The contributions of brain intercellular communication mechanisms, specifically extracellular vesicles (EV), to the progression of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) remain poorly understood.

Here, we investigated the role(s) of brain EV in the progressive course of AD through unbiased proteome-wide analyses of temporal lobe-derived EV and proteome-label quantitation of complementary remaining brain portions. Furthermore, relevant proteins identified were further screened by multiple reaction monitoring.

Our data indicate that EV biogenesis was altered during preclinical AD with the genesis of a specific population of EV containing MHC class-type markers. The significant presence of the prion protein PrP was also manifested in these brain vesicles during preclinical AD. Similarly, sequestration of amyloid protein APP in brain EV coincided with the observed PrP patterns. In contrast, active incorporation of the mitophagy protein GABARAP in these brain vesicles was disrupted as AD progressed. Likewise, disrupted incorporation of LAMP1 in brain EV was evident from the initial manifestation of AD clinical symptoms, although the levels of the protein remained significantly upregulated in the temporal lobe of diseased brains.

Our findings indicate that impaired autophagy in preclinical AD coincides with the appearance of proinflammatory and neuropathological features in brain extracellular vesicles, facts that moderately remain throughout the entire AD progression. Thus, these data highlight the significance of brain EV in the establishment of AD neuropathology and represent a further leap toward therapeutic interventions with these vesicles in human dementias.

Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, Vascular dementia, Extracellular vesicles, Braak staging, Neurodegeneration, Autophagy, Neuroinflammation

All reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise stated. Water and acetonitrile (ACN) of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Thermo Fisher Chemical, USA). Sequencing grade modified trypsin was obtained from Promega (Madison, WI, USA).

Post-mortem brain tissues (Brodmann area BA21) were obtained from donors with histological signs at time of autopsy of AD, mixed dementias (Dem), or age-matched controls (control). All postmortem brain samples (n = 18) were generously provided by the Harvard Brain Tissue Resource Center (HBTRC, Boston, MA, USA). Histologically, AD cases displayed neurofibrillary tangles burden consistent with Braak stage III to VI (AD3 to AD6), whereas cases of mixed dementias displayed significant cerebrovascular lesions including small vessel disease predominantly affecting the temporo-parietal region. Clinical details of the donors, including age, post-mortem delay, and gender are provided in Supplementary Table . Brain tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen at the time of autopsy and stored at − 150 °C until use. BA21 tissues were dissected in small pieces and large blood vessels were removed. Tissues were then washed three times with 1X PBS for 30 min. Three biological replicates were included per condition and were analyzed independently unless otherwise stated. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects or their legal representative. The use of post-mortem brain tissues was performed in strictly accordance with the declaration of Helsinki and the Singapore’s Human Biomedical Research Act (HBRA, Human Tissue Framework). Substantial manipulation of human tissues (as considered under Singapore’s HBRA 2019) was not performed in this study. All experimental procedures were performed in accordance to institutional guidelines.

Brain tissues from each subject (~ 80 mg) were homogenized with detergent-free homogenization buffer (100 mM ammonium acetate (AA) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail tablets) preserving EV fractions [, ] and using the tissue homogenizer bullet blender (Next Advance, NY, USA) as previously described []. Next Advance metallic beads (0.9–2.0 mm of diameter) were washed per triplicate with 1X PBS during 30 min prior to mixing them with brain tissues at 1:1 ratio (w/w). All the detailed procedures for the obtention of EV brain fractions were performed at 4 °C. Brain homogenization was performed in four cycles with 300 μL of homogenization buffer and 5 min of homogenization per cycle. The first two cycles were conducted at medium intensity whereas the last two cycles were conducted at maximum intensity. At the end of each cycle, the homogenate was centrifuged at 15000×g for 10 min and the obtained supernatants were combined.

Brain EV were enriched from the detergent-free homogenates using PROSPR as previously described [, ]. Briefly, brain homogenates processed as previously indicated to minimize tissue contaminants in brain EV preparations [] were mixed with four volumes of chilled acetone (− 20 °C), vortexed, and centrifuged at 5000×g for < 1 min. Supernatants containing hydrophobic EV fractions were then concentrated to near dryness in the vacuum concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany).

PROSPR-isolated EV were dissolved in 16 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABB) buffer, then diluted twofold with HPLC water. EV constituent proteins were then digested as previously described with minor modifications []. Briefly, lysed EV were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 30 °C for 3 h, followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h at room temperature in dark environment. Samples were then diluted to < 1 M urea with 50 mM ABB. Overnight trypsin digestion was performed at 37 °C using a 1:20 enzyme-to-protein ratio (w/w) with sequencing grade modified trypsin. Proteolytic digestion was quenched by addition of 0.5% formic acid (FA). Tryptic digested peptides from EV fractions were then desalted using C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA). Elution of brain EV peptides was performed using 1 ml of 75% ACN, 0.1% FA. Eluates were then dried in the vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 200 μL of 0.02% ammonium hydroxide (mobile phase A) for the subsequent fractionation by HPLC.

Complementary brain tissue proteome fractions that remained after processing brain tissues as described in the section “” were processed to obtain the remaining brain proteomes in this study. Thus, brain protein fractions without EV fractions were further homogenized using homogenization buffer with addition of 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), as described above. Homogenization was performed by 5 homogenization cycles at maximum intensity using the bullet blender homogenizer until no obvious pellet was observable. Extracted proteins were then subjected to acetone precipitation mixing brain tissue homogenates with chilled acetone for 3 h before centrifugation at 20000×g for 10 min. Supernatants were subsequently discarded, and precipitated proteins were airdried to remove excess of acetone.

Complementary brain proteins were solubilized in lysis buffer pH 8.5 containing 1% SDC and 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and supplemented with complete protease inhibitor cocktail. For whole brain characterization, brain proteins from independent subjects (n = 18) were pooled to obtain 200 μg protein/condition as previously described [, ]. Protein quantification was performed by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Whole brain proteins were reduced with 10 mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine hydrochloride for 2 h at 55 °C and subsequently alkylated using 55 mM IAA for 1 h at room temperature protected from the light. After alkylation, the SDC concentration was decreased to 0.5% using 100 mM TEAB. Overnight trypsin digestion was performed with sequencing-grade modified Promega trypsin at a 1:25 protein-to-enzyme ratio (w/w). Whole brain proteins digestion was subsequently quenched by addition of 0.5% final concentration of FA. SDC was removed from the digested samples by acidification, and peptides were further recovered from SDC precipitates as previously described [, ]. Tryptic peptides were dehydrated in vacuum concentrator and re-dissolved in 100 mM TEAB. Whole brain proteome peptides were labeled with 6-plex isobaric tags (tandem mass tag, TMT) from ThermoScientific (San Jose, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. TMT isobaric group labels were distributed as follows: 126 age-matched controls (control), 127 mixed dementias (Dem), 128 preclinical AD (AD3), 129 early symptomatic AD (AD4), 130 advanced stage AD (AD5), and 131 final stage AD (AD6). Labeled peptides were subsequently desalted using a C-18 Sep-pack 200 mg cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), and eluates were dried to dryness in the vacuum concentrator.

Brain EV and complementary brain proteomes were subjected to HPLC fractionation as previously described [], but with a few modifications. Briefly, dried peptides were reconstituted in 200 μL of mobile phase A (10 mmol/L ammonium hydroxide in water) and fractionated using a Xbridge™ BEH130 C18 column (3.5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm, Waters, Elstree, UK) on a Shimadzu Prominence UFLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) with UV monitoring of peptide intensities at 280 nm performed throughout. Peptide separation was performed at 1 mL/min using a 60-min gradient as follows: 0–5% B (0 mmol/L ammonium hydroxide in ACN) for 3 min, 5–35% B for 40 min, 35–70% B for 12 min, and 70–100% for 5 min. Fractions were collected at 1-min intervals and combined by concatenation. Concatenated fractions were then completely dried in the vacuum concentrator.

All experiments detailed were performed per triplicate generating three technical replicates for each biological sample analyzed. Dried peptide fractions of brain EV proteomes were reconstituted in mobile phase A (3% ACN, 0.1% FA) before label-free shotgun proteomics analysis by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Inc., Bremen, Germany), as it was previously described with minor modifications [, , , –]. Spray was generated using an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) working at 1.5 kV. Peptide separation was performed using a reverse-phase Acclaim PepMap RSL column (75 μm ID × 15 cm, 2-μm particle size, Thermo Scientific, Inc.) maintained at 35 °C and working at 300 nL/min. The 60-min gradient used for peptide separation was as follows: 3% mobile phase B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 1 min, 3 to 35% for 47 min, 35 to 50% for 4 min, 80% for 6 s, 80% (isocratic) for 78 s, 80 to 3% for 6 s, and then maintained at 3% for 6.5 min. Orbitrap Elite data acquisition was performed in positive mode using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Bremen, Germany) alternating between full Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FT-MS; 350–2000 m/z, resolution 60,000, with 1 μscan per spectrum) and FT-MS/MS (150–2000 m/z, resolution 30,000, with 1 μscan per spectrum). Fragmentation of the 10 most intense precursors with charge > + 2 and isolated within a 2 Da window was performed using high-energy collisional dissociation mode using 32% normalized collision energy. A threshold of 500 counts was enabled. For full FT-MS and FT-MS/MS, automatic gain control was set to 1 × 106.

All experiments detailed were performed per triplicate generating three technical replicates for each biological sample analyzed. Dried sample fractions were carefully reconstituted in mobile phase A (3% ACN, 0.1% FA) before their analysis by LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Inc., Bremen, Germany). Spray was generated using an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) working at 1.5 kV. Peptide separation was performed using a PepMap C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) maintained at 35 °C and working at 300 nL/min. Separation of peptides was performed over a 60-min gradient with mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in 90% ACN) as follows: 3–30% B for 45 min, 30–50% B for 9 min, 50–60% B for 1 min, 60% B for 2 min, and finally maintained isocratic at 3% B for 3 min. Q Exactive data acquisition was perform in positive ion mode using Xcalibur 3.0.63 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Bremen, Germany) alternating full Fourier transform MS (FT-MS; 350–1600 m/z range, resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, 1 μscan per spectrum) and FT-MS/MS (resolution 35,000) for the 10 most intense ions with charge > + 2 and isolated within a 2 Da window. Fragmentation of ions was performed by high-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation mode using 28% normalized collision energy. A threshold of 500 counts was enabled. For full FT-MS and FT-MS/MS, automatic gain control was set to 5 × 106 and 2 × 105, respectively.

Identification of proteins in brain EV from individual subjects by label-free mass spectrometry proteomics was validated in individual subjects by liquid chromatography multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MRM-MS). Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) validation was performed using a TSQ Vantage triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 nanoflow UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). For every candidate protein, the 4–6 most intense transitions corresponding to y- or b-ions derived from fragmentation of the most high-confident peptide (precursor ion) were considered for protein validation. Precursor ions had an m/z < 1000 Da containing no cysteine residues and no missed cleaved sites, unless otherwise specified. Precursor ions were sorted based on their identification in brain EV from the label-free proteomics experiment performed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Transitions were also confirmed by in silico prediction using the Skyline software []. The transitions used in this study can be found in Supplementary Table . Protein relative quantification was based on average intensity of transitions obtained by MRM.

LC-MRM-MS experiment was performed per triplicate using specific in-solution digested and fractionated peptide mixtures. For each run, approximately 0.7 μg tryptic peptides were injected into an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm; nanoViper C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) (Thermo Scientific, USA) working at 35 °C. Mobile phase A (0.1% FA in HPLC water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) were used to establish a 60-min gradient with a flow rate of 300 nL/min as follows: initial conditions at 3% B, 3–30% at 45 min and increase to 50% from 45 to 54 min, increased to 60% in 3 min, and finally reverted to initial conditions at 3% B for re-equilibration.

Data acquisition was performed in positive ion mode. Ionization spray voltage was set at 1.1 kV in a Michrom Thermo CaptiveSpray nanoelectrospray ion source (Bruker-Michrom, Inc., Auburn, AL) with a capillary temperature of 250 °C and a discharge current of 4.0 μA. Quadrupole Q1 and Q3 peak width was set at 0.80 full width at half maximum. High-purity argon was used as the collision gas in Q2, and the collision energy (CE) for each MRM transition was optimized using Skyline software according to the equations: 0.030 × m/z + 2.905 (for 2+ charged peptides) or 0.038 × m/z + 2.281 (for 3+ charged peptides). Retention time scheduling was used for precursor detection based on the retention time detected in Orbitrap Elite.

Brain EV from subjects with AD obtained by PROSPR were subjected to western blotting of EV-specific markers by detection of the tetraspanin family marker CD9 and the exosomal-specific marker Alix. Three biological replicates were used, and western blot of brain EV preparations was performed as previously indicated with minor modifications []. Briefly, brain EVs were transferred into lysis buffer (1% SDS in H2O) and lysates were subjected to clearing centrifugation (16,000×g, 30 min) and protein quantification by BCA. Thirty micrograms of lysed protein from each subject were mixed in 4X Laemmli buffer; the mixture was boiled at 95 °C for 5 min and subsequently subjected to western blot analysis by resolving the proteins in 12% SDS-PAGE gel and blotting the resolved proteins onto nitrocellulose membranes. Cell Signaling Technology Inc. (MA, USA; Cat. # 2171; mouse monoclonal; 1:1000) and Santa Cruz Biotechnology (TX, USA; Cat. # sc-13118; mouse monoclonal; 1:500) were used as primary antibodies, while an appropriate HRP-conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibody from Jackson ImmunoResearch (PA, USA; Cat. # 115-035-003; 1:1000) was used as secondary antibody. Protein-antibody conjugates were then visualized by using the ECL chemiluminescence detection kit from Thermo Fisher Scientific (MA, USA).

Vesicle content from brain EV enriched by PROSPR from subjects with AD (Braak AD3 n = 3) was subjected to Nanoparticle Track Analysis (NTA) as previously indicated []. Brain vesicle preparations were observed and analyzed through a Nanosight NS300 sCMOS instrument (Malvern, UK). Analysis parameters in Nanosight instrument were set as follows: capture time 60 s, camera level 4, slider shutter 50, slider gain 100, FPS 32.5, syringe pump speed 100, total volume per sample 1 mL, viscosity 0.906–0.910 cP, and temperature ~ 24 °C. No restricted areas were established during analyses; thus, all vesicle content in the sample was subjected to characterization.

Analysis of isobaric TMT labeling raw data files was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) with Sequest HT and Mascot servers used in parallel during database search. User-defined parameters and false discovery rate (FDR) for assignation of peptides and proteins in Proteome Discoverer were set as previously specified, with minor modifications [, ]. Briefly, a FDR < 1% was set for searching using trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a reporter ion integrated tolerance of 20 ppm. TMT 6 plex tag masses, identified according to the manufacturer’s description, were included as fixed modifications together with carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), trioxidation (CMWY), citrullination (R), and carbamylation (R). Phosphorylation (ST) and ubiquitination (K) were added as variable modifications. The UniProt human database downloaded on June 23, 2015, with 180,822 sequences and 71,773,890 residues was used for searching. A corrected ratio > 1.5-fold was considered to set significance for the upregulation threshold, and a corrected ratio < 0.5-fold was considered to set significance for the downregulation threshold in the analysis of whole brain proteomes data. As previously established [, ], it can be assumed that biological and experimental variance together weigh up to 50% of the total variance of the data; thus, any change identified in isobaric labeling beyond that threshold can be confidently considered as caused by the disease condition.

Analysis of label-free brain EV proteomes was carried out using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.6.02, Matrix Science, MA) with a precursor ion tolerance of 30 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da. The UniProt human database downloaded on June 23, 2015, with 180,822 sequences and 71,773,890 residues, was used in database searching. Deamidation at N and Q and oxidation of M were set as variable modifications, while cabarmydomethyl of C was set as fixed modification. FDR < 1% was established for protein identification, and trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme. Cluster analysis based on label-free protein quantitation (total number of spectra detected for all peptides in each protein) was performed as previously described [] using the fuzzy c-mean algorithm [] in R software. Only proteins with a fuzzy partition coefficient ≥ 0.5 were considered. Lists of clustered proteins were further independently analyzed by parametric one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons, and statistical significance was set at corrected p < 0.05, unless otherwise specified. Homoestadicity of data from brain EV proteomes was also analyzed by Brown-Forsythe test, and in cases where non-parametric analysis was required, one-way ANOVA on ranks was used and statistical significance was set at p < 0.05, unless otherwise stated. Only proteins confidently identified, based on the detailed statistical criteria, in all subjects in at least one experimental group have been reported.

A multiple correlation analysis to identify interaction between proteins in brain EV, complementary brain tissue proteome fractions, and other EV conditions was performed by calculating all potentially possible Pearson’s correlation coefficients between variables. A 95% of confidence interval was used, and strong interaction between correlated variables was considered when r ≥ 0.75, whereas very strong interaction between correlated variables was considered when r ≥ 0.85. Significance of the interaction was established when p < 0.05.

Analysis of MRM data from brain EV proteins was performed using Skyline software version 4.2 []. Parent ion identification in Skyline was achieved based on the following highly restrictive criteria: (i) peptide mass, (ii) retention time, (iii) coherent co-elution of transitions, and (iv) dot product similarity metric score dotP ≥ 0.9 [, ]. Thus, only proteins identified in accordance with all these criteria were considered. MRM data was reported from individual subjects.

Obtained raw data were analyzed in Microsoft Excel with the help of in-house created macros. GraphPad Prism 6 software was used for independent statistical analyses and rendering of data plots (GraphPad Software, Palo Alto, CA). All data are reported as mean ± SD, unless stated otherwise.

As recently pointed by its relevance for the neuroscientific community [], all data generated in this study were made publicly available via the ProteomeXchange consortium in the partner repository PRIDE. Identifier PXD015578. Additionally, whole membranes of western blot experiments were included as supplementary material.
