Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a debilitating motor neuron disease and lacks effective disease-modifying treatments. This study utilizes a comprehensive multiomic approach to investigate the early and sex-specific molecular mechanisms underlying ALS. By analyzing the prefrontal cortex of 51 patients with sporadic ALS and 50 control subjects, alongside four transgenic mouse models (C9orf72-, SOD1-, TDP-43-, and FUS-ALS), we have uncovered significant molecular alterations associated with the disease. Here, we show that males exhibit more pronounced changes in molecular pathways compared to females. Our integrated analysis of transcriptomes, (phospho)proteomes, and miRNAomes also identified distinct ALS subclusters in humans, characterized by variations in immune response, extracellular matrix composition, mitochondrial function, and RNA processing. The molecular signatures of human subclusters were reflected in specific mouse models. Our study highlighted the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway as an early disease mechanism. We further demonstrate that trametinib, a MAPK inhibitor, has potential therapeutic benefits in vitro and in vivo, particularly in females, suggesting a direction for developing targeted ALS treatments.

Subject terms: Transcriptomics, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Cellular neuroscience

Multiomic brain tissue analysis identified sex-specific molecular changes in Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), revealing subgroups within the disease and pointing to the MAPK pathway as an early disease mechanism and potential therapeutic target.

The results presented here comply with all relevant ethical regulations. Ethical approval for the use of human tissues was obtained from the Ethics Committees of the University Medical Center Göttingen (2/8/18 AN) and the Technical University Munich (145/19 S-SR).

All animal experiments complied with international and local animal welfare standards and were approved by the respective regulatory organs of the involved research centers. The experimental protocols for the collection of PFC tissue from transgenic SOD1 and FUS mice were prospectively reviewed and approved by the Mario Negri Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the Italian Ministry of Health (Prot. No. 9F5F5.143, ministry authorization no. 4/2020-PR; Direzione Generale della Sanità Animale e dei Farmaci Veterinari, Ufficio 6). The collection of PFC tissue from C9orf72 transgenic mice followed the regulations from the German Animal Welfare Act (Tierschutzgesetz/Tierschutz-Versuchstierverordnung, Regierungsbezirke Oberbayern, Prot. No. TV 55.2-2532.Vet_02-17-106). The collection of PFC tissue from TDP43 transgenic animals was approved by the (CCD) Centrale Commissie Dierproeven of Utrecht University (CCD license: AVD 1150020171565) and was in accordance with Dutch animal welfare laws (Wet op de Dierproeven 2014) and European regulations (guideline 2010/63/EU). The validation experiments in SOD1 transgenic mice, including the treatment with trametinib, were reviewed and approved by the Mario Negri Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the Italian Ministry of Health (Prot. No. 9F5F5.250, ministry authorization no. 496/2023; Direzione Generale della Sanità Animale e dei Farmaci Veterinari, Ufficio 6).

Human PFC samples were provided by four different brain banks: The Netherlands Brain Bank (NBB), London Neurodegenerative Diseases Brain Bank (London NDBB), Imperial College London—Multiple Sclerosis and Parkinson’s Tissue Bank (ICL MS&PD TB), and the Oxford Brain Bank (OBB). Race, ethnicity or social information were not considered for cohort composition. In total, 51 ALS and 50 CTR samples (without any signs of neurodegenerative diseases) were included. Frozen tissues were shipped on dry ice to the rechts der Isar Hospital Department of Neurology at the Technical University of Munich and stored at −80 °C (Supplementary Data ). For sampling, PFC samples were transferred to a cryostat chamber at −20 °C and punched with a 20-G Quincke Spinal Needle (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). Subsequently, ∼20 mg tissue was collected in RNAse-/DNAse-free tubes and stored at −80 °C until further use.

Four transgenic mouse models representing the most frequent ALS-causing genes were used for the multiomic studies. Mice were housed in standard cages in pathogen-free facilities, under a 12-h light/dark cycle. The animals were provided with unrestricted access to food and water. Prior to euthanasia for tissue collection, the animals were fully anesthetized in a CO2 chamber. After spinal reflexes were tested (by pinching the tail and upper and lower limbs with a laboratory tweezer), the animals were subsequently euthanized by cervical dislocation. B6;129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(TARDBP*M337V/Ypet)Tlbt/J mice (here simply referred to as TDP-43 mice) were provided by the Department of Translational Neuroscience of the University Medical Center Utrecht. This model was generated by inserting an 80 kb genomic fragment carrying the human TDP-43 locus (including a patient-derived M337V mutation). TDP-43 transgenic and control wild-type mice were euthanized at the age of 26 weeks (presymptomatic stage) for biomaterial collection. B6SJL-Tg(SOD1*G93A)1Gur/J mice (here referred to as SOD1 mice) were provided by the Laboratory of Translational Biomarkers, Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, Milan. High-copy number B6 congenic Tg(SOD1*G93A)1Gur/J SOD1*G93A male mice from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were bred with C57BL/6 female mice to obtain non-transgenic and mutant transgenic G93A*SOD1-expressing mice. SOD1 transgenic and control animals were sacrificed 14 weeks after birth (presymptomatic stage). (Poly)GA-NES/C9orf72(R26(CAG-Isl-175GA)−29×Nes-Cre) mice ref. (here referred to as C9orf72 mice) were provided by the German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases in Munich. To generate transgenic animals, plasmids were electroporated to enable the conditional expression of dipeptide-repeat proteins (DPRs). DPRs were created by inserting 175 GFP-(GA) genes encoded by non-repeating alternate codons downstream of a floxed stop cassette in the pEX CAG stop-bpA vector. Electroporation was performed on murine recombination-mediated cassette exchange embryonic stem cells at the Rosa26 safe harbor locus. Mouse lines with germline transmission, known as GAstop, were obtained and subsequently backcrossed to a C57BL/6 J background until a confirmed purity of over 98% was achieved (using SNP genotyping). C9orf72 transgenic and control animals were sacrificed 4.5 weeks after birth (early symptomatic stage). Tg (Prnp-FUS)WT3Cshw/J mice (hereafter referred to as FUS mice) were provided by the Laboratory of Translational Biomarkers, Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, and were sacrificed four weeks after birth. For each model, a total of 20 transgenic and non-transgenic mice were selected and balanced for condition and sex (TDP-43 model: 5 females vs. 5 males for transgenic and control cohorts; SOD1 model: 5 females vs. 6 males for the control cohort and 5 females vs. 4 males for the transgenic cohort; C9orf72 model: 6 females vs. 4 males for the control cohort and 4 females vs. 6 males for the transgenic cohort; FUS model: 5 females vs. 5 males for transgenic and control cohorts).

The mice were perfused with 50 mL of ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) prior to microdissection. The head was removed by cutting the base of the skull followed by skin removal. The skull was removed using small incisions followed by microdissection of the PFC in both hemispheres. The olfactory bulb and cerebellum were removed by cutting the cerebellar peduncle starting from the olfactory bulb and continuing along the interhemispheric fissure using tweezers with fine tips. The cortex was removed from the rest of the brain. Incisions were made in the middle of the cortex to excise the PFC (Supplementary Fig. ). Freshly prepared PFCs were collected in nuclease-free tubes and stored at −80 °C until RNA and protein isolation experiments were performed.

Total RNA was isolated from human and animal PFC samples using TRIzol Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany). To ensure proper handling of the RNA, all related experiments were conducted in an RNA workstation fume hood. In brief, 500 μL TRIzol was added to each sample, and the tissues were homogenized using a plastic homogenizer. Subsequently, 50 μL of 1-bromo-3-chloro-propane (Sigma-Aldrich) was added. The reaction tubes were inverted for 10–15 s and incubated at room temperature (22–25 °C) for three minutes. The resulting lysates were centrifuged at 12 000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C, leading to phase separation. The RNA-containing aqueous phase was carefully collected and transferred to a fresh nuclease-free tube. To precipitate the RNA, 250 μL of 2-propanol (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) and 2 μL of GlycoBlue Coprecipitant (15 mg/mL) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were added to each sample. The mixture was thoroughly vortexed and incubated overnight at −20 °C. Samples were centrifuged at 12 000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C the following day. The supernatant was discarded, and the RNA pellets were washed three times with 75% ice-cold ethanol (AppliChem). After air-drying the pellets for a few minutes under a fume hood, they were reconstituted with 15–20 μL nuclease-free water (Sigma-Aldrich). The reconstituted RNA was completely dissolved by incubation at 55 °C for two minutes in a thermoshaker. Following RNA isolation, DNase treatment was performed to eliminate DNA contamination. For this purpose, 5 μL 10× DNAse I Incubation Buffer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States), 5 μL DNase I (2 U/μL), and 0.5 μL RNaseOUT (40 U/μL) were added to each sample. Nuclease-free water was added to a final volume of 50 μL, and the samples were then incubated at 37 °C for 20 min. Finally, the RNA samples were purified and concentrated using an RNA Clean & Concentrator-5 Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. A QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used for DNA isolation from human midbrain samples according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After RNA and DNA isolation, the concentration and purity of nucleic acids were assessed using a NanoDrop One spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RNA integrity was evaluated using an Agilent 6000 NanoKit on a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA).

Prior to the DNA sequencing experiments, the quality of the isolated DNA was determined using a 4200 TapeStation System (Agilent). The AmpliSeq protocol (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) was used in subsequent steps. We used a target panel of 566 amplicons covering 30 ALS-related genes: TARDBP, DCTN1, ALS2, ERBB4, TUBA4A, CHMP2B, NEK1, MATR3, SQSTM1, FIG4, C9orf72, SIGMAR1, VCP, GLE1, SETX, OPTN, HNRNPA1, KIF5A, TBK1, ANG, SPG11, CCNF, FUS, PFN1, MAPT, VAPB, SOD1, CHCHD10, NEFH, and UBQLN2. Using this panel, DNA samples (50–100 ng) were amplified over 14 PCR cycles. The amplicons were digested, and AmpliSeq combinatorial dual indices were ligated for multiplexing. The quality and quantity of the enriched libraries were validated using a 4200 TapeStation System (Agilent). The average fragment size of the amplified product was 480 bp. The libraries were standardized to a concentration of 9 nM in Tris–Cl (10 mM, pH 8.5) supplemented with 0.1% Tween 20. Cluster generation and sequencing were performed using the MiSeq platform (Illumina) following the standard protocol. The loading concentration was 9 pM, and 15% phiX was added. The sequencing configuration was a 250-bp paired-end sequencing. C9orf72 repeat expansion analysis was performed using the AmplideX PCR/CE C9orf72 Kit (Asuragen, Austin, TX, USA). Briefly, DNA samples (n = 51, 40 ng each) were amplified using the three-primer GGGCC-repeat-primed configuration (combining flanking primers and a GGGCC-repeat-specific primer). This configuration allows the sizing of GGGCC alleles of up to 145 repeats and simultaneous detection of expanded GGGCC alleles with > 145 repeats. The PCR conditions consisted of initial denaturation (five minutes, 98 °C), 37 cycles (35 s, 97 °C; 35 s, 62 °C; and 3 min, 72 °C), and final elongation (10 min, 72 °C). Capillary electrophoresis was carried out on an ABI 3730 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA. USA) using a ROX 1000 Size Ladder (Asuragen), followed by analysis with GeneMapper 4.0 software (Applied Biosystems) and conversion of peak size to GGGGCC repeat length via the calibration curve method according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

The mRNA and small RNA sequencing experiments were conducted at the Functional Genomics Center, Zürich. For mRNA sequencing, two different library preparation kits were used: the TruSeq Stranded mRNA Kit (Illumina; short read sequencing) and the SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-Seq Kit v2 Pico Input Mammalian (Takara Bio USA, San Jose, CA, USA; short read sequencing). In the TruSeq protocol, total RNA samples (100–1000 ng) were subjected to poly-A enrichment and reverse transcription to generate double-stranded cDNA. The cDNA was fragmented, end-repaired, adenylated, and ligated to TruSeq adapters containing unique dual indices for multiplexing. Fragments with adapters at both ends were selectively enriched using PCR amplification, resulting in a smear with an average fragment size of ∼260 bp. The libraries were subsequently normalized to 10 nM in Tris–Cl (10 mM, pH 8.5) containing 0.1% Tween 20. For the SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-Seq Kit protocol, total RNA samples (0.25–10 ng) were reverse-transcribed using random priming into double-stranded cDNA in the presence of a template switch oligo (TSO). The generated cDNA fragments contained sequences derived from random priming oligos and the TSO. PCR amplification with primers binding to these sequences incorporated full-length Illumina adapters, including a multiplexing index. The ribosomal cDNA was cleaved using ZapR in the presence of mammalian R-Probes. The remaining fragments were enriched through a second round of PCR amplification using primers designed to match the Illumina adapters, resulting in a smear with an average fragment size of ∼360 bp. The libraries were normalized to 5 nM in Tris–Cl (10 mM, pH 8.5) containing 0.1% Tween 20. To validate the quality and quantity of the isolated RNA and enriched libraries, an Agilent Fragment Analyzer was used for the TruSeq kit, while the 4200 TapeStation System (Agilent) was used for the SMARTer Kit.

Sequencing was performed using the Illumina platforms NovaSeq 6000 (for transcriptomics) and HiSeq 2500 (for small RNA sequencing) according to standard protocols. Small RNA sequencing was performed using RealSeq-AC miRNA (SomaGenics, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) (short read sequencing). All samples were quantified and quality was controlled using an Agilent Fragment Analyzer. Briefly, RNA samples (1 ng–1 ug) were adaptor-ligated, circularized, and reverse-transcribed into cDNA. The cDNA samples were amplified using PCR, which also incorporated sample barcodes. The library product, a peak with a fragment size of ∼149 bp, was normalized to 10 nM in Tris–Cl (2 mM, pH 8.5) containing 0.1% Tween 20. The quality and quantity of the enriched libraries were validated using an Agilent Fragment Analyzer. Transcriptomics data were processed using the Nextflow Core RNASeq pipeline version 3.0. The data were demultiplexed with bcl2fastq, and the fastq files underwent several quality checks, including FastQC. Salmon was used for pseudo alignment and quantitation with a Salmon index built using GRCm39 with annotations from GENCODE vM26 for mouse data and GRCh38 with annotations from GENCODE v37 for human data. Count matrices from Salmon were used for the downstream analyzes. The count matrices were filtered, retaining genes with at least ten counts in 50% of the samples for any condition or sex. We used the clusterProfiler R package and GO biological processes and molecular functions for GSEA, filtering terms by size between 10 and 500 genes and correcting for multiple testing (Benjamini–Hochberg correction). For the DE analysis we used a cut-off of adjusted p-value 0.05 and threshold of log2 fold change (±1.5).

Tissues from both human PFCs and four different mouse models were prepared. The tissues were ground with a biomasher using 350 µL MeOH:H2O (4:1). Protein pellets were resuspended in 200 µL Laemmli buffer (10% SDS, 1 M Tris pH 6.8, and glycerol) and then centrifuged at 16.600 x g at 4 °C for five minutes. The protein concentration was determined using a DC assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample, containing 100 µg protein lysate, was heated at 95 °C for five minutes and loaded onto a 5% acrylamide SDS–PAGE stacking gel (prepared in-house). Prior to overnight digestion at 37 °C using modified porcine trypsin (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme–protein ratio of 1:80, the gel bands were reduced and alkylated. The resulting peptides were extracted using 60% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 100% ACN. The peptides were resuspended in 30 µL H20, 2% ACN, and 0.1% fluoroacetic acid. iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were added to each sample as an internal quality control (QC). NanoLC–MS/MS analyzes were conducted using a nanoAcquity UltraPerformance LC (UPLC) system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (solvent B). Samples equivalent to 800 ng protein were loaded onto a Symmetry C18 precolumn (20 mm × 180 μm with 5 μm diameter particles, Waters) over three minutes at a flow rate of 5 μL/min with 99% solvent A and 1% solvent B. Peptides were separated on an ACQUITY UPLC BEH130 C18 column (250 mm × 75 μm with 1.7 μm diameter particles) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The following gradient of solvent B was used: 1–8% over 2 min, 8–35% over 77 min, 35–90% over 1 min, 90% for 5 min, and 90–1% over 2 min. Samples from each cohort were injected in a random order. The system was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, automatically switching between MS (mass range 300–1800 m/z with R = 70 000, automatic gain control [AGC] fixed at 3.10^6 ions, and the maximum injection time set to 50 ms) and MS/MS (mass range 200–2000 m/z with R = 17 500, AGC fixed at 1.10^5, and the maximum injection time set to 100 ms) modes. The ten most abundant precursor ions were selected on each MS spectrum for further isolation and higher energy collisional dissociation, excluding monocharged and unassigned ions. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s. A sample pool was injected as an external QC every six samples for the human cohort and every five samples for the mouse cohort. MaxQuant version 1.6.14 was used to process raw data. The Andromeda search engine was used to assign peaks with trypsin/P specificity against a protein sequence database generated in-house containing all human (20 421 entries as of August 24, 2020) or mouse entries (17 134 entries for SOD1 and TDP-43 models as of March 27, 2020, and 17 061 entries for C9orf72 and FUS models as of September 29, 2020) extracted from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. Methionine oxidation/acetylation of the protein N-termini was used as a variable modification, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification. The “match between runs” option was enabled to facilitate protein quantification. To control false discoveries, a maximum false discovery rate of 1% was implemented (at both peptide and protein levels), employing a decoy strategy. Intensities were extracted from the Proteingroup.txt file for statistical analyzes. The MaxQuant protein vs. sample table was used for downstream analyzes, including label-free quantitation intensities. Only Swiss-Prot proteins were retained, whereas TrEMBL proteins were removed for higher reliability. After filtering out low abundant proteins, i.e., proteins that were detected in less than 50% of the samples in any combination of condition and sex, and imputing missing values using the missForest algorithm, the intensities were log2-transformed and used for principal component exploration, constructing heat maps, and differential abundance analysis. The limma package was used for linear modeling, and p-values were using the Benjamini–Hochberg correction. The protein names were mapped to the corresponding genes and used to search for enriched biological processes and molecular functions using the criteria described in the transcriptomics data processing, with a p < 0.01 threshold for functional annotation analyzes.

Starting with the protein extracts from the global proteomics experiments, protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340) and phosphatase inhibitors (final concentration in Na3VO4 = 1 mM) were added to samples. Protein concentration was determined using the RC DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Proteins for each sample (250 µg) were reduced and alkylated prior to an in-house optimized single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation protocol (adapted from Hughes et al., Nat Protoc, 2019). Briefly, beads A (Sera-Mag SpeedBeads, Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany, 45152105050250) and B (Sera-Mag SpeedBeads, Fisher Scientific, 65152105050250) were combined (1:1) and, after three washing steps with H2O, were added to the samples (bead–protein ratio of 10:1 for each type of bead, meaning a 20:1 ratio for the combination of beads). After inducing protein binding to the beads with 100% ACN for 18 min, the bead and protein mixtures were washed twice with 80% ethyl alcohol and once with 100% ACN before being resuspended in 95 µL NH4HCO3 prior to overnight on-bead digestion (enzyme–protein ratio of 1:20) at 1 000 rpm at 37 °C using modified porcine trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega). The digestion was stopped using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (final pH <2). The recovered peptides were resuspended in 170 µL 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA, and MS PhosphoMix I Light (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to each sample (peptide [µg]–mix [fmol] ratio of 1:6). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on 5 µL phase Fe(III)–NTA cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform (Agilent) following the immobilized metal affinity chromatography protocol. Briefly, cartridges were washed and primed with 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA and then equilibrated with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Subsequently, 100 µL samples were loaded onto the phase at a rate of 2 µL/min and then washed with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA before being eluted in 20 µL 1% NH4OH at 5 µL/min. After enrichment, FA and MS PhosphoMix I Heavy (Sigma-Aldrich) (peptide [µg]–mix [fmol] ratio of 1:6) were added to each sample. Dried phosphopeptides were resuspended in 40 µL H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. Sample preparation steps for the C9orf72 and FUS mouse models were identical to those previously described for SOD1 and TDP-43, except that proteins were extracted from new tissue samples immediately before the phosphoproteomics experiment.

NanoLC–MS/MS analyzes were conducted using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled with a Q-Exactive HF-X Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source. The solvent system consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (solvent B). Samples were loaded onto an ACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 Column (250 mm×75 µm, 1.7 µm diameter particles) over three minutes at a flow rate of 5 μL/min with 99% solvent A and 1% solvent B. Phosphopeptides were separated on an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (20 mm×180 µm, 5 µm diameter particles; Waters) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min using a gradient of solvent B as follows: 1–2% over 2 min, 2–35% over 77 min, and finally 35–90% over 1 min. The samples in each group were injected in random order. The instrument was operated in DDA mode with automatic switching between the MS and MS/MS modes. MS scans were performed in the mass range of 375–1500 m/z with R = 120 000, an AGC fixed at 3.106 ions, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. MS/MS scans were conducted in the mass range of 200–2000 m/z with R = 15 000, an AGC fixed at 1.105 ions, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. In each MS spectrum, the ten most abundant ions were selected for further isolation and higher-energy collisional dissociation, excluding monocharged and unassigned ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 40 s was used to prevent the reanalysis of previously selected ions. The obtained raw phosphoproteomics data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.14. Peaks were assigned using the Andromeda search engine with trypsin/P specificity against an in-house-generated protein sequence database containing mouse entries from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (17 061 entries as of September 29, 2020). The peptides were required to have a minimum length of seven amino acids, and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. These modifications include methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-termini, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification. Protein quantification utilized the “match between runs” option. A maximum false discovery rate of 1% (at both peptide and protein levels) was implemented using a decoy strategy. The intensities were extracted from the Phospho (STY).txt file and processed using the Perseus platform version 2.0.7.0, during which contaminants and reversed proteins, as well as proteins with negative scores, were removed. Using the “expand sites table” option, the intensities of the different phosphopeptides involved in one phosphosite were summed, and phosphosites with a localization probability below 75% were removed. The Perseus output table was used for statistical analyzes.

Only proteins that were detected in more than 50% of the mouse samples of any combination of sex and condition were retained for each dataset. The intensities were log2-transformed, quantile normalization was applied, and missing values were imputed to the lowest quartile. The remaining data processing for phosphoproteomics followed the procedure described above for proteomics data processing. For the DE analysis we used a cut-off of p-value 0.1.

To compare murine and human samples, transcript counts were normalized using DESeq2 size factor estimation. Subtype-specific differential expression of transcripts was determined using a 1.5-fold change cut-off and an adjusted p-value < 0.05 (unless stated otherwise). Two different models were designed to analyze sex-specific differences: The cohort was divided into male and female cohorts. For each cohort we carried out differential expression between case and control samples using the RNA-seq batch as covariate for the human samples.

Transcriptomics data has been processed using the NextFlow Core RNASeq pipeline, version 3.0 described. The data has been demultiplexed with bcl2fastq, and the fastq files have undergone several quality checks including FastQC. FastQC: A Quality Control Tool for High Throughput Sequence Data. Available online at: http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) and fastq screen. Salmon was used for pseudo alignment and quantitation, with a salmon index built using GRCm39 with annotations from GENCODE vM26 for the mice data and GRCh38 with annotations from GENCODE v37 for the human data. Count matrices from Salmon were used in downstream analyzes.

The Principal Component Analysis and heatmaps used the count matrices from Salmon, after filtering and normalization using a variance stabilizing transformation blind to the experimental design. The count matrices were filtered, keeping genes with at least ten counts in 50% of the samples of any condition and sex.

Following differential expression analysis by DESeq2, we searched for relevant biological processes and molecular functions using gene set enrichment analysis on their Gene Ontology terms, using the clusterProfiler R package, filtering terms by size between 10 and 500 genes, and adjusting p-values for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction. To assess the heterogeneity of the samples, silhouette scores were calculated on the first two principal components and averaged across conditions.

Small RNA data were processed using the Nextflow Core smRNASeq pipeline version 1.0. Reads were trimmed and aligned against miRBase version 22.1 using Bowtie1, both for mature miRNAs and hairpins. miRNAs with at least ten counts in 50% of the samples of any condition and sex were retained, and the rest were filtered out. Unnormalized count matrices were used for subsequent DESeq2 differential expression analysis after stratifying by sex and for p-values using the Benjamini–Hochberg correction. Mature miRNAs were mapped to their corresponding genes using miRDB version 6.0, excluding matches with scores <60 or >800 targets, as recommended. For each miRNA present in the miRNA expression matrices, we obtained experimentally validated targets from miRTarBase 8.0 and predicted targets from miRDB miRBase version 22. miRTarBase provides the most extensive curated database of validated miRNA–target interactions (MTI) collected from literature using natural language processing to select functional miRNA studies. Additionally, the miRDB database includes MTIs predicted by MirTarget, which uses a support vector machine (SVM) to analyze thousands of high-throughput sequencing experiments. Each experiment is assigned a probability score, which serves as the SVM’s output. A higher probability score indicates a higher likelihood of accurate target prediction. Therefore, we set a threshold of 0.6 on the output probabilities to select only highly likely MTIs. Finally, we joined the miRNA–target pairs from both sources for further analysis. For the DE analysis we used a cut-off of p-value 0.1 and threshold of log2 fold change (±1.5). Target network centrality was calculated using networkx (v2.8.8) using the eigenvector_centrality function on the STRING interaction network the miRNA targets.

Single-cell reference-based cell-type deconvolution of RNA-Seq in mouse models was performed using Scaden. We used healthy adult scRNA-Seq datasets for mouse and human. Scaden uses a fully connected deep neural network ensemble trained on pseudo-bulks simulated from reference scRNA-Seq data. Before deconvolution, we filtered the scRNA-seq data using Scanpy to maintain at least 200 genes expressed per cell and at least five cells expressing one gene. For Scaden, counts per million (CPM) of simulated pseudo-bulks and transcripts per million (TPMs) of the data to be deconvolved were used. In this study, CPM was used for scRNA-Seq instead of TPMs because scRNA-Seq consists of unique molecular identifier counts and does not include gene-length bias. We used a variance cutoff of 0.01, and the mean squared error was calculated for each batch as loss as implemented in the Scaden code repository (https://github.com/KevinMenden/scaden). For comparing the cell type abundances between human ALS subclusters and mouse models, the relative median differences from control samples was computed using the following equation:

The splicing tool SUPPA2 version 2.3 was used to analyze DAS for seven alternative splicing events: exon skipping, mutually exclusive exons, intron retention, alternative 3’-splice site, alternative 5’-splice site, alternative first exon, and alternative last exon. SUPPA2 was used with multipleFieldSelection() to select the TPM values of the transcripts, followed by GenerateEvents with the parameters -f ioe -e SE SS MX RI FL and annotation files GENCODE v37 for human data and GENCODE vM26 for mouse data. The inclusion values (PSI) were calculated using psiPerEvent, and the differences in PSI (ΔPSI) between the mutant and control conditions were determined using diffSplice with parameters -m empirical -l 0.05 -gc –save tpm_events to detect anomalies in the splicing landscape. For the DE analysis, we used a cut-off of p-value 0.1.

We used MOFA2 version 1.4.0 to integrate data from multiple omics levels for the human cohort, including transcriptomics, miRNA, and proteomics. The MOFA model was trained on the data, and downstream analyzes were performed. Each omics type was preprocessed in its own manner, and the default training parameters were used. The MOFA models were initialized with 15 initial factors, and convergence was reached when the evidence lower bound (ELBO) value did not change with more than a deltaELBO value of 1e-4%.

GSEA was performed using gseGO and gseKEGG from the clusterProfiler R package, with biological processes and molecular functions chosen as background databases for GO enrichment. The p-value cutoff was set at 0.05. Differential expression was presented using volcano plots generated with the Enhanced Volcano plot package in R, and over-representation analysis was performed on genes that showed at least one significant DAS event using the clusterProfiler function enrichGO, with a p-value cutoff of 0.1 and Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing. Protein–protein interaction networks were created using the STRING protein interaction network database version 11.0 using standard settings. We summarized the enriched GO terms by clustering pathways based on their descriptions, which is called clustering in semantic space using GO-Figure. In addition, for proteomics results, we performed additional clustering analyzes using REVIGO. This tool allows GO term clustering by hierarchy, considering the following such as enrichment p-adjusted values, semantic similarity and term proximity.

To conduct a weighted gene co-expression analysis, we employed the WGCNA package. Pairwise Pearson correlations were calculated to establish signed regulatory networks within the WGCNA. By constructing an adjacency matrix, we applied a soft-thresholding technique to approximate a scale-free topological network. Eigengenes or eigenproteins were calculated as the first principal components of each module. This resulted in the development of several modules. We merged similar modules based on hierarchical clustering (SOD1: 0.4, C9orf72: 0.4, FUS: 0.5, TDP-43: 0.4 for RNA-Seq and 0.25 for proteomics). We calculated the relationships between WGCNA modules and traits. Sex was also included in the traits resulting in four traits: male ALS, female ALS, male CTR, and female CTR. First, we filtered modules based on the significance of the module–gene relationship (p < 0.05) and then selected modules that were highly correlated with either male or female ALS. The correlation cutoffs differed between the mouse models (SOD1: 0.5, C9orf72: 0.3, FUS: 0.3, TDP-43: 0.5 and human: 0 for RNA-Seq). The minimal module size was set to 30 with a merge height of 0.4–0.5 and a correlation threshold of 0.3–0.5 (Supplementary Data ). Over-representation analysis was performed using the enrichGO function of clusterProfiler.

The selection of the pathways used for clustering analyzes of human samples was based on the enrichment analyzes performed with the transcriptomics dataset. We selected the top hits from gseGO and gseKEGG analyzes [from the clusterProfiler R package], as well as a co-expression network analysis (weighted gene co-expression analysis - (WGCNA) analysis, analyzing the top 30 most highly enriched terms for each dataset, and then grouped these terms by more general umbrella terms, to select ten pathways that summarized the enriched terms best: mitochondria/respiration; synapse; MAPK cascade; oxidative stress; nucleocytoplasmic transport; protein folding/metabolism; lipid metabolism; RNA splicing; extracellular matrix and activation of immune response. In more detail, for overlapping KEGG pathway and GO results, a predominant enrichment for extracellular matrix (ECM) and immune response pathways and synapse-related terms was observed for both males and females. The convergence of these themes across sexes suggests common biological themes relevant for the disease and justified their selection for the clustering analyzes. In addition to neurodegenerative disease pathways driven by DE genes involved in protein metabolism and oxidative stress mechanisms (Supplementary Fig. ), female-specific results showed enrichment for aerobic respiration (GO) and ribosome (KEGG), while protein metabolism was captured for male results (KEGG). Oxidative stress was also inferred from the enrichment of oxidative phosphorylation pathways in both males and females (KEGG). WGCNA results revealed key associations with all of the selected themes, especially for terms related to mitochondria/respiration and protein metabolism, synapse, nucleocytoplasmic transport, lipid metabolism; immune response and RNA splicing. WGCNA results were also very frequently enriched for MAPK-related terms (Supplementary Data ), justifying its selection for the clustering analyzes.

We used decoupleR (v1.1.0) to aggregate scores from gene sets derived from GO terms of interest. Gene lists with the components of GO terms of interest were extracted using the AmiGO2 database (https://amigo.geneontology.org/). For the unsupervised per sample enrichment analyzes, we used decoupleR with the consensus from the mlm, ulm, wsum functions and calculated activity scores. These are numerical values associated with genes and represent gene expression levels.

Primary cortical neuronal cell cultures were generated from neonatal mouse C57BL/6 J pups aged postnatal day 0–1 (P0–P1) in accordance with ethical guidelines for animal experimentation at local and international levels. Animal care strictly followed official governmental protocols, with utmost effort to minimize the number of animals utilized and to mitigate any potential suffering or distress. Pups were decapitated, and the brains were collected in dissection media containing 10× Hanks balanced salt solution and NaHCO3. The cortex was dissected, the meninges were removed, and small pieces of the cortex were collected in a Falcon tube. Tissues were trypsinized at 37 °C in a water bath for 12 min and treated with 200 μL DNAse I (10 mg/mL). The tissue strips were gently triturated (until the tissue fragmented) in fetal bovine serum using a fire-polished Pasteur pipette. The mixture was subsequently centrifuged at 800 × g for four minutes, and the resulting cell pellet was resuspended and cultured in a neurobasal medium supplemented with B27 and antibiotics (0.06 μg/mL penicillin and 0.1 μg/mL streptomycin). Cells were seeded at a density of 3 × 105 cells per well in 24-well plates. Prior to cell seeding, the coverslips were acid-washed, rinsed several times with water, sterilized with ethanol and UV light, and placed in a well plate. The plates were then coated with poly-L-ornithine (0.05 mg/mL) overnight and laminin (10 μg/mL) for 2 h in an incubator before use. The cells were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified incubator under 5% CO2 for seven days prior to the experiments. The cell culture medium was replaced every three days during this period. To induce glutamate excitotoxicity, L-glutamic acid (Tocris, UK) was dissolved in 50 mM NaOH, and a stock solution of 50 mM was prepared prior to use. An appropriate concentration of glutamate was prepared in the maintenance medium (neurobasal medium supplemented with B27 and antibiotics). The cells were exposed to 5 mM glutamate by exchanging 1:3 medium at seven days in vitro. After six hours of incubation, glutamate was thoroughly removed by washing, and the cells were fixed for immunocytochemistry or lysed for protein extraction.

Cells were cultured on coverslips following previously described methods and immunostained at seven days in vitro according to standard techniques. Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature for 10 min. To quench the free aldehyde groups, the cells were treated with 50 mM NH4Cl for 15 min and washed with PBS. For the permeabilization of the cell membrane, PBS with 0.25% Triton X-100 was added for 10 min at room temperature. Non-specific binding sites were blocked by applying 10% goat serum in PBS for at least 20 min. Dilutions of primary antibodies were prepared in blocking solution to a final volume of 180 μL per 18-mm coverslip, and cells were incubated for 90 min at 37 °C with shaking. The following primary antibodies were used: mouse anti-MAP2 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA; #MA5-12826, RRID:AB_10976831) (1:500) and rabbit anti-cleaved caspase 3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; #9661, RRID: AB_2341188) (1:250). The cells were washed three times for five minutes each with PBS before applying the secondary antibodies. The cells were then incubated with secondary antibodies for 30 min and washed, respectively Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA #A-11034, RRID: AB_2576217) (1:250) and goat Anti-rabbit Cy3 (Jackson ImmunoResearch, Ely, United Kingdom, #111-165-144, RRID: AB_2338006) (1:250). For double staining, a second primary antibody was added, and the same steps were repeated. Coverslips were mounted on slides using a mounting medium supplemented with DAPI. Images were captured using an inverted fluorescence microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany) with a 63× oil objective and analyzed using ImageJ software. Fifteen random images from each coverslip were analyzed for cell death by counting the number of cleaved caspase-3 positive cells. Neurite lengths were measured using a simple neurite tracing plugin in ImageJ. Statistical analyzes were conducted using GraphPad Prism version 9.4.1 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA). Outliers were identified and removed using the Grubbs test (α = 0.1). Comparisons were done using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and data were plotted as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of at least five independent experiments. Differences were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05.

For protein analysis, cells were washed once with 1× PBS, and after adding RIPA lysis buffer, protease inhibitor cocktail (1:25), and phosphatase inhibitor (1:20), cells were incubated on ice for five minutes. The cells were scraped off with a cell scraper, transferred into 1-mL reaction tubes, and homogenized by passage through a U-100 insulin syringe several times. Protein concentration was determined using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. One microliter of protein sample was used for the assay. Colorimetric reactions were analyzed using an Infinite M200 PRO ELISA plate reader (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland). Twenty grams of each sample were loaded onto a gel (NuPAGE 4 to 12%, Bis-Tris) (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (1:4) and sample-reducing buffer (1:10) were added to lysed protein before loading onto the gels, incubated with shaking at 75 °C for 13 min, and centrifuged at 12 000 × g at 4 °C. The proteins were subjected to gel electrophoresis at 200 V. Subsequently, the proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes using an iBlot2 gel transfer device (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The membranes were then blocked with 5% nonfat milk in PBST at room temperature for 30 min. For antibody incubation, primary antibodies (diluted in blocking buffer) were added to the membranes and allowed to incubate overnight at 4 °C with rotation. Rabbit anti Lamin B1 (Proteintech, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany, #12987-1-AP, RRID: AB_2136290) (1:2000), rabbit anti p44/42 mitogen-activated protein kinase (anti-Erk1/2) (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, #9102, RRID: AB_330744) (1:1000), rabbit anti MEK2 (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, #9125, RRID: AB_2140644) (1:1000), rabbit anti Phospho-p44/42 MAPK(ERK1/2) (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, #9101, RRID: AB_331646) (1:1000) and rabbit anti Phospho-MEK1/2 (Ser217/221) (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, #9121, RRID: AB_331648) (1:1000). After four washes with PBST (five minutes each), the membranes were incubated with peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (Vector Laboratories, Newark, CA, USA, #PI-1000, RRID: AB_2336198) (diluted 1:10 000 in blocking buffer) at room temperature for one hour. Finally, the membranes were washed thoroughly with PBST to remove the unbound antibodies. Blots were incubated with enhanced chemiluminescence reagent and were imaged using a Molecular Imager ChemiDoc (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) imaging system. Band signal intensities were quantified using ImageJ software and normalized to housekeeping proteins and controls. Statistical analyzes were conducted using GraphPad Prism version 9.4.1. Outliers were identified and removed using the Grubbs test (α = 0.1). Comparisons were done using one-way ANOVA, and data were plotted as the mean ± SEM of at least three independent experiments. Differences were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05.

Spinal cords were homogenized in five volumes (w/v) of 1% boiling SDS. Protein homogenates were sonicated, boiled for 10 min, and centrifuged at 13 500 × g for five minutes. Supernatants were analyzed by dot blotting. For detergent-insoluble protein extraction, mouse tissues were homogenized in 10 volumes (w/v) of buffer (15 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.6, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.25 M Na3VO4, 2 mM Na4P2O7, 25 mM NaF, 5 µM MG132) and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Briefly, the samples were centrifuged at 10 000 × g, and the pellet was suspended in an ice-cold homogenization buffer containing 2% Triton X-100 and 150 mM KCl. The samples were then centrifuged at 10,000 × g to obtain the Triton-insoluble (insoluble) fraction.

Mice were anesthetized and underwent transcardial perfusion using 50 mL PBS followed by 100 mL of 4% paraformaldehyde (in PBS). The spinal cord was promptly dissected, postfixed for three hours, and subsequently transferred to a solution of 20% sucrose in PBS overnight. Once sunk, the spinal cord was transferred to a 30% sucrose solution until it reached the desired consistency. Next, the spinal cord was frozen in n-pentane at 45 °C and stored at ∼−80 °C. Prior to freezing, the spinal cord was divided into cervical, thoracic, and lumbar segments and embedded in Tissue-Tek O.C.T. compound (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA, USA). Coronal sections (30 µm thick) were sliced from the lumbar spinal cord and subjected to immunohistochemistry. Rabbit monoclonal anti-pMEK (Ser221) (pMEK2) antibody (1:50, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA, RRID: AB_490903) was used. In brief, slices were incubated with blocking solutions (0.2% Triton X-100 and 2% normal goat serum) at room temperature for one hour. Subsequently, the slices were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies. The sections were then incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies (1:200) for one hour at room temperature, followed by immunostaining using an avidin–biotin kit and diaminobenzidine. To facilitate visualization, sections were counterstained with 0.5% cresyl violet. Sagittal sections (20 µm thick) were sliced from tibialis anterior and subjected to immunofluorescence. Mouse anti-synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2 A (SV2, 1:50, DSHB, RRID: AB_2315387), mouse anti-neurofilament medium polypeptide 2H3 (1:12, DSHB, RRID: AB_2314897) and α-bungarotoxin (α-BTX) coupled to Alexa Fluor™ 594 (1:500; Invitrogen) was used. In brief, slices were fixed in acetone for 10 minutes and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with α-BTX. Subsequently, the slices were incubated with blocking solutions (0.5% Triton X-100, 5% bovine serum albumin and 5% normal goat serum) at room temperature for one hour. Subsequently, the slices were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies. The sections were then incubated with anti-mouse 647 (1:500, Invitrogen) for one hour at room temperature.

Stained sections were captured at 20× and 40× magnification using an Olympus BX-61 Virtual Stage microscope (Olympus Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan), ensuring complete stitching of the entire section with a pixel size of 0.346 µm. Images were acquired using 6-µm-thick stacks (step size of 2 µm). The different focal planes were merged into a single stack using mean intensity projection to maintain consistent focus across the sample. Finally, the acquired signals were analyzed for each slice using ImageJ and OlyVIA software (Olympus Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan).

Protein levels were quantified using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Waltham, MA, USA) and analyzed by western blotting and dot blotting. Membranes were blocked with a solution of 3% (w/v) BSA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20 in Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.5). Subsequently, the membranes were incubated with primary antibodies followed by peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (GE HealthCare, Chicago, IL, USA). The antibodies utilized were rabbit monoclonal anti-pMEK2 (1:2000, Cell Signaling Technology; Danvers, MA, USA, RRID: AB_490903), rabbit monoclonal anti-phospho-p44/42 MAPK (Erk1/2) (Thr202/Tyr204) (1:2000, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA,; RRID: AB_2315112), rabbit polyclonal anti-human SOD1 (1:1000, StressMarq Biosciences, Victoria, Canada; RRID: AB_2704217), rabbit polyclonal anti-ubiquitin (1:1000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK; RRID: AB_306069), and mouse monoclonal anti-SQSTM1/p62 (p62) (1:500, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom, RRID: AB_945626). Peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (goat anti-mouse and anti-rabbit) (GE HealthCare, Chicago, IL, USA) were used at dilutions of 1:20 000 and 1:10 000, respectively. The blots were developed using the Luminata Forte Western Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA, USA) and visualized on a ChemiDoc Imaging System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Densitometry analysis was performed using Image Lab software version 6.0 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Protein immunoreactivity was normalized to Ponceau Red staining (Honeywell Fluka, Charlotte, NC, USA) for accurate quantification.

SOD1G93A female and male mice received 3 mg/kg dose of trametinib or vehicle (PBS) through intranasal delivery, twice per week. The treatment of SOD1G93A female and male mice started from 9 weeks of age until 16 weeks of age, when they were sacrificed for biochemical analysis. The effect of trametinib on the progression of the disease in SOD1G93A female mice was assessed twice a week from 9 weeks of age by measuring body weight, hind limb extension reflex and grip strength. The extension reflex was quantified using the following 3-point score system: 3, hind limbs extending to form an angle of 120 degrees; 2.5, hind limbs extending to <90 degrees with decreased reflex in a hind limb; 2.0, as 2.5 with decreased reflex in both hind limbs; 1.5, loss of reflex with marked flexion in a hind limb; 1, as 1.5 with marked flexion in both hind limbs; 0.5, loss of reflex with hind limbs and paws held close to the body, but still able to walk; 0, as 0.5 but unable to walk. The grip strength test was performed by placing mice on a horizontal metallic grid which was then gently inverted. The latency to fall of each mouse was recorded. The test ended after 90 s. In the case of failure, the measurement was repeated three times and the best performance of the session was considered for the statistical analysis. Age of paralysis was defined as the age at which the mice lost reflex with hind limbs and paws held close to the body (0.5 score at extension reflex test). Disease onset was retrospectively determined as the average age at which the mouse exhibits the first failure, at two consecutive time points, from both maximum weight and maximum performance in extension reflex score and grip strength test. The animals were euthanized when they showed rigid paralysis in the hind limb and a 0.5 score in hind limb extension reflex. Data of behavioral tests and body weight loss were evaluated by two-way ANOVA for repeated measures. Disease onset and survival length were evaluated by log-rank Mantel-Cox test. This study complied with international and local animal welfare standards.

Mouse plasma samples were collected in K2-EDTA BD Microtainer blood collection tubes and centrifuged at 5 000 × g for five minutes to obtain the plasma. The plasma NfL was quantified using a Simoa NF-light Advantage (SR-X) Kit (#103400) on a Quanterix SR-X platform (Quanterix, Boston, MA, USA). All reagents used were from a single lot, and measurements were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Total RNA from Gastrocnemius muscle was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) and purified with PureLink RNA columns (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). RNA samples were treated with DNase I and reverse transcribed with the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). For Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reactions (qRT-PCR), we used the Taq Man Gene expression assay (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA. USA), on cDNA specimens in triplicate, using 1X Universal PCR master mix (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and 1X mix containing specific receptor probes for mouse nicotinic acetylcholinergic receptor, gamma subunit (AChRγ) (Mm00437419_m1; Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Relative quantification was calculated from the ratio of the cycle number (Ct) at which the signal crossed a threshold set within the logarithmic phase of the given gene to that of the reference mouse β-actin gene (Mm02619580_g1; Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The means of the triplicate results for each sample were used as individual data for 2-ΔΔCt statistical analysis.

Statistical analyzes of in vivo experimental data were performed using GraphPad Prism 7.0 and statsmodels Python package (v0.13.0). Student’s t-tests or one-way ANOVAs, followed by pairwise TukeyHSD post hoc tests, were used to analyze the differences between the experimental groups for each variable. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05.

The experimental designs, statistical analyzes, and reproducibility parameters of this study are described below, encompassing both human and animal models. The human postmortem prefrontal cortex (PFC) samples included 51 ALS and 50 control specimens, sourced from multiple brain banks. The ALS animal models used included four genetically modified mouse strains, with cohorts designed with ten transgenic and ten non-transgenic mice per model, balanced for sex. Experiments were conducted with strict adherence to reproducibility guidelines. All procedures were standardized, and where possible, performed by the same investigator to minimize variation. No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size. The numbers were chosen based on historical data, which suggested that these sample sizes were sufficient to detect meaningful differences in the parameters measured, with acceptable power and alpha levels. The experiments were not randomized. The investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

Further information on research design is available in the linked to this article.
