Invasion of red blood cells (RBCs) by Plasmodium falciparum merozoites is a complex process that is regulated by intricate signaling pathways. Here, we used phosphoproteomic profiling to identify the key proteins involved in signaling events during invasion. We found changes in the phosphorylation of various merozoite proteins, including multiple kinases previously implicated in the process of invasion. We also found that a phosphorylation-dependent multiprotein complex including signaling kinases assembles during the process of invasion. Disruption of this multiprotein complex impairs merozoite invasion of RBCs, providing a novel approach for the development of inhibitors to block the growth of blood-stage malaria parasites.

KEYWORDS: host cell invasion, host-parasite interaction, malaria, signaling

Red blood cell (RBC) invasion by Plasmodium merozoites requires multiple steps that are regulated by signaling pathways. Exposure of P. falciparum merozoites to the physiological signal of low K+, as found in blood plasma, leads to a rise in cytosolic Ca2+, which mediates microneme secretion, motility, and invasion. We have used global phosphoproteomic analysis of merozoites to identify signaling pathways that are activated during invasion. Using quantitative phosphoproteomics, we found 394 protein phosphorylation site changes in merozoites subjected to different ionic environments (high K+/low K+), 143 of which were Ca2+ dependent. These included a number of signaling proteins such as catalytic and regulatory subunits of protein kinase A (PfPKAc and PfPKAr) and calcium-dependent protein kinase 1 (PfCDPK1). Proteins of the 14-3-3 family interact with phosphorylated target proteins to assemble signaling complexes. Here, using coimmunoprecipitation and gel filtration chromatography, we demonstrate that Pf14-3-3I binds phosphorylated PfPKAr and PfCDPK1 to mediate the assembly of a multiprotein complex in P. falciparum merozoites. A phospho-peptide, P1, based on the Ca2+-dependent phosphosites of PKAr, binds Pf14-3-3I and disrupts assembly of the Pf14-3-3I-mediated multiprotein complex. Disruption of the multiprotein complex with P1 inhibits microneme secretion and RBC invasion. This study thus identifies a novel signaling complex that plays a key role in merozoite invasion of RBCs. Disruption of this signaling complex could serve as a novel approach to inhibit blood-stage growth of malaria parasites.

P. falciparum 3D7 blood stages were cultured in vitro, and merozoites were isolated as previously described (, , ). Mature synchronized schizonts were transferred to IC buffer (142 mM KCl, 5 mM NaCl, 2 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, and 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.2). Released merozoites were collected by centrifugation as described previously (, ) and resuspended in IC buffer, EC buffer (5 mM KCl, 142 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.6 mM glucose, and 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.2), or EC-BA buffer (EC buffer supplemented with 50 mM BAPTA-AM [Calbiochem]) at 37°C for 15 min with or without inhibitors as required. Merozoite pellets were prepared by centrifugation at 3,300 × g for 5 min and stored at –80°C for further analysis. Purity of merozoite preparations was confirmed by Giemsa staining the merozoite preparations and observation by light microscopy.

Isolated merozoites were lysed by incubation with urea lysis buffer on ice for 15 min followed by sonication for 3 × 30 s on ice. Protein concentration was quantified with a Pierce BCA protein assay kit as per the supplier’s protocol. Then, 6 to 7 mg of total protein was used for each biological replicate for the label-free phosphoproteomics experiment. For the quantitative experiment, 100 μg of total protein isolated from IC-, EC-, and EC-BA-treated merozoites was used for labeling as described below. The isolated proteins were reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin gold (Promega) with a 1:200 enzyme to substrate ratio at 37°C overnight. Tryptic digested peptides from the label-free experiment were desalted with reverse-phase tC18 SepPak solid-phase extraction cartridge 500 mg (Waters) as described previously ().

Fractionation of desalted peptides was carried out with strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography on a polySULFOETHYL A column as previously described (). Then, 12 to 15 fractions of 4 ml were collected, lyophilized until the volume was reduced to 30%, and desalted as described above.

Proteins isolated from merozoites in IC, EC, and EC-BA buffers were digested with trypsin, and peptides were labeled separately with TMT tags with masses of 128, 129, and 130 as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptide samples were combined and fractionated by HILIC using method described previously (). Then, 12 to 15 fractions (0.5 ml) were collected and lyophilized for further use.

Combined IMAC-based phosphoproteomic enrichment and desalting were carried out as described previously (). Peptide fractions were incubated on a rotating platform with IMAC beads (PHOS-Select iron affinity gel [Sigma]) for 1 h at room temperature (RT). During this time, StageTips () were prepared using Empore 3M C18 material (Fisher Scientific). After incubation, IMAC beads were added on top of the StageTips, and the flowthrough was collected and concentrated on a SpeedVac instrument. Phosphopeptides were eluted from IMAC resin onto C18 loaded tips and desalted. Phosphopeptides were eluted from C18 StageTips, lyophilized, and stored at –80°C. Flowthrough from IMAC was used further for phosphopeptide enrichment using TiO2/ZrO2 NuTip (Glygen) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Phosphopeptides were eluted, concentrated by SpeedVac centrifugation, and stored at –20°C until further analysis.

LC-MS/MS was carried out using a Nano LC-1000 HPLC nanoflow system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and hybrid Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated with a 120 min gradient using Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column and eluted onto the mass spectrometer. Data acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS2. Full-scan MS spectra of intact peptides (m/z 350 to 1,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. The top 20 precursors were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell. Dynamic exclusion was 50 s and a minimum 500 counts for nonlabeled, and 200 counts for TMT sets were required for MS2 selection.

All raw files were searched against a P. falciparum database using an OpenMS pipeline () containing the two search engines Mascot and MSGF+, followed by Percolator postprocessing and phosphorylation analysis using PhosphoScoring, an implementation of the Ascore algorithm (). The search parameters were as follows: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and serine/threonine/tyrosine (STY) phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. A false-discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. In the TMT experiment, TMT-6plex labeling on lysine and N termini was searched for protein quantitation. A phosphoscore over 11 was considered a significant localization score.

Data were also searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 (with the Andromeda search engine) against a P. falciparum database. The following search parameters were applied: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and STY phosphorylation were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. A false-discovery rate of 1% was set up for both protein and peptide levels. TMT-6plex labeling on lysine and N termini was searched for protein quantitation. Phospho-localization probability of more than 75% was considered significant localization. Quantification from MaxQuant analysis was used for quantification of changes in the phosphorylation. All phospho-spectra of interest were manually validated.

To determine whether the variation of the quantification of a phosphopeptide is due to a variation in the abundance of the protein itself or due to a variation in the abundance of its modification, a statistical test was performed to compare the variation in abundance of each phosphopeptide to the abundance of the corresponding protein. To do this for a specific phosphopeptide, we first estimated the average, m, and standard deviation, s, of the log2-fold change (log2FC) of the nonmodified peptides of the protein (where FC is equal to either EC¯/IC¯ or EC−BA¯/IC¯, x¯ being the average intensity observed for a peptide under the condition x). Assuming that the log2FC of the nonmodified peptides follows a normal distribution centered on m and having a standard deviation of s, we deduce that a P value related to the test that the measured log2FC for the phosphopeptide is equal to m by 2×PN(m,s)(log2(FC)) if log2(FC)<m and 2×(1−PN(m,s)(log2(FC))) if log2(FC)≥m, where PN(m,s) is the cumulative distribution function of N(m,s). Note that this P value is computed only when we have at least 3 nonmodified peptides with intensity values for a protein.

The merozoite phosphoproteome interaction network was constructed using the STRING database () and visualized in Cytoscape version 3.7.1 (). The merozoite phospho-interactome was analyzed for highly connected nodes with the molecular complex detection clustering algorithm MCODE ().

All P. falciparum gene ontology analyses were performed with the built-in result analysis tool for gene ontology on the PlasmoDB database. Phosphopeptides with a width of 15 amino acids were subjected to motif analysis using MotifX (, ). A background of the P. falciparum protein database was used for the analysis, and the occurrence threshold set to a default P value threshold of ≤1e−6 was used to identify enriched motifs.

IP of proteins from merozoites isolated in cRPMI 1640 medium (Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium supplemented with Albumax I) or resuspended in IC, EC, and EC-BA buffers or treated with specific inhibitors or peptides was performed with a Pierce coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) kit as per the manufacturer’s protocol. The identity of proteins from the eluate of IP experiments was investigated using an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or by Western blotting. Data were searched using MaxQuant as described above.

P. falciparum merozoites treated with IC or EC buffer were lysed and cleared by centrifugation. Proteins were fractionated with a Superdex 200 column (GE Healthcare; 10 × 300 mm). Fractions of 1 ml were collected and analyzed by Western blotting for the presence of PfPKAr, Pf14-3-3I, and PfCDPK1 in respective fractions.

Peptides (AA, RA, P1, P2, and P3) were coupled to agarose beads using a co-IP kit (Pierce) as per the manufacturer’s instruction. Peptide-coated beads were incubated with GST-tagged Pf14-3-3I protein; noncoated beads were used as a control. Recombinant protein bound to the beads was eluted, and eluates were tested by Western blotting using anti-Pf14-3-3I mouse sera.

Merozoites isolated as described above were treated with inhibitors (BV02 at 0.5 μM, 1 μM, 1.5 μM, and 2 μM) and peptides (P1, P2, and P3 at 10 μM, 50 μM, and 100 μM) for 15 min at 37°C followed by incubation with RBC in the presence of the inhibitor or peptide to allow invasion and growth for 24 h under standard culturing conditions. Solvents used to dissolve the inhibitors were used as a control. The parasitemia was determined by flow cytometry after staining with SYBR GreenI (Sigma) as previously described (). Data were analyzed with FlowJo (Tree Star) and the percent inhibition of invasion was calculated using the formula (1 – T/C) × 100; where T and C denote parasitemia in treatment and control samples, respectively.

P. falciparum merozoites isolated in cRPMI were incubated for 15 min at 37°C with BV02 (2 μM), AA (100 μM), RA (100 μM), or DMSO (solvent) and with peptides P1, P2, P3 (100 μM each), or RPMI (solvent). Following incubation, merozoites and supernatants were separated by centrifugation, and the presence of PfAMA1 (microneme protein) and PfNapL (cytosolic protein used as lysis control) in the supernatant and PfNapL in the pellet (cytosolic protein used as a loading control) were detected by Western blotting as described above.

ImageJ (NIH) software was used to perform densitometry of Western blots. The band intensity of the loading control was used for normalization. Statistical analysis for all the plots was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.1.2 software. All experiments were analyzed using multiple t tests (assuming equal standard error [SE]), and P ≤ 0.05 was considered significant. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.005; ***, P < 0.0005. The graphs were plotted with a mean ± SE of the mean (SEM) of the population.

The mass spectrometry-based proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE () partner repository with the data set identifier PXD015093. All other relevant data are available from the authors upon request.
