This study investigates the challenge of comprehensively cataloging the complete human proteome from a single-cell type using mass spectrometry (MS)-based shotgun proteomics. We modify a classical two-dimensional high-resolution reversed-phase peptide fractionation scheme and optimize a protocol that provides sufficient peak capacity to saturate the sequencing speed of modern MS instruments. This strategy enables the deepest proteome of a human single-cell type to date, with the HeLa proteome sequenced to a depth of ∼584,000 unique peptide sequences and ∼14,200 protein isoforms (∼12,200 protein-coding genes). This depth is comparable with next-generation RNA sequencing and enables the identification of post-translational modifications, including ∼7,000 N-acetylation sites and ∼10,000 phosphorylation sites, without the need for enrichment. We further demonstrate the general applicability and clinical potential of this proteomics strategy by comprehensively quantifying global proteome expression in several different human cancer cell lines and patient tissue samples.

•Multi-shot proteomics quantifies the protein levels of 12,200+ genes in HeLa cells•This essentially complete HeLa proteome has coverage similar to next-gen RNA-seq•Deep coverage of major PTMs is achieved without specific enrichment•The approach is extendable to other human cell lines and patient samples

Multi-shot proteomics quantifies the protein levels of 12,200+ genes in HeLa cells

This essentially complete HeLa proteome has coverage similar to next-gen RNA-seq

Deep coverage of major PTMs is achieved without specific enrichment

The approach is extendable to other human cell lines and patient samples

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to the Lead Contact, Jesper V. Olsen, by email at jesper.olsen@cpr.ku.dk

Human epithelial cervix carcinoma HeLa cells (female), human embryonic kidney HEK293 cells (fetus), human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells (female), lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells (male), human colon cancer HTC116 cells and human breast cancer MCF-7 cells (female) were purchased from ATCC. Cells were cultured in DMEM (Gibco, Invitrogen), supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100U/mL penicillin (Invitrogen), 100μg/mL streptomycin (Invitrogen), at 37°C, in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. SH-SY5Y was cultured in RPMI (Gibco, Invitrogen) with the same supplements as listed above. We have not performed specific authentication of the cell lines used in this study.

Collection and use of the human samples provided by Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark has been approved by The Central Denmark Region Committees on Health Research Ethics (J. no‟s M-1999/4678 and M-2000/0299). Informed consent was obtained from all donors. Use of clinical data associated with the samples has been approved by the Danish Data protection Agency (j. no 2007-58-0010 and j.no. 2013-41-2041). Total RNA from serial cryosections were extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA integrity was assessed using the Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Kit on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer and the analyzed samples had RNA integrity numbers (RIN) >9.

Cells were harvested at approximately 80 % confluency by washing twice with PBS (Gibco, Life technologies) and subsequently adding boiling lysis buffer (6 M guanidinium hydrochloride (GndCl), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10 mM chloroacetamide, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5) directly to the plate. Cells were collected by scraping the plate and boiled for additional 10 min followed by micro tip sonication.

Human tissues were quickly dissected and snap frozen. Followed by heat inactivation (Denator T1 Heat Stabilizor, Denator) the tissues were transferred to a GndCl solution (6 M GndCl, 25 mM Tris, pH 8.5, Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor tablets (Roche)) and homogenized by ceramic beads using 2 steps of 20 s at 5500 rpm (Precellys 24, Bertin Technologies). The tissues were heated for 10 min at 95°C followed by micro tip sonication on ice and clarified by centrifugation (20 min, 16,000g, 4°C). Samples were reduced and alkylated by adding 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 10 mM chloroacetamide for 20 min at room temperature.

Protein concentration was estimated by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad), and the lysates were digested with Lys-C (Wako) in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:100 (w/w) for 1 h followed by a threefold dilution with 25 mM Tris, pH 8.5, to 2 M GndCl and further digested overnight with trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) 1:100 (w/w). For experiments using different proteases, lysates were directly diluted to 2 M GndCl before addition of proteases (Lys-C, Trypsin, Chymotrypsin (Roche) and Glu-C (Roche)). Protease activity was quenched by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of approximately 1%, and the resulting peptide mixture was concentrated using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge (Waters). Peptides were eluted off the Sep-Pak with 2 mL 40% acetonitrile (ACN) followed by 2 mL 60% ACN. The ACN was removed by vacuum centrifugation for 40 min at 60°C and the final peptide concentration was estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm on a NanoDrop (NanoDrop 2000C, Thermo Scientific).

1-2 mg of peptides were fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on an Ultimate 3000 high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) operating at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with three buffer lines: Buffer A consisting of water, buffer B of ACN and Buffer C of 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, pH8. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient from 5% B to 35% B in 62 min followed by a linear increase to 60% B in 5 min, and ramped to 70% B in 3 min. Buffer C was constantly introduced throughout the gradient at 10%. Fractions were collected at 60 s or 90 s intervals to a total of either 39, 46, or 70 fractions. Samples were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of approximately 0.1% prior to concentration using vacuum centrifugation. For nanoflow LC–MS/MS, the loading amount was kept constant at 1 μg per injection, estimated by measuring absorbance at 280 nm on a NanoDrop instrument.

Phosphopeptides from all 46 fractions were enriched using titanium dioxide beads (5 μm Titansphere, GL Sciences, Japan). TiO2 beads were pre-incubated in 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (20 mg/mL) in 80% ACN and 1% TFA (5 μL/mg of beads) for 20 min. All fractions were brought to 80% ACN and 5% TFA in a final volume of 5 mL. 1 mg (in 5μL of DHB solution) was added to each fraction, which was then incubated for 30 min while rotating. After incubation, fractions were transferred to a deep 96-well filter plate and the supernatant was removed by a vacuum manifold and collected to four new fractions with a traditional concatenation scheme. These were incubated with fresh TiO2 beads for a second enrichment step. Beads were washed on the filter plate with 1 mL 80% ACN and 1% TFA, followed by 50% ACN and 1% TFA. The final washing step was with 10% ACN and 1% TFA. The phosphopeptides were eluted from the plate with 400 μL 5% NH4OH followed by 400 μL 10% NH4OH with 25% ACN. Eluted peptides were concentrated in a speed-vac and loaded onto C18 Stage-tips.

All samples were analyzed on an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray source. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). The column temperature was maintained at 40°C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Each peptide fraction was auto-sampled and separated using a 30 min gradient ranging from 10 % buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) to 30% B in 25 min and ramped to 45 % B in 5 min at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The washout followed at 80% buffer B for 4 min. The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, s-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary temperature at 275°C. All experiments were performed in the data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically isolate and fragment topN multiply-charged precursors according to their intensities. Former target ions were dynamically for 30 seconds excluded and all experiments were acquired using positive polarity mode. Full scan resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and the mass range was set to m/z 350-1400. Full scan ion target value was 3E6 allowing a maximum fill time of 100 ms. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)() fragment scans was acquired with optimal setting for parallel acquisition using 1.3 m/z isolation width and normalized collision energy of 28. For fastest HCD-MS/MS scanning a top20 method was employed with fragment scan resolution of 15,000 and an ion target value of 1E5 allowing maximum filling time of 15 ms. For protease comparisons, LC-MS/MS experiments were analyzed with a mix of 30 min and 60 min LC gradients and full scan resolutions at 120,000 at m/z 200 with a maximum fill time of 25 ms. For 60 min gradients, fast scanning top12 method using 30,000 resolution for HCD scans with maximum fill time of 45 ms was acquired. Phosphopeptide-enriched samples were analyzed with a sensitive top7 scanning method. Ion target value for HCD fragment scans were set to 2E5 with a maximum fill time of 110 ms and analyzed with 60,000 resolution.

Paired end mRNA sequencing was performed as previously described () using the Illumina Hiseq 2000 Platform. In brief, 500 ng total RNA was used for library preparation with the TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kit v2 and the libraries had fragment lengths of ∼200bp. TruSeq PE Cluster Kit v3 was used for cluster generation, and TruSeq SBS Kit v3 for sequencing. Human transcriptome quantification was performed by trimming read adaptor sequences using the AdapterRemoval tool (https://github.com/slindgreen/AdapterRemoval) mapping the reads to the human genome issue HG19 (hg19) using the Tophat2 mapper () and estimating FPKM values for Ensembl genes using Cufflink (Gencode v15 annotation w/o Pseudogenes) ().

All raw LC–MS/MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant v1.5.3.6 using the Andromeda Search engine and searched against the complete human UniProt database including all Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL entries as well as all isoforms. In addition, the default contaminant protein database was included and any hits to this excluded from further analysis. The second peptide option was disabled and “match between runs” features were excluded in the downstream analysis. Two previously published dataset were included as raw-files in our combined MaxQuant analysis. These are three 14 fraction HeLa experiments () and three human tissues (). Four analysis groups were made in MaxQuant, enabling one combined analysis for all proteases. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification for all groups. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, pyro-glutamate formation from glutamine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. For PTM analysis, the HeLa dataset was searched separately using methylation of argnines and lysines or acetylation of lysines as variable modifications.

The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on PSM, PTM site and Protein level. The FDR control employed in MaxQuant has recently been described in detail (). Briefly, MaxQuant make use of the target-decoy search strategy to estimate and control the extent of false-positive identifications using the concept of posterior error probability (PEP) to integrate multiple peptide properties, such as length, charge, number of modifications, and Andromeda score into a single quantity reflecting the quality of a peptide spectrum match (PSM). A second level of FDR control is set on the list of reported protein groups by calculating a Protein group score. This is the product of individual PEPs of the peptides of a protein group, and includes a factor to take into account the number of peptides per protein group. The protein group score is similar to the PEP, in that it provides a measure of the certainty of protein identification.

When analyzing multiple different cell lines, tissue samples and external datasets together in MaxQuant compared to analyzing the datasets individually, the main difference lies in the calculation of the protein FDR, which is done globally based on all raw files. This is important because if search results for separate raw files or datasets are combined into one larger dataset without any further higher-level FDR control; false-positive protein identifications are known to aggregate. As the computational performance of MaxQuant scales very well with the number of raw files it is recommended to always analyze all raw files that will later be used in a comparative manner together in a single MaxQuant. This has the additional advantage that the protein groups are defined in common for the whole data set, which simplifies quantitative comparative analysis of protein ratios and intensities.

The majority of the bioinformatics was accomplished using custom Perl and R scripts supplemented with Perseus (). Pathway visualization was done using PathVisio 3.2.2 (). The String () database version 10 was read into Cytoscape (www.cytoscape.org) for visualization of complexes. External datasets used were proteome and RNAseq data from HeLa (), the Corum () database release February 2012 limited to human species, citation numbers were obtained from PhosphoSite.org (), and HeLa copy number estimates (, ). Mapping of gene and protein identifiers between experiments were done as follows. All identifiers from UniProt, IPI, and older Ensembl identifiers were mapped to protein-coding genes in the Ensembl database version 84 primary assembly based on GRCh38. The primary gene identifier for each protein group was defined as the ones that represented proteins that could explain all peptides within a protein group. Overlap between datasets was calculated based on match to primary gene identifier. When a gene identifier represents multiple protein groups, the highest number of razor and unique peptides is used to choose the group of the main protein-coding gene. PTM site sequence motif analysis was performed using IceLogo ()with fold-change as the scoring system and a p-value cut-off of 0.05. Our input dataset was sequence windows for individual PTM sites identified and the complete human dataset were used as the background dataset.

All raw mass spectrometric data files from this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository () with the dataset identifier PXD004452.
