TITLE
Derivation and characterization of a cytocompatible scaffold from human testis.

ABSTRACT
Study question Is it possible to derive a scaffold from human testis for the purpose of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine? Summary answer We developed a method to produce a cytocompatible decellularized testicular matrix (DTM) while maintaining the native tissue-specific characteristics and components. What is known already The potential benefits of tissue-specific scaffolds consisting of naturally-derived extracellular matrix (ECM) have been demonstrated using a wide variety of animal and human tissue sources. However, so far, testis scaffolds have never been considered for constructive remodelling purposes. Study design, size, duration Human cadaveric testicular tissue was exposed for 24 or 48 h to 1% Triton X-100 and/or 1% sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). Acellular samples were used for further scaffold characterization purposes. Participants/materials, setting, methods The extent of decellularization was evaluated by histology. Confirmation of cell removal in DTM was done by a DNA quantification technique. Retention of testicular tissue-specific characteristics was evaluated by mass spectrometry, immunohistochemistry, Alcian blue staining and scanning electron microscopy. Soluble toxicity and testicular cell attachment was assessed to check the cytocompatibility of DTM scaffolds. Main results and the role of chance Histological analysis showed that DTM could be obtained by mechanical agitation in 1% SDS for 24 h. The resulting DTM was found to be clear of cells while retaining the typical three-dimensional structure and the major components of the native tissue scaffold, including collagen type I and IV, fibronectin, laminin and glycosaminoglycans. In addition, using proteomic analysis, we revealed numerous additional ECM proteins in DTM, indicating its complex nature. The mass spectrometry data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001524. Importantly, we demonstrated that DTM scaffolds are not cytotoxic, as evidenced by MTT assay not showing an aberrant fibroblast proliferation activity after indirect exposure, and support testicular cell attachment and infiltration. Limitations, reasons for caution The functionality of human testicular cells in DTM needs to be investigated. Wider implications of the findings Our results suggest that the insights into the molecular composition of the testicular ECM provide new clues for the unravelling of its important yet poorly understood role in regulating testicular function, and DTM-based bioscaffolds are promising components for the development of human in vitro spermatogenesis as a treatment for various types of male fertility disorders.
