TITLE
Top-down proteomic profiling of human saliva in multiple sclerosis patients.

ABSTRACT
Multiple sclerosis is a chronic disease of the central nervous system characterized by inflammation, demyelination and neurodegeneration which is of undetermined origin. To date a single diagnostic test of multiple sclerosis does not exists and novel biomarkers are demanded for a more accurate and early diagnosis. In this study, we performed the quantitative analysis of 119 salivary peptides/proteins from 49 multiple sclerosis patients and 54 healthy controls by a mass spectrometry-based top-down proteomic approach. Statistical analysis evidenced different levels on 23 proteins: 8 proteins showed lower levels in multiple sclerosis patients with respect to controls and they were mono- and di-oxidized cystatin SN, mono- and di-oxidized cystatin S1, mono-oxidized cystatin SA and mono-phosphorylated statherin. 15 proteins showed higher levels in multiple sclerosis patients with respect to controls and they were antileukoproteinase, two proteoforms of Prolactin-Inducible Protein, P-C peptide (Fr.1-14, Fr. 26-44, and Fr. 36-44), SV1 fragment of statherin, cystatin SN Des 1-4 , cystatin SN P 11 → L variant, and cystatin A T 96 → M variant. The differences observed between the salivary proteomic profile of patients suffering from multiple sclerosis and healthy subjects is consistent with the inflammatory condition and altered immune response typical of the pathology. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009440. Significance To date a single diagnostic test of multiple sclerosis does not exist, and diagnosis is based on multiple tests which mainly include the analysis of cerebrospinal fluid. However, the need for lumbar puncture makes the analysis of cerebrospinal fluid impractical for monitoring disease activity and response to treatment. The possible use of saliva as a diagnostic fluid for oral and systemic diseases has been largely investigated, but only marginally in multiple sclerosis compared to other body fluids. Our study demonstrates that the salivary proteome of multiple sclerosis patients differs considerably compared to that of sex and age matched healthy individuals and suggests that some differences might be associated with the different disease-modifying therapy used to treat multiple sclerosis patients.
