TITLE
Differential proteomic analysis of actinic keratosis, Bowen's disease and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma by label-free LC-MS/MS.

ABSTRACT
Background The boundaries between actinic keratosis (AK), Bowen's disease (BD), and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) are sometimes not clear. Large-scale proteomic profiling studies of these lesions are also non-existent. Objective To evaluate proteomic changes between normal epidermis, AK, BD and cSCC that could support a molecular classification and improve our understanding of disease progression. Methods Microdissected formalin-fixed paraffin embedded samples of normal epidermis (n = 4, pooled), AK (n = 10), BD (n = 10) and cSCC (n = 10) were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Following normalization and multiple testing adjustments, differential abundance analysis was performed using Linear Models for Microarray data. Proteins were filtered for significance (adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05) and fold change of at least ±1.5. Comparative bioinformatics analysis was performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. Proteomic findings were subsequently substantiated using immunohistochemistry. Results 2073 unique proteins were identified. cSCC had the highest number of differentially abundant proteins (63 proteins) followed by BD (58 proteins) and AK (46 proteins). Six proteins (APOA1, ALB, SERPINA1, HLA-B, HP and TXNDC5) were differentially abundant in cSCC compared to AK. Immunohistochemical analysis corroborated changes in MIF, RPL37A and TXNDC5. IPA analysis predicted that cell proliferation, angiogenesis and inflammatory reactions were significantly activated in cSCC compared to BD and AK. Cell death and DNA damage were predicted to be inhibited in BD. Conclusion Our study supports the concept that AK and BD are precursors of cSCC. The identification of proteome changes indicates disruption of repair, pro-apoptotic, and tumor promoting pathways. Our findings will help select targets for classification and treatment.
