TITLE
Unambiguous Phosphosite Localization through the Combination of Trypsin and LysargiNase Mirror Spectra in a Large-Scale Phosphoproteome Study.

ABSTRACT
Understanding of the kinase-guided signaling pathways requires the identification and analysis of phosphosites. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based phosphoproteomics is a rapid and highly sensitive approach for high-throughput identification of phosphosites. However, phosphosite determination from MS data with a single protease is more likely to be ambiguous, regardless of the strategy used for phosphopeptide detection. Here, we explored the application of LysargiNase, which was recently reported to mirror trypsin in specificity to cleave arginine and lysine residues exclusively at the N-terminal side. We found that the combination of trypsin and LysargiNase mirror spectra resulted in higher ion coverage in MS 2 spectra. The median ion coverage values of b ions in tryptic spectra, LysargiNase spectra, and combined spectra are 8.3, 20.5, and 25.0%, respectively. As for the median ion coverage of y ions, these values are 27.8, 10.0, and 32.3%. Higher ion coverage was helpful to pinpoint the precise phosphosites. Compared to trypsin alone, the combined use of trypsin and LysargiNase mirror spectra enabled 67.1% of mirror spectra with unreliable scores (confidence score <0.75) to become reliable (confidence score ≥ 0.75). Meanwhile, all of the mirror peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) with multiple potential phosphosites from trypsin and LysargiNase digests could be assigned one precise phosphosite after applying the combination strategy. Besides, the combination strategy could identify more novel phosphosites than the union strategy did. We synthesized three phosphopeptides corresponding to the three novel phosphosites and validated the reliability of the identification. Taken together, our data demonstrated the distinctive potential of the combination strategy presented here for unambiguous phosphosite localization (Project accession PXD011178).
