TITLE
Plasma Glycoproteomics Reveals Sepsis Outcomes Linked to Distinct Proteins in Common Pathways.

ABSTRACT
Objective Sepsis remains a predominant cause of mortality in the ICU, yet strategies to increase survival have proved largely unsuccessful. This study aimed to identify proteins linked to sepsis outcomes using a glycoproteomic approach to target extracellular proteins that trigger downstream pathways and direct patient outcomes. Design Plasma was obtained from the Lactate Assessment in the Treatment of Early Sepsis cohort. N-linked plasma glycopeptides were quantified by solid-phase extraction coupled with mass spectrometry. Glycopeptides were assigned to proteins using RefSeq (National Center of Biotechnology Information, Bethesda, MD) and visualized in a heat map. Protein differences were validated by immunoblotting, and proteins were mapped for biological processes using Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health; Bethesda, MD) and for functional pathways using Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (Kanehisa Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan) databases. Setting Hospitalized care. Patients Patients admitted to the emergency department were enrolled in the study when the diagnosis of sepsis was made, within 6 hours of presentation. Interventions None. Measurements and main results A total of 501 glycopeptides corresponding to 234 proteins were identified. Of these, 66 glycopeptides were unique to the survivor group and corresponded to 54 proteins, 60 were unique to the nonsurvivor group and corresponded to 43 proteins, and 375 were common responses between groups and corresponded to 137 proteins. Immunoblotting showed that nonsurvivors had increased total kininogen; decreased total cathepsin-L1, vascular cell adhesion molecule, periostin, and neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin; and a two-fold decrease in glycosylated clusterin (all p Conclusion This study identifies proteins linked to patient outcomes and provides insight into unexplored mechanisms that can be investigated for the identification of novel therapeutic targets.
