=== TITLE ===
Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2 infected host cells reveals therapy targets

=== ABSTRACT ===
A novel coronavirus was recently discovered and termed SARS-CoV-2. Human infection can cause coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which has been rapidly spreading around the globe,. SARS-CoV-2 shows some similarities to other coronaviruses. However, treatment options and a cellular understanding of SARS-CoV-2 infection are lacking. Here we identify the host cell pathways modulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection and show that inhibition of these pathways prevent viral replication in human cells. We established a human cell culture model for infection with SARS-CoV-2 clinical isolate. Employing this system, we determined the SARS-CoV-2 infection profile by translatome and proteome proteomics at different times after infection. These analyses revealed that SARS-CoV-2 reshapes central cellular pathways, such as translation, splicing, carbon metabolism and nucleic acid metabolism. Small molecule inhibitors targeting these pathways prevented viral replication in cells. Our results reveal the cellular infection profile of SARS-CoV-2 and led to the identification of drugs inhibiting viral replication. We anticipate our results to guide efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying host cell modulation upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, our findings provide insight for the development of therapy options for COVID-19.

=== SARS-COV-2 RAPIDLY REPLICATES IN CELLS ===
To investigate potential antiviral compounds against SARS-CoV-2, we established a highly permissive SARS-CoV-2 cell culture model in Caco-2 cells. Addition of SARS-CoV-2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of one (to allow infection of a majority of cells while preventing multiple infection) led to a fast progression of viral infection with visible cytopathogenic effect (CPE) apparent after 24 hours (). To determine if productive viral infection takes place in this model, we measured viral RNA copies in the supernatant during a 24-hour time period. SARS-CoV-2 RNA molecules increased continuously after infection (), indicating that the virus underwent full replication cycles. Staining for viral nucleoprotein additionally revealed production of viral protein in a majority of cells (). Taken together, we established a functional SARS-CoV-2 cell culture model that allows investigation of the different steps of the SARS-CoV-2 life cycle in cells.

=== TRANSLATION INHIBITORS BLOCK REPLICATION ===
To determine the temporal profile of SARS-CoV-2 infection, we infected Caco-2 cells with SARS-CoV-2, cultured them for a range of 2-24 hours and quantified translatome and proteome changes by mePROD proteomics compared to time-matched mock-infected samples (). Across all replicates, we quantified translation for 2,715 proteins and total protein levels for 6,382 proteins (). Principal component analysis showed replicates clustering closely and first separation of infected samples after 6 hours (). Many RNA viruses decrease cellular protein synthesis, as has been suggested for SARS-CoV-1. When monitoring global translation rates, only minor translation changes were observed ( and ). We detected translation rates for five viral proteins, all of which exhibited increasing translation rates over time (). To identify pathways potentially important for virus amplification, we determined host proteins exhibiting translation kinetics correlating with viral proteins. Averaged profiles of all quantified viral proteins were used as reference profiles, distance to this profile calculated for all quantified host proteins and a network analysis carried out for the top 10% quantile of nearest profiles (244 proteins; ). Pathway analyses of the network revealed an extensive increase in the host translation machinery ( and ). In addition, we detected significant enrichment of components of several other pathways, such as splicing and nucleobase synthesis.

Host translation has been previously targeted to pharmacologically inhibit replication of diverse coronaviruses, such as SARS-CoV-1 or MERS-CoV (),. As components of the translation machinery were translated at higher rates (), we speculated that SARS-CoV-2 replication might be sensitive to translation inhibition. We tested two translation inhibitors – cycloheximide (inhibitor of translation elongation) and emetine (inhibits 40S ribosomal protein S14) – for their ability to reduce SARS-CoV-2 replication. Both compounds significantly inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication at non-toxic concentrations (, ). Taken together, translatome analyses of cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 revealed the temporal profile of viral and host protein responses with prominent increases in the translation machinery. Translation inhibitors prevented SARS-CoV-2 replication in cells.

=== PATHWAYS CHANGED BY SARS-COV-2 INFECTION ===
To obtain a general understanding of host proteome changes after infection, we analysed system-wide differences in protein levels over time (, ). While early time points only showed minor host proteome changes, the proteome underwent extensive modulation 24 hours post infection ( and ). Hierarchical clustering identified two main clusters of proteins regulated: The first cluster consisted of proteins reduced during infection and was enriched in proteins belonging to cholesterol metabolism ( and ). The second cluster was composed of proteins increased by infection and revealed strong increases in RNA modifiers, such as spliceosome components (consistent with translatome measurements in ), and carbon metabolism (, and ). Remarkably, for 14 of 25 spliceosome components increased upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, direct binding to viral proteins of SARS-CoV-1 or other coronaviruses had been shown ()–. Thus, we tested whether inhibition of splicing or glycolysis may be able to prevent SARS-CoV-2 replication. Addition of pladienolide B, a spliceosome inhibitor targeting splicing factor SF3B1, prevented viral replication at non-toxic concentrations (, ), revealing splicing as an essential pathway for SARS-CoV-2 replication and potential therapeutic target.

Next, we assessed the effects of carbon metabolism (i.e. glycolysis) inhibition on SARS-CoV-2 replication. 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG), an inhibitor of hexokinase, the rate limiting enzyme in glycolysis, had previously been shown to be effective against other viruses in cell culture and suppressed rhinovirus infection in mice. Blocking glycolysis with non-toxic concentrations of 2-DG prevented SARS-CoV-2 replication in Caco-2 cells (2-DG, , ). Notably, we also observed changes in ER resident proteins reshaping lipid metabolism (), consistent with previous reports on other coronaviruses. Together, our quantitative analyses of proteome changes upon SARS-CoV-2 infection revealed host pathways changes upon infection and revealed spliceosome and glycolysis inhibitors as potential therapeutic agents for COVID-19.

=== KINETIC INFECTION PROTEOME PROFILING ===
To identify additional potential inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 replication, we determined proteins with abundance trajectories similar to the detected nine viral proteins ( and ; measurement depth does not allow to distinguish polyprotein from processed protein). We compared distance and false discovery rate for each protein to an averaged viral protein profile and performed gene ontology (GO) analysis (459 proteins with a FDR < 0.01). We identified a major cluster of metabolic pathways consisting of diverse nucleic acid metabolism sub-pathways (, ). Coronavirus replication depends on availability of cellular nucleotide pools. Compounds interfering with nucleic acid metabolism, such as ribavirin, have been used in the past to inhibit viral replication. We tested the effect of inhibition of nucleotide synthesis on SARS-CoV-2 replication in cells. Ribavirin, which inhibits inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH), the rate-limiting enzyme in de novo synthesis of guanosine nucleotides, inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication at low micromolar and clinically achievable concentrations (, ), consistent with data in monkey cells. Inhibition of IMPDH had been shown to prevent replication of coronaviruses HCoV-43, CoV-NL63 and MERS-CoV but not of SARS-CoV-1. Considering the clinical use of ribavirin to treat viruses such as hepatitis C and respiratory syncytial virus,, it may be regarded as treatment option for COVID-19 patients.

Components of the protein homeostasis (proteostasis) machinery also showed a behaviour highly comparable to the viral proteins (), consistent with a perturbation of host cell proteostasis due to the higher folding load, resulting from high translation rates of viral proteins. Therefore, we tested the effects of proteostasis perturbation on SARS-CoV-2 replication using NMS-873, a small molecule inhibitor of the AAA ATPase p97. p97 is a key component of proteostasis affecting protein degradation, membrane fusion, vesicular trafficking and disassembly of stress granules. NMS-873 has been shown to inhibit influenza A and B replication previously. Here, NMS-873 inhibited SARS-CoV-2 replication at low nanomolar concentrations (, ). In summary, analyses of the effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on the host cell proteome revealed major readjustments in cellular function, particularly of splicing, proteostasis and nucleotide biosynthesis. Compounds modulating these pathways prevented SARS-CoV-2 replication in cells.

=== DISCUSSION ===
Identifying and testing potential drug candidates for COVID-19 is of high priority. So far, only limited data has been obtained describing the host-cell response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, preventing data-based assessment of treatment options. We describe a SARS-CoV-2 cell infection system to determine changes in host-cell pathways upon infection, resulting from host-cell (antiviral) responses or viral effector proteins, and assess inhibitors. At the MOI used, a majority of cells was infected, allowing to determine global changes across the whole cell population with minimal ratio compression from uninfected cells. We found the previously described SARS-CoV-2 entry receptor ACE2 mildly reduced after infection (), consistent with a drop in ACE2 levels due to shedding by ADAM10 described for SARS-CoV-1. Temporal proteome and translatome proteomics showed limited translation attenuation and revealed core cellular pathways modulated upon infection (). For SARS-CoV-1 and other RNA viruses, severe effects on translation had been described. Our observations suggest that SARS-CoV-2 reshapes host cell translation, likely by increasing production of translation machinery components to compensate host-cell translation inhibition. We tested two translation inhibitors with different modes of action and found these to efficiently prevent viral replication in cells. These findings encourage further testing of translation inhibitors for preventing SARS-CoV-2 replication.

Overall, our proteomics analyses suggested cellular pathways for therapeutic intervention, including a profound increase in spliceosome, proteostasis and nucleotide biosynthesis pathway components. Revealing these pathways provided with novel drug targets, which were based on the behaviour of SARS-CoV-2 in human cells and had not previously been tested with other coronaviruses. Some of the inhibitors, for which we observed inhibition of SARS-CoV-2, are approved drugs, such as ribavirin, or undergoing clinical trials (i.e. 2-DG). A clinical trial for ribavirin was recently initiated (ClinicalTrials.gov; NCT04356677).

Analysis of pathways important for viral infection in cells by combinatorial profiling using proteomics and translatomics represents a useful tool to propose likely pathways to inhibit viral replication. Determining possible compounds based on the specific cellular infection profile of the virus allows an unbiased determination of potential drug targets. Here, using such an experimental-data-driven approach, we identified several drugs preventing SARS-CoV-2 replication in cells for further testing in clinical settings for COVID-19.

=== METHODS ===
Human Caco-2 cells, derived from colon carcinoma, was obtained from the Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen (DSMZ; Braunschweig, Germany AC169). Cell-authentification certificate from DSMZ is available and cells have been tested negative for mycoplasma infection.

Cells were grown at 37°C in Minimal Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and containing 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. All culture reagents were purchased from Sigma.

SARS-CoV-2 was isolated from samples of travellers returning from Wuhan (China) to Frankfurt (Germany) using human colon carcinoma cell line CaCo-2 as described previously. SARS-CoV-2 stocks used in the experiments had undergone one passage on CaCo-2 cells and were stored at –80° C. Virus titers were determined as TCID50/ml in confluent cells in 96-well microtitre plates.

SARS-CoV-2 RNA from cell culture supernatant samples was isolated using AVL buffer and the QIAamp Viral RNA Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Absorbance-based quantification of the RNA yield was performed using the Genesys 10S UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). RNA was subjected to OneStep qRT-PCR analysis using the Luna Universal One-Step RT-qPCR Kit (New England Biolabs) and a CFX96 Real-Time System, C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler. Primers were adapted from the WHO protocol targeting the open reading frame for RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp): RdRP_SARSr-F2 (GTG ARA TGG TCA TGT GTG GCG G) and RdRP_SARSr-R1 (CAR ATG TTA AAS ACA CTA TTA GCA TA) using 0.4 µM per reaction. Standard curves were created using plasmid DNA (pEX-A128-RdRP) harboring the corresponding amplicon regions for RdRP target sequence according to GenBank Accession number NC_045512. For each condition three biological replicates were used. Mean and standard deviation were calculated for each group.

Confluent layers of CaCo-2 cells in 96-well plates were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at MOI 0.01. Virus was added together with drugs and incubated in MEM supplemented with 2% FBS with different drug dilutions. Cytopathogenic effect (CPE) was assessed visually 48 h after infection. To assess effects of drugs on Caco-2 cell viability, confluent cell layers were treated with different drug concentration in 96-well plates. The viability was measured using the Rotitest Vital (Roth) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Data for each condition was collected for at least three biological replicates. For dose response curves, data was fitted with all replicates using OriginPro 2020 with the following equation: IC50 values were generated by Origin together with metrics for curve fits.

Viral infection was assessed by staining of SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein. Briefly, cells were fixed with acetone/methanol (40:60) solution and immunostaining was performed using a monoclonal antibody directed against SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein (1:500, Sinobiological, Cat #40143-R019-100ul), which was detected with a peroxidase conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:1000, Dianova), followed by addition of AEC substrate.

Two hours before harvest cells were washed twice with warm PBS to remove interfering medium and cultured for two additional hours with DMEM medium containing 84 mg/L L-Arginine (13C615N4; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Cat#CNLM-539-H) and 146 mg/L L-Lysine (13C615N2, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Cat#CNLM-291-H) to label nascent proteins. After labelling culture, the cells were washed three times with warm PBS and lysed with 95°C hot lysis buffer (100mM EPPS pH 8.2, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 1mM TCEP, 4mM 2-Chloracetamide, Protease inhibitor tablet mini EDTA-free [Roche]). Samples were then incubated for additional five minutes at 95°C, followed by sonication for 30s and further 10min incubation at 95°C.

Samples were prepared as previously described. Briefly, proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform precipitation and resuspended in 8M Urea/10mM EPPS pH 8.2. Isolated proteins were digested with 1:50 wt/wt LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 wt/wt Trypsin (Promega, Sequencing grade) overnight at 37°C after dilution to a final Urea concentration of 1M. Digests then were acidified (pH 2-3) using TFA. Peptides were purified using C18 (50mg) SepPak columns (Waters) as previously described. Desalted peptides were dried and 25µg of peptides were resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (200mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10% acetonitrile). Peptides were subjected to TMT labelling with 1:2 Peptide TMT ratio (wt/wt) for one hour at RT. Labelling reaction was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubation at RT for additional 15min. Labelled peptides were pooled and subjected to High pH Reverse Phase fractionation with the HpH RP Fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. All multiplexes were mixed with a bridge channel, that consists of control sample labelled in one reaction and split to all multiplexes in equimolar amounts.

Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5-38% acetonitrile over 120 min and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database, SARS-CoV-2 database (Uniprot pre-release) and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. One search node was set up to search with TMT6 (K) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to search for light peptides and one search node was set up with TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to identify heavy peptides. Searches were performed using Sequest HT. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 5. Results were then exported to Excel files for further processing. For proteome quantification all PSMs were summed intensity normalized, followed by IRS and TMM normalization and peptides corresponding to a given UniProt Accession were summed including all modification states.

For translatome measurements, Excel files were processed in Python, as previously described. Python 3.6 was used together with the following packages: pandas 0.23.4, numpy 1.15.4, scipy 1.3.0. Excel files with normalized PSM data were read in and each channel was normalized to the lowest channel based on total intensity. For each peptide sequence, all possible modification states containing a heavy label were extracted and the intensities for each channel were averaged between all modified peptides. Baseline subtraction was performed by subtracting the measured intensities for the non-SILAC-labeled sample from all other values. Negative intensities were treated as zero. The heavy label incorporation at the protein level was calculated by summing the intensities of all peptide sequences belonging to one unique protein accession. These values were combined with the standard protein output of PD 2.4 to add annotation data to the master protein accessions.

Hierarchical cluster analysis and comparison with viral protein profiles for all samples was performed using Perseus software package (version 1.6.5.0) after centering and scaling of data (Z scores). K-means pre-processing was performed with a cluster number of 12 and a maximum of 10 iterations. For the comparison of profiles, the viral profiles were Z scored and averaged to generate reference profile. Profiles of all proteins were compared to the reference (Pearson), distances and False discovery rates computed.

For network analysis, Cytoscape 3.7.1 software was used with BiNGO 3.0.3 plugin for GO term analysis, EnrichmentMap 3.1.0 and ReactomeFI 6.1.0. For GO-term analyses, gene sets were extracted from data as indicated using fold change and significance cut-offs.

Significance was, unless stated otherwise, tested using unpaired two-sided students t-tests with equal variance assumed. Statistical analysis was performed using OriginPro 2020 analysis software. For network and GO analysis all statistical computations were performed by the corresponding packages.

=== SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL ===
Contains Uniprot Accession, Species annotation, Gene Symbol and normalized translation data for each replicate (Data was normalized using summed intensity normalisation for sample loading, followed by internal reference scaling and Trimmed mean of M normalisation). Log2 ratios and P values were computed for each group comparison (two-sided, unpaired t-test with equal variance assumed, n = 3 independent biological samples). See .

Contains UniProt Accession, Gene Symbol and normalized protein abundances for each sample. (Data was normalized using summed intensity normalisation for sample loading, followed by internal reference scaling and Trimmed mean of M normalisation). Log2 ratios and P values were computed for each group comparison (two-sided, unpaired t-test with equal variance assumed, n = 3 independent biological samples). See , .

Pathway names, size of pathway, proteins found in dataset, P values and FDR are given (P values by binomial test and FDR by binomial test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction).

Pathway names, size of pathway, proteins found in dataset, P values and FDR are given (P values by binomial test and FDR by binomial test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction).

GO term, proteins found in dataset, GO size, P value and FDR are given (P values by binomial test and FDR by binomial test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction).

=== DATA AVAILABILITY ===
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD017710. We furthermore created a webpage (http://corona.papers.biochem2.com/) visualizing the presented data for easy access of the published data.
