A novel coronavirus was recently discovered and termed SARS-CoV-2. Human infection can cause coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which has been rapidly spreading around the globe,. SARS-CoV-2 shows some similarities to other coronaviruses. However, treatment options and a cellular understanding of SARS-CoV-2 infection are lacking. Here we identify the host cell pathways modulated by SARS-CoV-2 infection and show that inhibition of these pathways prevent viral replication in human cells. We established a human cell culture model for infection with SARS-CoV-2 clinical isolate. Employing this system, we determined the SARS-CoV-2 infection profile by translatome and proteome proteomics at different times after infection. These analyses revealed that SARS-CoV-2 reshapes central cellular pathways, such as translation, splicing, carbon metabolism and nucleic acid metabolism. Small molecule inhibitors targeting these pathways prevented viral replication in cells. Our results reveal the cellular infection profile of SARS-CoV-2 and led to the identification of drugs inhibiting viral replication. We anticipate our results to guide efforts to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying host cell modulation upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. Furthermore, our findings provide insight for the development of therapy options for COVID-19.

Human Caco-2 cells, derived from colon carcinoma, was obtained from the Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen (DSMZ; Braunschweig, Germany AC169). Cell-authentification certificate from DSMZ is available and cells have been tested negative for mycoplasma infection.

Cells were grown at 37°C in Minimal Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and containing 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. All culture reagents were purchased from Sigma.

SARS-CoV-2 was isolated from samples of travellers returning from Wuhan (China) to Frankfurt (Germany) using human colon carcinoma cell line CaCo-2 as described previously. SARS-CoV-2 stocks used in the experiments had undergone one passage on CaCo-2 cells and were stored at –80° C. Virus titers were determined as TCID50/ml in confluent cells in 96-well microtitre plates.

SARS-CoV-2 RNA from cell culture supernatant samples was isolated using AVL buffer and the QIAamp Viral RNA Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Absorbance-based quantification of the RNA yield was performed using the Genesys 10S UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). RNA was subjected to OneStep qRT-PCR analysis using the Luna Universal One-Step RT-qPCR Kit (New England Biolabs) and a CFX96 Real-Time System, C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler. Primers were adapted from the WHO protocol targeting the open reading frame for RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp): RdRP_SARSr-F2 (GTG ARA TGG TCA TGT GTG GCG G) and RdRP_SARSr-R1 (CAR ATG TTA AAS ACA CTA TTA GCA TA) using 0.4 µM per reaction. Standard curves were created using plasmid DNA (pEX-A128-RdRP) harboring the corresponding amplicon regions for RdRP target sequence according to GenBank Accession number NC_045512. For each condition three biological replicates were used. Mean and standard deviation were calculated for each group.

Confluent layers of CaCo-2 cells in 96-well plates were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at MOI 0.01. Virus was added together with drugs and incubated in MEM supplemented with 2% FBS with different drug dilutions. Cytopathogenic effect (CPE) was assessed visually 48 h after infection. To assess effects of drugs on Caco-2 cell viability, confluent cell layers were treated with different drug concentration in 96-well plates. The viability was measured using the Rotitest Vital (Roth) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Data for each condition was collected for at least three biological replicates. For dose response curves, data was fitted with all replicates using OriginPro 2020 with the following equation: IC50 values were generated by Origin together with metrics for curve fits.

Viral infection was assessed by staining of SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein. Briefly, cells were fixed with acetone/methanol (40:60) solution and immunostaining was performed using a monoclonal antibody directed against SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein (1:500, Sinobiological, Cat #40143-R019-100ul), which was detected with a peroxidase conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:1000, Dianova), followed by addition of AEC substrate.

Two hours before harvest cells were washed twice with warm PBS to remove interfering medium and cultured for two additional hours with DMEM medium containing 84 mg/L L-Arginine (13C615N4; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Cat#CNLM-539-H) and 146 mg/L L-Lysine (13C615N2, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Cat#CNLM-291-H) to label nascent proteins. After labelling culture, the cells were washed three times with warm PBS and lysed with 95°C hot lysis buffer (100mM EPPS pH 8.2, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 1mM TCEP, 4mM 2-Chloracetamide, Protease inhibitor tablet mini EDTA-free [Roche]). Samples were then incubated for additional five minutes at 95°C, followed by sonication for 30s and further 10min incubation at 95°C.

Samples were prepared as previously described. Briefly, proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform precipitation and resuspended in 8M Urea/10mM EPPS pH 8.2. Isolated proteins were digested with 1:50 wt/wt LysC (Wako Chemicals) and 1:100 wt/wt Trypsin (Promega, Sequencing grade) overnight at 37°C after dilution to a final Urea concentration of 1M. Digests then were acidified (pH 2-3) using TFA. Peptides were purified using C18 (50mg) SepPak columns (Waters) as previously described. Desalted peptides were dried and 25µg of peptides were resuspended in TMT labelling buffer (200mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10% acetonitrile). Peptides were subjected to TMT labelling with 1:2 Peptide TMT ratio (wt/wt) for one hour at RT. Labelling reaction was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5% and incubation at RT for additional 15min. Labelled peptides were pooled and subjected to High pH Reverse Phase fractionation with the HpH RP Fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. All multiplexes were mixed with a bridge channel, that consists of control sample labelled in one reaction and split to all multiplexes in equimolar amounts.

Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5-38% acetonitrile over 120 min and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors.

Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database, SARS-CoV-2 database (Uniprot pre-release) and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues. One search node was set up to search with TMT6 (K) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to search for light peptides and one search node was set up with TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) and methionine oxidation as static modifications to identify heavy peptides. Searches were performed using Sequest HT. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 5. Results were then exported to Excel files for further processing. For proteome quantification all PSMs were summed intensity normalized, followed by IRS and TMM normalization and peptides corresponding to a given UniProt Accession were summed including all modification states.

For translatome measurements, Excel files were processed in Python, as previously described. Python 3.6 was used together with the following packages: pandas 0.23.4, numpy 1.15.4, scipy 1.3.0. Excel files with normalized PSM data were read in and each channel was normalized to the lowest channel based on total intensity. For each peptide sequence, all possible modification states containing a heavy label were extracted and the intensities for each channel were averaged between all modified peptides. Baseline subtraction was performed by subtracting the measured intensities for the non-SILAC-labeled sample from all other values. Negative intensities were treated as zero. The heavy label incorporation at the protein level was calculated by summing the intensities of all peptide sequences belonging to one unique protein accession. These values were combined with the standard protein output of PD 2.4 to add annotation data to the master protein accessions.

Hierarchical cluster analysis and comparison with viral protein profiles for all samples was performed using Perseus software package (version 1.6.5.0) after centering and scaling of data (Z scores). K-means pre-processing was performed with a cluster number of 12 and a maximum of 10 iterations. For the comparison of profiles, the viral profiles were Z scored and averaged to generate reference profile. Profiles of all proteins were compared to the reference (Pearson), distances and False discovery rates computed.

For network analysis, Cytoscape 3.7.1 software was used with BiNGO 3.0.3 plugin for GO term analysis, EnrichmentMap 3.1.0 and ReactomeFI 6.1.0. For GO-term analyses, gene sets were extracted from data as indicated using fold change and significance cut-offs.

Significance was, unless stated otherwise, tested using unpaired two-sided students t-tests with equal variance assumed. Statistical analysis was performed using OriginPro 2020 analysis software. For network and GO analysis all statistical computations were performed by the corresponding packages.

Contains Uniprot Accession, Species annotation, Gene Symbol and normalized translation data for each replicate (Data was normalized using summed intensity normalisation for sample loading, followed by internal reference scaling and Trimmed mean of M normalisation). Log2 ratios and P values were computed for each group comparison (two-sided, unpaired t-test with equal variance assumed, n = 3 independent biological samples). See .

Contains UniProt Accession, Gene Symbol and normalized protein abundances for each sample. (Data was normalized using summed intensity normalisation for sample loading, followed by internal reference scaling and Trimmed mean of M normalisation). Log2 ratios and P values were computed for each group comparison (two-sided, unpaired t-test with equal variance assumed, n = 3 independent biological samples). See , .

Pathway names, size of pathway, proteins found in dataset, P values and FDR are given (P values by binomial test and FDR by binomial test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction).

Pathway names, size of pathway, proteins found in dataset, P values and FDR are given (P values by binomial test and FDR by binomial test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction).

GO term, proteins found in dataset, GO size, P value and FDR are given (P values by binomial test and FDR by binomial test and Benjamini-Hochberg correction).
