Evidences indicated that non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) might originate from the same cell type, which however ended up to be two different subtypes of lung carcinoma, requiring different therapeutic regimens. We aimed to identify the differences between these two subtypes of lung cancer by using integrated proteome and genome approaches.

Two representative cell lines for each lung cancer subtype were comparatively analysed by quantitative proteomics, and their corresponding transcriptomics data were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. The integrated analyses of proteogenomic data were performed to determine key differentially expressed proteins that were positively correlated between proteomic and transcriptomic data.

The proteomics analysis revealed 147 differentially expressed proteins between SCLC and NSCLC from a total of 3,970 identified proteins. Combined with available transcriptomics data, we further confirmed 14 differentially expressed proteins including six known and eight new lung cancer related proteins that were positively correlated with their transcriptomics data. These proteins are mainly involved in cell migration, proliferation, and invasion.

The proteogenomic data on both NSCLC and SCLC cell lines presented in this manuscript is complementary to existing genomic and proteomic data related to lung cancers and will be crucial for a systems biology-level understanding of the molecular mechanism of lung cancers. The raw mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD015270.

Keywords: Non-small cell lung cancer, Small cell lung cancer, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Bioinformatics, Proteogenomics, Mass spectrometry

Two NSCLC cell lines (H1975, A549) and two SCLC cell lines (H69, H446) were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The cell lines were cultivated in the RPMI-1640 culture medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin Solution in a humidified incubator at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The NSCLC cell lines were cultivated with adherent method and SCLC cell lines were cultivated in suspension method. After removing the medium, the cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) buffer and then lysed directly with 8 M urea/1 M NH4HCO3 solution (). Lysates were briefly sonicated until the solutions became clear. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay reagent (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai).

The protein extraction from cell lines and protein digestion were performed as described previously with minor modifications (). Briefly, lung cancer proteins were denatured in the 8M urea /1M NH4HCO3 buffer, sonicated by Ultrasonic Cell Distribution System, reduced by 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h and alkylated by 15 mM IAM at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The solutions were diluted two-fold with deionized water, and the proteins were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison WI; protein; enzyme, 100:1, w/w) at 37 °C for 2 h with shaking. The solutions were further diluted by four-fold, and additional trypsin (protein; enzyme, 100:1, w/w) were added and incubated at 37 °C overnight with shaking. Then samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min to remove cell residues and desalted with HLB column (Waters, Milford, MA). The peptides were eluted by 60% ACN/0.1% TFA.

Each sample underwent triplicate LC-MS/MS runs on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated on a nano Easy-LC system with a 75 µm × 15 cm Acclaim PepMap100 separating column protected by a two cm guard column (Thermo Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min and consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid 80% acetonitrile (B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 3–7% B for 2 min, 7–35% B for 83 min, 35–68% B for 20 min, 68–100% B for 5 min and equilibrated in 100% B for 10 min. MS analysis was performed using a mass spectrometer. The spray voltage was set at 2.3 kV. Orbitrap MS1 spectra (AGC 4 × 105) were collected from 350–1,800 m/z at a resolution of 60 K followed by data dependent HCD MS/MS (resolution 15,000, collision energy 30%) using an isolation width of 1.6 Da. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 45 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

Mass spectrometric data were searched against the UniProt/SwissProt human proteome database (20,341 proteins, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org on May 25th, 2018) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) (). The precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 modifications per peptide was allowed. The false discovery rates (FDR) of both peptide and protein identification were set to 1% (). The “Match between runs” based on the accurate m/z and mass spectra retention time was used with a min 0.7 match time window and min 20 alignment time window (). For the calculation of the protein abundances, label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed with an LFQ minimum ratio count of two. The normalization of label-free quantitation (LFQ) was performed based on the total intensities of all detected peaks in each LC-MS data, which is a default setting in the MaxQuant and has been described in detail in Cox’s research (). The medium of normalized ratios from non-modified peptides were used for the protein quantitation.

An authoritative public cancer database of 947 human cancer cell lines from CCLE (Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia) () were downloaded from Microarray dataset GSE36133 which was obtained from GEO database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) (), and based on the Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array platform (). For data pre-processing, the probe-level data in CEL files were converted into expression measures by using the affy package in R language (), and then was subjected to background correction and quartile data normalization by using robust multiarray average (RMA) algorithm. Each probe was mapped to its corresponding gene using Bioconductor annotation function of R language (). The probes corresponding to no gene or more than one gene were deleted. When there were several probes for one gene, the highest P-value of these probes was used as the expression value of the gene.

Linear Models for Microarray Analysis package in R language was employed to screen DEGs between NSCLC samples and SCLC samples. The strict thresholds were set at fold-change (—log2 FC—) ≥1 and P-value <0.01. The screened DEGs underwent two-way hierarchical clustering analysis by using the pheatmap package in R language.

Gene Ontology (GO) analysis was undertaken for the significantly different expressed genes and proteins in order to find the unique biological process, cellular component and molecular function. GO enrichment analysis was performed by DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) followed by the ggplot2 R language package (). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway was performed by using ClueGO plug-in and Cluepedia of Cytoscape software () to display the multiple biological pathways according to different express genes and proteins (; ). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed to search for the associated important pathway information and key proteins and genes. In this study, two-sided hypergeometric test and Benjamini–Hochberg were used to calculate p-value. A pathway with adjusted P-value <0.05 was regarded as the significant pathway.

Protein interaction was constructed using the significantly different expressed genes and proteins. The STRING website (https://string-db.org/) was used to query whether the proteins interacted with other proteins with combined score output (). In this study, the interaction score ≥0.4 were used and performed by Cytoscape.

Among these significant DEPs, the highly interconnected proteins in PPI network were selected by the MCODE plug-in of Cytoscape. MCODE () was the most co mMon module in Cytoscape which filtered with k-score. In this study, we used Haircut, node score cut-off (0.2), K-core (2), and Max.Depth (100) for clustering core proteins. The functional analysis of each module was enriched by Reactome (https://www.reactome.org/) with the significance threshold of P-value<0.05, FDR<0.01 ().

The correlation between proteins and mRNA intensities in two subtypes of lung cancer cell lines was calculated by Pearson correlation analysis in “Corrplot” R package. The correlation coefficient which higher than 0.4 was considered as positive correlation.
