PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Bone marrow; Blood cell
diseases: Acute leukemia
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: acetylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Peptide counting
keywords: Aml; Lfq; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Cryopreserved normal CD34 + bone marrow cells were derived from eight healthy Caucasians (four men and four women; PromoCell GMBH; Heidelberg, Germany), and their age did not differ significantly from the AML patients analysed in the study. The submitted samples have been analyzed together with raw files derived from 50 different AML patient samples (9 patients samples in this project and 41 patient samples in project PXD014997).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
AML patients samples compared to Healthy Human CD34+ cells (LFQ LC-MSMS)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
20 ug sample was prepared a label-free sample (LF)for proteomic analysis, and processed according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Not fractionated. Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN/0.5 % FA. Peptides (approximately 1 µg) were pre-concentrated on a 2 cm x 75 µm ID Acclaim PepMap 100 trapping column and separated on a 50 cm x 75 µm ID EASY-spray PepMap RSLC analytical column (Thermo Scientific). Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy-Spray (Thermo Scientific) and coupled to an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were eluted during a 195 min binary gradient with solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (0.1% FA / ACN). The gradient started at 5% B from 0-5 min and increased to 8% B from 5-5.5 min, then to 24% B from 5.5-115 min, to 35% B from 115-140 min, to 90% B from 150-155 min. Hold at 90% from 155-170 min, then ramped to 5% B from 170-195 min. The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full MS scans (scan range 375 – 1500 m/z) were acquired in profile mode with a resolution R = 120 000, a target value of 3 x 106 and maximum injection time of 100 ms. MS/MS scans were acquired in centroid mode for the top 12 precursors with intensity threshold > 5 x 104 (5.5% underfill ratio). The target ion was set to 1 x 105 with a maximum injection time of 110 ms and a resolution R = 30 000. The normalized collision energy was 28, the isolation window was 1.6 m/z with 0.3 m/z offset, and the dynamic exclusion lasted for 25 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8. The spectra were searched against the concatenated reverse-decoy Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database downloaded 05.11.15 using the Andromeda search engine. MaxQuant parameters were set up as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, LFQ set to 1, Gln->pyro-Glu as variable modifications. Trypsin was used as digestion protease. The false discovery rate was set at 0.01 for peptides and proteins. The minimum peptide length allowed was six amino acids. The match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled.

METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Patient and Cell Samples
We reanalyzed a previous liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS)-characterized proteomic cohort including AML cells from 50 Caucasian patients with non-APL variants of AML at the time of first diagnosis (Table 1). This study included (i) all consecutive patients (acute promyelocytic leukemia being excluded) from the same geographical area during a defined time period (1995–2012) and receiving intensive conventional AML therapy (ii) with a high percentage of AML blasts among circulating leukocytes (see below) who (iii) completed the planned intensive and potentially curative antileukemic treatment. All patients had >20% AML cells among nucleated bone marrow cells. The patient cohort did not include patients with the uncommon erythroid and megakaryocytic AML variants.
None of the patients received autologous stem cell transplantation. Some patients received allogeneic stem cell transplantation according to national Norwegian guidelines; the time for allotransplantation is indicated in Tables S8 and S13.
The patients were classified according to the 2022 ELN risk classification by genetics at initial diagnosis (Table 1). Only 26 patients were investigated with an extended panel of AML-associated mutations, and for this reason, 11 patients were classified as intermediate/adverse (i.e., absence of favorable genetic abnormalities) or unclassified (missing karyotyping or analysis of NPM1/FLT3/CEBPA genetic abnormalities).
Enriched primary AML cells could be prepared by density gradient separation alone from peripheral blood; all patients had ≥80% AML blasts among circulating leukocytes, and gradient-separated cells therefore included ≥95% AML blast cells. After gradient separation, the AML samples were cryopreserved according to a standardized protocol and stored in liquid nitrogen until use. Briefly, cells were dissolved in standardized RPM1 1640 culture medium (Stem Cell Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) supplemented with 40% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS) (Stem Cell Technologies) before being placed on ice; thereafter, an equal volume of cold medium with 20% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) was gradually added over 5 min to reach the final concentrations of FCS 20% and DMSO 10%. The cells were thereafter transferred to storage for 24–72 h at −70 °C before being transferred to liquid nitrogen. Cells were thawed at 0 °C and immediately transferred to the proteomic solution (see also Section 2.2).
Cryopreserved normal CD34+ bone marrow cells were derived from eight healthy Caucasians (four men and four women; PromoCell GMBH; Heidelberg, Germany); their age did not differ from the AML patients (median age, 50.5 years; range, 41–55 years; interquartile range (IQR), 50.5 − 43.25 = 7.25). These cells were also cryopreserved in 10% DMSO. The proteomic analyses of the normal CD34+ cells have not been published previously but are available at ProteomeXchange, data identifier PXD058846.
2.2. Proteomic Analysis
Our methods have been described in detail previously, and we thus tested several sample preparation workflows. These experiments included double versus single-digestion and in-solution versus filter-based digestions for proteome analysis, metal oxide affinity chromatography (MOAC), immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), and sequential elution from IMAC (SIMAC) for phosphoproteome analysis. The results showed that FASP procedures produced the highest number of quantified proteins with a reduced number of missed cleavages. IMAC was selected because it produced the highest number of quantified phosphopeptides, even though MOAC, IMAC, and SIMAC protocols isolated different phosphoproteoforms.
Quantitative proteomics of the AML patients and CD34+ cells was performed according to the label-free quantification (LFQ) approach. Proteome extraction was carried out in 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.6) with immediate boiling to inactivate proteases and phosphatases. Samples were reduced with 0.1 M of dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 50 mM iodacetamide (IAA) before being digested in a filter unit according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure, adding trypsin to 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in a 1:50 ratio. Quantitative phosphoproteomics was carried out with samples spiked with a super-SILAC (stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture) mix. The phosphoproteomics samples were FASP-processed and enriched for phosphopeptides using the IMAC approach. LC–MS/MS runs were carried out with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation liquid chromatography (LC) system. LC–MS/MS methods have been described in detail previously as Supplementary Information. In brief, LC–MS/MS raw files for primary AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). The spectra were searched against the concatenated reverse-decoy Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (downloaded on 5 November 2015) utilizing the Andromeda search engine. Relative label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm, with the LFQ count set to 1. This algorithm normalizes protein intensities based on peptide ratios measured in all pairwise comparisons within the entire sample batch. The MaxQuant parameters were configured as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and Gln→pyro-Glu were included as variable modifications. Trypsin was stated as the digestion protease. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for both peptides and proteins, and a minimum peptide length of six amino acids was required. Additionally, the match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled.
All proteomic raw data and MaxQuant output files together with the phosphoproteomic raw data can be found in the ProteomeXchange consortium with the dataset identifiers PXD014997 and PXD058846.
2.3. Morphological, Cell Surface Marker and Genetic Subclassification of AML Patients
The FAB classification is regarded as a standardized and well-described system to characterize and classify patients with regard to AML cell differentiation. In our present study, we defined monocytic differentiation as FAB-M4/M5, neutrophil differentiation as FAB-M2, and undifferentiated as FAB-M0/M1. No erythroid or megakaryocytic variants (i.e., FAB-M6/M7 AMLs) were included.
Cell surface markers were analyzed with flow cytometry and the karyotype with standard cytogenetic analysis. Analyses of FLT3 and NPM1 mutations have been described previously. Submicroscopic mutational profiling of 54 genes frequently mutated in AML was performed using the Illumina TruSight Myeloid Gene Panel and sequenced using the MiSeq system and reagent kit v3 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).
2.4. Statistical and Bioinformatical Analyses
Our various bioinformatical analyses are summarized in the flow chart in Figure 1.
The Perseus 2.0.7.0 platform was used for functional and statistical analyses of proteomics and phosphoproteomics data. Patient subset data were normalized by using width adjustment. A Welch’s t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction (i.e., FDR < 0.01) was performed to test for significant difference between means of compared groups. Z-statistics were carried out on the Welch’s t-test regulated proteins to identify proteins with significantly different fold changes. A flow chart summarizing the various bioinformatical analyses and their presentation in our study is given in Figure 1.
Welch’s t-test with p-value < 0.05 was performed to test for significantly differentiated phosphorylation sites between compared groups. Reactome pathway, Gene Ontology (GO), and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses were obtained with the Enrichr gene set search engine. Protein–protein interaction (PPI) network analyses were performed with the STRING database version 11.5. Networks were visualized using the Cytoscape platform v3.10.0. GraphPad v8.0.1 and the Perseus platform were used to make the volcano plot and the heatmap, respectively.

RESULTS:
3. Results
3.1. Primary AML Cells at the Initial Diagnosis Show Increased Abundance of Several Neutrophil Differentiation Biomarkers Compared with Normal CD34+ Bone Marrow Cells; Results from an Initial Statistical Comparison
The total proteomic profiles for all 50 AML patients and eight normal CD34+ bone marrow cell populations were compared. We first used Welch’s t-test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction (i.e., FDR < 0.01) based on only those proteins with at least 70% valid values both for leukemic and normal cells. A total of 891 proteins showed a statistically significant difference (i.e., p < 0.05); this included 184 proteins with at least a 2-fold median increase for the AML cells (Table S1) and 199 proteins showing at least a 2-fold increase for the CD34+ normal bone marrow cells (Table S2).
The 10 top-ranked Reactome terms for the 184 significant proteins with at least 2-fold increased levels in AML cells are listed in Table S3 together with the corresponding differentially abundant proteins for each of these terms. The terms reflecting neutrophil differentiation/innate immunity included a relatively large number of overlapping proteins, whereas fewer proteins were included in terms reflecting integrin function, endothelial cell function, and RHO signaling, respectively. There was a considerable overlap of proteins between each of these last minor groups and the terms reflecting neutrophil functions/innate immunity. These top 10 Reactome terms included 79 of the 184 proteins with increased levels in the AML cells.
The top-ranked Reactome terms for the 199 proteins with an at least 2-fold increase in normal CD34+ bone marrow cells reflected nucleotide metabolism/synthesis (purine ribonucleotide monophosphate biosynthesis, metabolism of nucleotides, nucleotide biosynthesis), regulation of DNA functions/mitosis (DNA strand elongation, activation of pre-replicative complex, mitotic G1 phase, and G1/S transition), and integrin signaling (p130CAS linkage to MAPK signaling for integrins, BRB2:SOS provides linkage to MAPK signaling for integrins) (Table S4). However, these terms included only 33 of the 199 proteins with high levels in the CD34+ cells.
We conclude that the differentially abundant protein identified in this initial comparison of AML and normal CD34+ cells shows extensive biological diversity. The main difference was that proteins with increased levels in AML cells mainly reflected limited myeloid/neutrophil differentiation, whereas proteins with increased levels in normal CD34+ cells reflected a different regulation of cellular proliferation and integrin-associated intracellular MAPK signaling.
3.2. Proteomic Comparison of AML Cells at Initial Diagnosis and Normal CD34+ Bone Marrow Cells: High Expression of Neutrophil Markers in the AML Cells and High Levels of Platelet/Coagulation Biomarkers in Normal Cells
Our initial strategy was the comparison of the protein levels for all 50 AML patients and the eight normal CD34+ bone marrow cell populations by using Welch’s t-test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction (i.e., FDR < 0.01) as described in Section 3.1. As an alternative and additional statistical strategy to our previous use of a fold change cut-off value (i.e., 2-fold; see Section 3.1) we conducted a significant fold change difference analysis (Z-statistics) of the 891 proteins identified in the initial step analysis described in Section 3.1. By using this approach, we identified only 48 proteins with significantly increased levels in AML cells and 73 proteins with increased levels in the normal CD34+ bone marrow cell populations (Table S5; see also Figure 2); all these proteins were among the most significant in Welch’s t-test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction (as indicated in Tables S1 and S2).
Reactome analysis (Figure 2A) of the 48 AML-associated proteins showed enrichment of proteins reflecting neutrophil degranulation (21 proteins) and innate immunity (17 overlapping proteins). The cellular compartment (CC) GO terms also reflected differences consistent with neutrophil differentiation, i.e., granular/vesicular lumen. Furthermore, the top four Reactome terms for the AML cells also included the terms RHO GTPases activate NADPH oxidases (four proteins) and antimicrobial peptides (five proteins) (Figure 3). The top-ranked terms from the other GO term analyses (biological process, BP; molecular function, MF) and the KEGG analysis showed lower significance than the Reactome/CC terms (Figure 2A).
The analyses of normal CD34+ bone marrow cells reflected increased levels of a relatively small number of proteins involved in coagulation/platelet activation; the four top-ranked Reactome terms included a total of six proteins out of the seventy-three significantly increased proteins in CD34+ cells (Figure 3). The terms identified by GO, Reactome, and KEGG analyses of these 73 proteins showed generally lower significance than the Reactome/CC terms for the AML cells (Figure 2).
Based on these analyses, our conclusion is the same as for the analysis described after the first statistical analysis described in Section 3.1—differentially abundant proteins between AML and normal CD34+ cells show large biological diversity with the main characteristic being an increased expression of proteins reflecting limited myeloid/neutrophil differentiation of the AML cells, whereas the increased levels of regulators of the proliferation/cell cycle possibly reflect the immature/stem cell status of the CD34+ cells.
3.3. Analysis of Differentially Abundant Proteins by Volcano Plot Analysis; Identification of Neutrophil Differentiation Markers as Well as Regulators of Cellular Metabolism Including Iron Metabolism
We conducted a volcano plot analysis of the 121 differentially abundant proteins identified after the fold change significance analysis (Figure 2B). Only ten biologically diverse proteins (five increased in AML and five in CD34+ cells) showed a marked differential expression, including myeloid differentiation markers (HBA1, HBB, PRG2, and possibly the antimicrobial PRGT); regulators of lipid (ALDH1A1, PLBD1), amino acid (PHGDH, possibly APCS), and iron (TF) metabolism; and transcriptional regulators (HIST1H1E, possibly APCS) (Table S6). Thus, this analysis also identified several differentiation markers but, in addition, a few metabolic and functional DNA/transcriptional regulators.
3.4. Analysis of Protein–Protein Interaction Networks; Identified Networks Involve Regulators of Intracellular Signaling, Platelet Function, and Iron Metabolism, as Well as Transcription and DNA Repair
Regulation of MAPK cascade. This network included nine proteins, three of them showing increased levels in primary AML cells. Differences in regulators of integrin-associated MAPK regulators were also identified in our first global analysis (see first Section 3.1 of Results and Table S4, right columns).
Nitric oxide transport. The network included the two hemoglobin chains also identified in the volcano plot together with the hemoglobin-binding protein haptoglobin.
Base excision repair. This network included three proteins with decreased levels in AML cells.
Aldehyde dehydrogenase. This network included three proteins with decreased levels in AML cells.
Protein–protein interaction (PPI) network analyses based on the 121 differentially abundant proteins from the fold change significance analysis identified only four networks with at least three members (Figure 4):
Thus, only one relatively large network was identified, suggesting that the intracellular molecular context of MAPK signaling is different for primary AML cells compared with normal CD34+ bone marrow cells. Only 18 out of 121 differentially abundant proteins were included in these four networks.
We identified seven additional pairs of interacting proteins. Three pairs included proteins that were increased in the AML cells, including (i) one pair with two integrin alpha chains and (ii) two pairs with three proteins (S100A8, S100A9, and AHNAK) involved in signaling/calcium metabolism. Furthermore, four pairs were decreased in AML cells, and these are referred to as platelet-associated proteins (GP1BA and GP1BB), iron metabolism (transferrin and its receptor), cell cycle/histone regulation (CDK1, H1F0), and two members of the family structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) that modulate chromosome structure during mitosis (SMC2, SMC4). However, only 33 of the 121 proteins were included in interacting networks/pairs, an observation suggesting that the identified 121 proteins show a considerable biological heterogeneity.
3.5. Even Proteins Showing Strong Differential Abundance When Comparing AML and CD34+ Cells, in General, Vary Between Individual Patients and Can Be a Basis to Identify AML Patient Subsets
We conducted an unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis based on the 121 differentially abundant proteins identified after Z-statistics (Figure 5). The differentially abundant proteins were separated into two main clusters (see left part of the figure, referred to as platelet activation and neutrophil degranulation, respectively), and both main clusters could be further subdivided into two subclusters. The upper main cluster included those proteins that reflected platelet activation/function in the Reactome analysis (Figure 2A; Table S6), and all these proteins were located in the lower subcluster (Table S7). On the other hand, the lower main protein cluster included the large majority of proteins reflecting the terms neutrophil degranulation/innate immune system, RHO GTPases activate NADPH oxidases and antimicrobial peptides in the Reactome analysis (Figure 2B, Table S6), and the large majority of these proteins were included in the lower subcluster (Table S7).
The normal CD34+ bone marrow cell samples formed a separate main cluster in this analysis; see the top of Figure 5 to the right. The primary AML cell samples formed the large left main cluster that could be further subdivided into several subclusters. Furthermore, this analysis showed that patients could be divided into two main subsets based on the expression of a subset of proteins showing generally high levels when comparing the total AML and CD34+ cell populations (the lower protein main cluster; see left part of Figure 5). The 22 patients on the left showed a generally lower expression of these proteins compared with a higher expression in the 28 patients on the right.
The clinical and biological characteristics of these two patient subsets are presented in Table S8 and are compared/summarized in Table S9. The 28-patient subset on the right had a significantly lower age (Table S9; Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.00076), a lower frequency of undifferentiated FAB-M0/M1 leukemic cells (p = 0.0003), a lower frequency of CD34+ AML cell populations (p = 0.0307), higher frequencies of favorable (p = 0.0312) and favorable/normal karyotypes (p = 0.0299), a lower frequency of refractory/relapsed disease (p = 0.0365), and a higher frequency of long-term AML-free survival (p = 0.0016) compared with the 22-patient subset on the left. These associations are mainly caused by several patients with a favorable karyotype (i.e., inv(16)) who clustered close to each other among the 28-patient subset on the right.
We compared the two clusters with regard to peripheral blood blast count and the percentage of AML blast cells among the nucleated bone marrow cells. The 28 patients in the neutrophil degranulation/differentiation cluster showed a significantly higher peripheral blood blast count (median 42.5 × 109/L, range 4–357 × 109/L, IQR 71.0 − 29.5 = 41.5 × 109/L) than the other 22 patients (median 23 × 109/L, range 5–231 × 109/L, IQR 47.25 − 10.75 = 36.5 × 109/L; Mann–Whitney U test, p = 0.026). In contrast, the percentage of bone marrow blasts did not differ between the 28 neutrophil differentiation patients (median 76.5%, range 30–97%, IQR 85.75 − 60.50 = 25.25) and the other 22 patients (median 83.5%, range 25–99%, IQR 95.00 − 58.25 = 35.25).
Cryopreservation and storage in liquid nitrogen can lead to a reduced abundance of membrane molecules. Several of the identified neutrophil differentiation markers included in the clustering analysis are cell surface molecules. We, therefore, compared the cell storage times for the left 22-patient main cluster (median 86 months, range 60–240 months, IQR 139 − 66 = 73 months) and the right 28-patient main cluster with the neutrophil differentiation patients (median 131 months, range 60–245 months, IQR 225.00 − 72.25 = 152.25 months). This difference was not statistically significant.
3.6. Additional Phosphoproteomic Differences of the 121 Differentially Abundant Proteins from the AML/CD34+ Cell Comparison: A Comparison of the Two Patient Subsets Identified in the Proteomic Clustering Analysis of These 121 Proteins
Primary AML cells derived from 41 of the 50 patients were included in a previous phosphoproteomic study; 23 of these patients belonged to the larger main subset (Figure 5, the 28 patients on the right) and the other 18 patients belonged to the smaller main subset (Figure 5, the 22 patients on the left). We observed detectable phosphorylation for 38 of the 121 differentially abundant proteins identified in our proteomic comparison of primary AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells (i.e., proteins with a fold difference exceeding 2.0; see above). These 38 proteins had 174 detectable phosphorylated sites. Next, we conducted a statistical comparison (Welch’s t-test) of the phosphorylation level for these 174 phosphosites/38 differentially abundant proteins between the two patient subsets identified in the unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis presented in Figure 5 (i.e., 23 of the 28 right patients versus 18 of the 22 left patients; see first chapter of this section). This analysis identified a total of 53 differentially phosphorylated sites in 16 proteins that differed significantly between these two patient subsets. These differing phosphosites are presented in Table 2 and Table S10; important characteristics of the 16 phosphoproteins are presented in Table S11.
Three of these 16 proteins are regarded as markers of neutrophil differentiation (ANXA2, ITPR1, and PRKCD; see Figure 3).
For seven of these sixteen proteins, differences were detected for at least two phosphosites, i.e., the phosphorylation profile differed and not only in the phosphorylation of a single site.
For certain proteins, opposite differences/effects on various phosphosites were observed, i.e., AHNAK, PLEC, and TOP2A (see Table S10).
For other proteins, the total protein level was increased/decreased in one direction between the two patient subsets, whereas the level of (certain) phosphorylations was altered in an opposite direction (AHNAK, ITPR, PBXIP1, PLEC, TOP2A); these observations show that altered phosphorylation reflects the altered regulation of phosphorylation and not the difference in total protein level.
Some of these phosphosites seem important for molecular compartmentalization (AHNAK) or molecular interactions/intracellular signaling (AHNAK, ANXA2, GP1BB, ITPR1, PLEC, PRKCD, STMN1).
The phosphorylation status also seems important for the regulation of fundamental cellular processes, especially cell cycle regulation/cell growth (ANXA2, KCTD12, PLEC, PRKCD, SMC4, TOP2A) but also stemness/stem cell differentiation (AHNAK, STMN1), survival/chemosensitivity (ANXA2, DUT, PRKCD, TOP2A), cytoskeleton functions (DBN1, PLEC), electrolyte balance/transport (DBN1, ITPR1), nucleotide metabolism (DUT), cell migration (AHNAK), nutrition (APOBR), and epigenetic/transcriptional regulation (MSL1, PBXIP1, RCOR3, TOP2A).
Some of the proteins seem to be implicated in carcinogenesis (KCTD12, MSL1, PBXIP1, PRKCD, STMN1) and even AML chemosensitivity (ANXA2, STMN1, TOP2A).
Based on the data presented in Table 2 and Tables S10 and S11, the following main observations were made:
To conclude, primary AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells show complex differences in their proteomic profiles, and this complexity is further increased by additional variations between patient subsets with regard to post-translational modulation/phosphorylation for 16 of the 121 differentially abundant proteins.
3.7. Variation of the Biological Context of Transferrin and Transferrin Receptors That Are Both Differentially Abundant When Comparing Normal and Leukemic Hematopoietic Cells; Identification of a Patient Minority Whose AML Cells Show Similarities with Normal Cells in Regulation of Cellular Iron Utake
Our statistical comparison of primary AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells showed that both transferrin and the transferrin receptor were differentially abundant with low levels in the leukemic cells; transferrin was then the protein with the lowest p-value and its receptor also showed a highly significant decrease (Figure 4, Table S2). Transferrin and its receptor constitute the main mechanism for the cellular uptake of iron. Furthermore, iron metabolism and the regulation of iron-dependent ferroptosis seem to have a prognostic impact on human AML. For these reasons, we compared iron metabolism in AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells in more detail.
The Reactome term “Iron metabolism” and the KEGG term “Ferroptosis” included only three of the 121 differentially abundant proteins showing at least a 2-fold difference when comparing AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells and, in addition, being identified in the z-score analysis (Tables S1, S2 and S5). However, 13 additional iron metabolism/ferroptosis proteins also showed statistically significant (Welch’s t-test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction) but without being identified in the z-score analysis (see figure legend). Our comparison of iron metabolism/ferroptosis regulation in primary AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells was, therefore, based on these 16 proteins (Table S12). The identified proteins are involved in the regulation of cellular iron uptake and intracellular endosomal release (TFRC, TF, ACO1, several V-ATPase components), regulation of iron homeostasis (ACO1), and/or various steps/characteristics of ferroptosis—i.e., altered regulation of cellular iron metabolism/handling (TFR, TFRC, ACO1, CUL1, CAND1), altered redox balance (GLRX3), altered lipid metabolism (ACSL1), and protein ubiquitination/degradation (RPS27A, CAND1, CUL1, NED8, ATG7) (Table S12,).
We conducted an unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis based on the 16 differentially abundant metabolic/ferroptotic proteins identified as described above (Figure 6). The proteins are listed to the left in the figure. Only three proteins, TF, TFRC (both increased in normal cells), and ATP6V0D1 (higher in AML cells), showed ≥2-fold differences when comparing leukemic and normal cells, whereas the other 13 differentially abundant proteins showed <2-fold differences that still reached statistical significance (p < 0.05) when comparing the two complete groups. It can be seen that the left main cluster included a majority of 40 AML patients (indicated by blue color), whereas the right minor main cluster had one right subcluster that included the eight normal CD34+ cell populations (indicated by corn silk color at the top of the figure) and another subcluster that included 10 AML patients (blue color).
It can be seen from Figure 6 that the minority of 10 patients clustering together with the normal CD34+ bone marrow cells differed in their proteomic profile both from the normal cells (although the common clustering reflects certain similarities) and from the 40 other AML cell populations. Thus, we identified a minority of 10 AML patients whose leukemic cells showed a different iron metabolism/ferroptosis protein profile compared with cells derived from the other 40 patients and from the eight normal individuals. The similarities between the 10 exceptional AML patients and the healthy individuals especially included the absorption pair transferrin/transferrin receptor and V-ATPase components that are important for vacuolar acidification and thereby intracellular iron release.
Male versus female ratio.
A low frequency of secondary AML.
Morphological signs of differentiation, i.e., frequency of monocytic FAB-M4/M5 AML variants (Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.1548).
Number of patients with at least 20% AML cells expressing the CD34 stem cell marker (p = 0.0706).
Even though all six patients with the favorable inv(16) karyotype were localized in various subclusters among the left 40 patients, this difference did not reach statistical significance.
Other cytogenetic abnormalities did not differ significantly between the two main AML patient subsets; both subsets showed heterogeneity with regard to karyotype.
The frequencies of FLT3-ITD or NPM1-INS did not differ.
Both groups were heterogeneous with regard to the ELN risk classification by genetics at the time of initial diagnosis (see Table 1 and Table S13). The minority of 10 patients in the right main cluster included three patients with ELN adverse prognosis, four patients with intermediate/adverse prognosis, and one patient for each of the three groups: favorable, intermediate, and unclassified.
The peripheral blood blast count of the 10 patients that were clustered together with normal CD34+ cells (median 26.0 × 109/L, range 5–71 × 109/L, IQR 49.75 − 9.75 = 40.0 × 109/L) did not differ significantly from the other 40 AML patients (median 33.5 × 109/L, range 4.0–351 × 109/L, IQR 99.5 − 27.5 = 72.0 × 109/L). Similarly, the percent AML blasts in the bone marrow did not differ between the minor subset of 10 patients (median 63.5%, range 25–99%, IQR 95.00 − 49.25 = 45.75%) and the majority of 40 patients (median 83.5%, range 25–99%, IQR 86 − 53 = 33) in the other main cluster. These observations suggest that there is no major difference between the two patient subsets with regard to AML cell burden.
All 10 patients clustering together with the normal CD34+ cells belonged to the left 22-patient cluster/subset identified in Figure 5 (see Table S8). Thus, in the 121-protein clustering a subset of 22 patients was identified that showed few signs of differentiation and adverse prognosis (i.e., decreased frequency of long-term survival), and in this second clustering analysis (Figure 6) based on regulators of iron metabolism/ferroptosis, a subset among these 22 patients (i.e., patients with fewer signs of differentiation) was identified with a particularly high-risk disease/adverse prognosis.
We compared the clinical and biological characteristics of this minority of 10 AML patients (i.e., the right AML subcluster) with the other 40 patients (the left main cluster). First, all 10 of the exceptional patients had high-risk/chemoresistant AML (i.e., primary resistance or death from later resistant relapse), whereas 18 of the 40 other patients reached long-term AML-free survival (Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.0085). Second, the minority of 10 patients (median age 62 years; range 29–80 years; IQR 67.25 − 57.50 = 9.75) had a higher age than the 40 patients in the left main cluster (median 46 years; range 18–67 years; IQR 57.00 − 37.25 = 19.75; Mann–Whitney U-test, p = 0.00214). Finally, the 10 AML patients in the right main cluster and the 40 other patients in the left main cluster did not differ significantly with regard to:
To summarize, our iron metabolic/ferroptotic clustering analysis based on these 16 differentially abundant proteins identified a heterogeneous minority of elderly patients with chemoresistant AML; these patients were heterogeneous both with regard to AML cell differentiation, CD34 expression, karyotype, FLT3-ITD, and NPM1-INS. Thus, the significant difference in long-term AML-free survival between these two patient subsets cannot be explained by different frequencies of other prognostic parameters.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is an aggressive malignancy characterized by the proliferation of immature leukemia cells in the bone marrow. Its incidence increases with age, and the only potentially curative treatment is intensive chemotherapy possibly combined with allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT). However, such treatment is not possible for unfit patients and in the large group of elderly patients due to the unacceptable risk of severe or fatal toxicities. Thus, there is a need for new therapeutic strategies to improve both the survival of younger patients with resistant/relapsed AML and elderly/unfit patients with a high risk of severe toxicity. New targeted therapies are therefore tried in the treatment of AML.
AML is a heterogeneous malignancy with regard to AML cell morphology/differentiation, genetic abnormalities, and communication with neighboring nonleukemic cells in the bone marrow. This heterogeneity is the basis for the subclassification of AML described in the WHO 2022 classification. Despite the heterogeneity, there are also fundamental common biological characteristics, e.g., bone marrow homing, limited signs of AML cell differentiation, and rapid progression without treatment. These last characteristics justify the therapeutic similarities between the various patient subsets when using conventional intensive chemotherapy as well as allo-HSCT; the only exception being the acute promyelocytic (APL) variant.
The aim of this present study was to characterize the molecular consequences of AML transformation by comparing primary AML cells with normal CD34+ bone marrow cells, i.e., a normal counterpart for this bone marrow malignancy that also shows limited differentiation. Furthermore, the acceptable intensity of AML therapy is determined by the balance between antileukemic efficiency versus the risk of severe/fatal toxicity, especially hematological toxicity, which is often dose-limiting and contributes to treatment-related mortality. One hypothesis could then be that an unfavorable balance between anti-AML efficiency versus the risk of severe/lethal hematological toxicity for certain therapeutic approaches is due to biological similarities between normal and leukemic hematopoietic cells. We would also expect proteomic differences between normal and leukemic hematopoietic cells to reflect fundamental AML cell characteristics and important mechanisms involved in leukemogenesis and possibly also chemoresistance against conventional as well as new targeted therapies. Finally, proteomic profiling may become an alternative strategy for the evaluation of differentiation in AML cells. In this context, we performed a preliminary/pilot study where we investigated whether proteins showing differential expression when comparing normal and leukemic hematopoietic cells can be used for patient subclassification and the identification of patient subsets that differ in prognosis/survival after conventional intensive therapy. The present results suggest that our identification of distinct patient subsets is relevant for the prognostication of AML patients receiving conventional intensive chemotherapy, but this needs to be further investigated and confirmed in larger clinical studies.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: , Table S1: Proteins showing increased levels in primary AML cells compared with normal CD34+ bone marrow cell; Table S2: Proteins showing increased levels in normal CD34+ bone marrow cells compared with primary AML cell; Table S3: Reactome classification of differentially abundant proteins when comparing 50 primary AML cell populations and CD34+ bone marrow cells derived from eight healthy individuals, an overview of proteins showing at least a median 2-fold increase in primary AML cells; Table S4: Differential expression of protein when comparing 50 primary AML cell populations and CD34+ bone marrow cells derived from eight healthy individuals, an overview of proteins showing at least a median 2-fold increase in normal CD34+ cells compared with AML cells; Table S5: Proteins showing a differential expression when comparing AML cells derived from 50 patients and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells derived from eight healthy individuals; an overview of identified proteins after analysis based on Welch’s t-test with Benjamini correction and fold change significance (z-score test); Table S6: Proteins showing differential expression when comparing AML cells derived from 50 patients and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells derived from eight healthy individuals; an overview of identified proteins after analysis based on Welch’s t-test with Benjamini correction and fold change significance (z-score test); Table S7: Hierarchical clustering analysis of 121 differentially abundant proteins when comparing AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells; the protein subclassification into two main clusters as shown in Figure 5; Table S8: Clinical and biological characteristics of the 50 AML patients included in the study. Patients are listed according to the clustering analysis presented in Figure 5 (listed from left to right, see the top of the figure) in the article, i.e., the upper part of the table represents the left 22 patients in the cluster analysis and the lower part the right subset of 28 patients; Table S9: Clinical and biological characteristics of 50 AML patients included in the study; a comparison of two patient subsets identified by unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis (Figure 5). Table S10: Protein phosphorylation of primary human AML cells, the identification of protein phosphorylation sites that (i) are localized on a subset (a total of 38 proteins) of the 121 proteins that showed differential expression (i.e., at least 2-fold difference) when comparing primary AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells; and (ii) in addition a statistically significant difference when each identified phosphosite was compared between the two patient subsets identified in the unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis presented in Figure 5 (i.e., 23/28 right versus 18/22 left patients); Table S11: Differentially abundant proteins showing additional differences in protein phosphorylation; Table S12: Proteins involved in the regulation of iron homeostasis/metabolism and/or ferroptosis and showing differential expression when comparing primary AML cells and normal CD34+ bone marrow cells; Table S13: Clinical and biological characteristics of the 50 AML patients included in the study; patient subclassification in an unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis based on 16 differentially abundant proteins involved in regulation of iron metabolism and/or ferroptosis (Figure 6) (listed from left to right, see the top of the figure).
Data Availability Statement
All proteomic raw data and MaxQuant output files together with the phosphoproteomic raw data can be found in the ProteomeXchange consortium with the dataset identifiers PXD014997 and PXD058846.