PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Tmtpro; Tissue-specific expression; Strong anion exchange fractionation; Real-time search; Peptide sax

ABSTRACT:
Proteome-wide abundance profiling across tissues can help to provide insight into the biological mechanisms underlying tissue-specific function and potential related dysfunction and amelioration thereof. Here, we use sample multiplexing to profile the proteomes of ten diverse mouse tissues using TMTpro-based quantitative mass spectrometry. Our optimized workflow, incorporating two-dimensional peptide pre-fractionation (which included both basic pH reversed-phase and strong ion exchange chromatography) enabled the quantification of over 13,000 proteins across brain, brown fat, heart, kidney, liver, lung, skeletal muscle, spleen, ovaries, and testes. Global analysis revealed distinct proteome profiles for each tissue, with clear clustering patterns reflecting functional similarities and differences. We highlighted the abundance of numerous tissue-specific proteins, exemplified by Synapsin-1 in brain, Uncoupling protein 1 in brown fat, and Zona pellucida proteins in reproductive tissues. Gene ontologies and pathway analyses of the most relatively abundant proteins in each tissue revealed enrichment patterns consistent with known physiological functions. For instance, brain tissue showed enrichment for synaptic components and neurotransmission processes, while liver tissue was enriched for metabolic pathways. This dataset serves as a valuable resource for mapping tissue-specific protein landscapes in mammals, offering potential insights into the molecular mechanisms of tissue function.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic profiling of over 13,000 proteins across ten mouse tissues using multi-dimensional peptide pre-fractionation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 1X Roche Protease Inhibitors, 1X Roche PhosphoStop phosphatase inhibitors) at a tissue concentration of approximately 10-15 mg/mL using a polytron tissue grinder. Next, the homogenized sample was passed 10 times through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). 100 µg of protein was aliquoted from each fraction for subsequent reduction and alkylation. Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (room temperature, 30 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. In brief, four parts of neat methanol were added to each sample and vortexed, one part chloroform was added to the sample and vortexed, and three parts water was added to the sample and vortexed. The sample was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 2 min at room temperature and subsequently washed twice with 100% methanol. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 13 h with Lys-C protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 ratio and the reaction was incubated 6 h at 37°C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert, after which database searching included all M. musculus entries from UniProt (the same database as used for RTS, above) and all protein sequences in that database in reverse order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a product ion tolerance of 0.9 Da to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet database searching and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). TMTpro tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021 Da) were set as static, whereas oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) with a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Once completed, proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across matching PSMs. PSMs with signal-to-noise (S/N) values <100 and/or isolation purity <50% were omitted from further analysis. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted for the isotopic impurities of the TMT reagents as specified by the manufacturer. The S/N measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and normalized such that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was the same, thereby adjusting for unequal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was represented as a percentage of the total, in that the summed S/N for that protein across all channels was 100, thus providing a relative abundance (RA) measurement.