PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Peripheral blood mononuclear cell
diseases: Dengue disease; Dengue shock syndrome; Dengue hemorrhagic fever; Susceptibility to dengue virus
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex reporter+balance reagent acylated N-terminal; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Dengue; Cd4+ t-cells; Cd8+ t-cells; Co-inhibitory receptors; Cytotoxic cells; Severe dengue biomarkers; Nk-cells; Type-i ifn

ABSTRACT:
Dengue is a mosquito-borne virus infection affecting half of the world’s population for which therapies are lacking. The role of T and NK-cells in protection/immunopathogenesis remains unclear for dengue for dengue. We performed a longitudinal phenotypic, functional and transcriptional analyses of T and NK-cells in 124 dengue patients using flow cytometry and single-cell RNA-sequencing. We show that T/NK-cell signatures early in infection discriminate patients who will progressdevelop to severe dengue (SD) from those who do not. These signatures are exacerbated in In patients with overweight/obesity these signatures are exacerbated compared to healthy weight patients, supporting their increased susceptibility to SD. In SD, CD4+/CD8+ T-cells and NK-cells display increased co-inhibitory receptor expression and decreased cytotoxic capacity potential compared to non-SD. Using transcriptional and proteomics approaches we demonstrate decreased Furthermore, type-I Interferon signalling is downregulatedresponses in SD, suggesting defective innate immunity virus-sensing mechanisms  may underlie NK/T-cell dysfunction.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Early NK-cell and T-cell dysfunction marks progression to severe dengue in patients with obesity and healthy weight

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For proteomic analysis, peripheral blood mononclear cells (PBMC) from five patients with severe dengue and six patients with non-severe dengue disease were used. PBMC were washed twice with cold PBS, resuspended in RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, UK), and incubated on ice for 30 min, with pipetting every 10 min to ensure complete cell lysis. The lysates were centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min and the supernatants used for downstream proteomic analysis. The protein concentration in each sample was quantified using an EZQ protein Quantification Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).Aliquots of 20 µg of each sample were digested with trypsin (1.25 µg trypsin; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro) sixteen plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The labelled samples were pooled and desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10 prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting fractions (concatenated into 15 in total) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid before further fractionation and mass spectrometry analysis using an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by the University of Bristol Proteomics facility. Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless-steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 300°C.    All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%.   For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded January 2024: 83095 entries) and a bespoke dengue virus database using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMTpro mass tag (+304.207) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.     To identify proteins that were significantly differentially regulated between conditions the data was analysed using Perseus v2.1.3 with statistical analysis using a Welsh’s t-test and a permutation-based FDR. Visualisation of the data was done using RStudio v4.4.2 and software in the Bioconductor repository. Gene ontology over representation analysis was done in RStudio using ClusterProfiler v3.20 (REF) with the background list set to contain all differentially expressed proteins identified.