PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Skeletal muscle
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: SWATH MS
keywords: Human skeletal muscle exercise glycogen

ABSTRACT:
A single bout of exercise followed by intake of carbohydrates leads to glycogen supercompensation in the prior exercised muscle. The molecular mechanisms underlying this well-known phenomenon remain elusive. Here we report that a single bout of exercise induces marked activation of glycogen synthase (GS) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) for several days beyond normalized muscle glycogen content in man. Acute muscle specific deletion of AMPK activity in mouse muscle abrogated the ability for glycogen supercompensation, providing genetic evidence that AMPK serves as essential driver for glycogen supercompensation. Muscle proteomic analyses revealed elevated glucose uptake capacity in the prior exercised muscle while key proteins in fat oxidation and glycolysis largely remained unchanged. The temporal order of these sustained cellular alterations induced by a single bout of exercise provide a mechanism to offset the otherwise tight feedback inhibition of glycogen synthesis and glucose uptake by glycogen, ultimately leading to muscle glycogen supercompensation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Exercise-induced molecular mechanisms for glycogen supercompensation in human skeletal muscle

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human one-legged glycogen supercompensation regime  Nine healthy, untrained male volunteers participated in the study. The subjects gave written informed consent after having been informed of any possible risks and discomfort associated with the study. The study was approved by the regional ethics committee in Denmark (Journal number: H-4-2013-071) and performed in accordance with the Declarations of Helsinki II. All subjects underwent 3 clinical investigations (day 1, day 2 and day 5) during a 5 day glycogen supercompensation regime. The subjects were asked to refrain from physical activity and to eat a controlled eucaloric diet containing 60 E% carbohydrates (CHO) for 4 days leading up to the initial experiments. Upon arrival at the laboratory on day 1, the subjects performed one-legged knee extensor exercise for 1 hour at 80% of PWL interspersed by 5 min bouts at 90% of PWL every 10 min. This was followed by interval exercise until exhaustion containing 4 min bouts starting at 100% PWL followed by 1 min at 50% of PWL. This was continued until the subjects were unable to maintain a kicking frequency of 60 kicks/min during the 4 min interval. At this point exercise intensity was lowered by 10%. This procedure was continued until the subjects were unable to finish the 4 min interval at 60% of PWL. At this time the subjects were told to complete a final bout at 90% of PWL for 4 min. None of the subjects were able to complete this final exercise period. On average the time to exhaustion was 2 h 35 min ± 18 min (n=9). Upon cessation of exercise the subjects showered and rested in the supine position for 4 hours. Then a 120 min hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp was initiated by a bolus insulin injection (9.0 mU/kg, Actrapid, Novo Nordisk, DK) followed by continuous insulin infusion (1.42 mU/kg/min insulin) reaching similar levels of plasma insulin around 100 µU/mL (day1: 106 ± 4.3, day 2: 111 ± 4.4, day 5: 119 ± 4.2 µU/mL (average concentration during the last 60 min, n=9)). At least 2 hours before the insulin clamp, catheters were placed in both femoral, one antecubital and one dorsal hand vein. A heat pad was placed around the lower part of the arm and hand in order to “arterialize” blood drawn from the hand vein. Substrate uptake/release across the legs was calculated by multiplying the arterial-venous (AV) difference in blood substrate concentration by femoral arterial blood flow (measured by Doppler ultrasound, Philips iU22, Santa Ana, CA). Blood glucose levels (measured by ABL 800 FLEX, Radiometer Medical, CPH, DK) were maintained at the euglycemic predefined target by continuously adjusting the glucose infusion rate (GIR) (20% glucose solution; Fresenius Kabi, Upsala, S). Concurrent measures of substrate AV differences and blood flow were performed every 20 min. Muscle biopsies from m. vastus lateralis were obtained under local anesthesia (3-5 ml of Xylocaine, 20 mg/ml) in the basal- and insulin-stimulated state (120 min) by use of the Bergström needle biopsy technique. Muscle specimens were frozen within 20 sec in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further analysis. A new incision was made for every biopsy and spaced 4-5 cm apart. This insulin clamp procedure in combination with basal and insulin stimulated muscle biopsies was repeated in the rested state (without prior exercise) on day 2 and day 5. The subjects arrived in the morning in the overnight fasted state at day 1, day 2 and day 5. Upon arrival in the morning the subjects were given a meal corresponding to 5% of their daily energy intake (~600-800 kJ). During the 5 day supercompensation regime the subjects were provided a predefined eucaloric diet containing 80E% carbohydrates, 10E% fat and 10E% proteins. All food items were handed out to the subjects and compliance to the diet regime was ensured by questionnaire survey. Proteomic Analysis Muscle was lysed by tip-probe sonication in 8M guanidine containing 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide and heated to 95°C for 5 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 20,000g for 20 min at 4°C and the supernatant diluted 1:1 with water. Proteins were precipitated with 4 volumes of acetone overnight at -30°C and washed with 80% acetone. Proteins were digested in 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 containing 10% 2,2,2-Trifluoroethanol overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade LysC (Wako Chemicals) and trypsin (Sigma) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50. The digests were acidified to 1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to purification by styrene divinyl benzene – reversed phase sulfonated solid phase extraction microcolumns.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptides were spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys) and analysed on an Easy-nLC1200 coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X in positive polarity mode. Peptides were separated using an in-house packed 75 μm x 50 cm pulled column (1.9 μm particle size, C18AQ; Dr Maisch) with a gradient of 2 – 35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA over 120 min at 300 nl/min at 60°C. The instrument was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode essentially as described previously [PMID: 29070702]. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1650 m/z (120,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS variable sized isolation windows with HCD (30,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 27 NCE). A spectral library was created by fractionating a pooled mix of peptides from all the samples on an in-house packed 320 μm x 25 cm column (3 μm particle size, BEH; Waters) with a gradient of 2 – 40% acetonitrile containing 10 mM ammonium formate over 60 min at 6 μl/min using an Agilent 1260 HPLC. A total of 12 concatenated fractions were analysed using the identical LC-MS/MS conditions above except the instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, an MS1 scan was acquired from 350 – 1650 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3e6 AGC, 50 ms injection time) followed by 20 MS/MS with HCD (1.2 m/z isolation, 15,000 resolution, 1e5 AGC, 27 NCE). DDA data were processed with Andromeda in MaxQuant v1.6.0.9 against the human UniProt database (September, 2017) using all default settings with peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% [PMID: 19029910]. DIA data were processed with Spectronaut v11 using all default settings with precursor and protein FDR set to 1% and quantification performed at MS2 [PMID: 25724911]. All data was analyzed in Perseus [PMID: 27348712]. Data were Log2 transformed, median normalized and the ratio of the exercised leg to the rest leg calculated for each subject on each day. Differential abundance was determined with one-sample t-tests.

METHODS:
Methods
One-legged glycogen supercompensation regime in man
The study was approved by the regional ethics committee in Denmark (Journal number: H-4-2013-071) and performed in accordance with the Declarations of Helsinki II. Each subject gave written informed consent before participating. Nine healthy male subjects (age, 26 ± 3 years; BMI, 23.5 ± 1.7 kg/m2; VO2 peak, 45 ± 4 ml O2/min/kg; data presented as means ± SD) underwent a glycogen supercompensation regime. The study design is illustrated in Figure 1 and a detailed description of preclinical investigation of the subjects and the experimental design is provided in Supplemental I. The subjects were familiarized to the one-legged knee extensor model at light intensity prior to the testing. The working leg was chosen randomly in order to avoid possible confounding effects of leg dominance. On a separate day, the peak workload (PWL) of the knee extensors during one-legged extensor exercise was determined as previously described. On day 1, the subjects performed one-legged knee extensor exercise until exhaustion. This exercise protocol consisted of one-legged knee extensor exercise for 1 h at 80% of PWL interspersed by 5 min bouts at 90% of PWL every 10 min. This was followed by interval exercise until exhaustion containing 4 min bouts starting at 100% PWL followed by 1 min at 50% of PWL. When the subjects were unable to maintain kicking frequency during these intervals, the exercise intensity was lowered by 10% and finished when the subjects were unable to finish 4 min at 60% of PWL.
After 4 h of rest, a 120 min euglycemic hyperinsulinemic- (∼100 μU/ml) clamp was performed. This procedure was repeated in the same subjects in the rested state (without prior exercise) at day 2 and day 5 in order to investigate insulin-stimulated glucose uptake during the glycogen supercompensation regime. Catheters were inserted in the femoral veins of both legs and in a heated hand vein for sampling of arterialized venous blood in order to measure insulin-stimulated glucose uptake across the legs using A-V balance technique combined with ultrasound Doppler measurements of femoral arterial blood flow. Muscle biopsies from m. vastus lateralis were obtained before (basal state) and after 120 min of insulin infusion (insulin-stimulated state) from both legs at day 1, day 2, and day 5. Throughout the 5 day supercompensation regime, the subjects consumed a eucaloric diet composed of 80 E% carbohydrates, 10 E% fat and 10 E% protein.
Proteomic analyses of human muscle biopsies
Muscle biopsies for proteomic analyses were processed and analyzed as previously described. A detailed description can be found in Supplemental I. For MS data repository and the complete data set, see Supplemental III.
Muscle processing and western blotting
Homogenates from human muscle biopsies were prepared from freeze-dried muscle, dissected free of visible fat, blood and connective tissue. Homogenates from mouse muscle were prepared from wet muscle. Muscle tissue was subsequently homogenized as described in detail in Supplemental I. Muscle homogenates and lysates were prepared in sample buffer. Except for GLUT1 and GLUT4 measurements, all samples were heated for 5 min at 96 °C. Equal amounts of sample were loaded on self-cast gels (7–15%) and separated by SDS-PAGE. Gels were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes using semidry blotting. Membranes were blocked in 2% skim milk or BSA and subsequently probed overnight at 4 °C with primary antibody (see Supplemental I for full list of primary antibodies). Membranes were incubated with secondary antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) for 45 min at room temperature and protein abundance of phosphorylated proteins and total expression of proteins was visualized with chemiluminescence (Millipore) and a digital imaging system (ChemiDoc MP System; Bio-Rad, Copenhagen, DK). Sample loading and protein transfer were ensured by use of Coomassie-staining.
Muscle glycogen content
Muscle glycogen content was measured by a fluorometric method as glycosyl units after acid hydrolysis on 150 μg homogenates for human samples and 10–15 mg w.w. muscle for mouse samples. Glycogen content in human muscle homogenates was determined as average from basal and insulin-stimulated samples as no effect of insulin was observed.
Enzyme activity of GS and AMPK
Enzyme activity for GS and AMPK was assayed in muscle homogenate and lysate, respectively, as specified in Supplemental I.
Animal studies
Animal experiments were performed on male mice in compliance with the European Union convention for protection of vertebra animals used for scientific purposes (Council of Europe 123, Strasbourg, France, 1985) and were approved by the Danish Animal Experimental Inspectorate. Muscle-specific inducible AMPK α1/α2 double KO mice (AMPK α imdKO) were generated by use of the Cre/loxP system as described in detail in Supplemental I. GYS1 KI mice (R582A/R582A) carrying a G6P-insensitive form of GS in muscle were generated as previously described. A detailed description of genetic mouse models and procedures can be found in Supplemental I.
In vivo glycogen synthesis and in vivo glucose uptake in mice
Animals were restricted from access to chow 2 h prior to the experiments. Mice performed treadmill exercise for 1½ h at 60% (10% incline) of maximal running capacity and received oral gavage containing either saline (10 μl/g body wt) (Saline experiment) or glucose (10 μl/g body wt, 0.2 g/ml glucose) in combination with [3H]-2-deoxyglucose (2.2 MBq/ml; Perkin Elmer, USA) and [14C]-glucose (0.74 MBq/ml; Perkin Elmer, USA). Blood samples from the tail vein were obtained at 0, 20, 40, and 60 min after oral gavage and blood glucose concentration was monitored by glucometer (Contour XT; Bayer, Leverkusen, DE). Concurrently, blood plasma was obtained for determination of 3H and 14C radioactivity. In vivo glycogen synthesis rate was determined as [14C]-glucose incorporation into glycogen. Glycogen fraction was purified by overnight precipitation of muscle homogenates (10–20 mg muscle boiled in 1 M NaOH for 30 min) in ice cold (−20 °C) 96% ethanol in the presence of glycogen (1.14 mg, Sigma, G-8876, DK). After overnight precipitation, samples were centrifuged (15 min at 3000 g) and washed 3 times in cold ethanol (−20 °C); the pellet was suspended in water and counted for 14C radioactivity by liquid scintillation counting. In vivo glucose uptake was determined as trapped 2-[3H]-2-deoxyglucose-6-phosphate related to specific activity in the blood and the time of exposure as described in details in Supplemental I.
Glycogen supercompensation in mouse muscle
Mice were restrained from access to chow 2 h prior to the experiment. The exercise protocol consisted of 1½ h treadmill exercise (10% incline) at 60% of individual maximal running capacity. Glucose gavage (2 g/kg body wt) was given immediately after exercise and after 1 h of rest. Five hours after termination of exercise, the mice were killed by cervical dislocation, and tissues were quickly removed and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Glucose gavage solution was obtained by dissolving glucose in saline (0.2 g/ml) and was administered relative to mouse body weight (10 μl/g body wt).
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means ± SEM. For the human glycogen supercompensation regime and in vitro mice studies data are analyzed by two-way ANOVA with repeated measurements. In vivo experiments in mice were analyzed by two-way ANOVA. Student-Newman-Keuls test was used for post hoc testing. A statistical significant difference was accepted for p ≤ 0.05

RESULTS:
Results
Muscle insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake capacity remain enhanced in recovery from a single bout of glycogen-depleting exercise
To investigate the molecular regulation of glycogen supercompensation, nine male subjects underwent a one-legged glycogen supercompensation regime. Glycogen content was reduced in muscle of one leg by one-legged exercise until exhaustion (Exercised Leg) (day 1) (p < 0.001), while the contralateral leg (Rested Leg) served as a resting control with unchanged glycogen content (p = 0.33) (Figure 2A). Intake of a carbohydrate-rich, eucaloric diet (80 E% CHO) in the following days normalized (day 2) and supercompensated (p < 0.001) (day 5) glycogen content in muscle of the prior exercised leg while remaining unchanged in muscle from the rested leg (Figure 2A). Euglycemic-hyperinsulinemic clamps in combination with catheterization of the femoral veins enabled the measurement of insulin-action on glucose uptake in the glycogen-depleted muscle in recovery from exercise (day 1) and under resting conditions with normalized (day 2) and supercompensated muscle glycogen content (day 5), respectively. These measurements revealed enhanced insulin-stimulated glucose uptake across the prior exercised leg compared to the rested control leg (day 1) (p < 0.001) (Figure 2B). This mechanism ensures glucose availability for initial glycogen resynthesis in the prior exercised muscle. Surprisingly, insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in the rested leg was higher on day 2 and day 5 compared to day 1. This was associated with higher insulin sensitivity at the whole body level (GIR) at day 2 and 5 compared to day 1 (Figure 2C). Plasma FFA levels were markedly enhanced in recovery from exercise and RER values indicated increased reliance on fat as energy substrate at day 1 compared to day 2 and 5 (Fig S1,S2). Availability of FA has been indicated as negative regulator of muscle insulin sensitivity and we speculate that this may be associated with the lowered insulin sensitivity at a whole body level on day 1. However, as insulin-stimulated glucose uptake was similar in both legs on day 2 and 5 (p = 0.35 and p = 0.15, respectively), enhanced insulin sensitivity itself seems not to drive glycogen synthesis beyond resting levels (i.e. glycogen supercompensation).
We next investigated basal skeletal muscle biopsies for key metabolic proteins by use of proteomic analyses in the rested and exercised leg on day 1, 2 and 5 (n = 5) (Figure 2D and Supplemental Table S1). These data showed a marked upregulation of proteins involved in glucose transport (GLUT1 and GLUT4) (p < 0.05) and a tendency for upregulation of proteins involved in glucose phosphorylation (HKI and HKII) (p-values in the range of 0.07–0.19) while proteins involved in fat oxidation and glycolysis largely remained unchanged during the supercompensation period (Figure 2D and Supplemental Table S1). A single peptide from glycogen synthase 1 isoform 2 (GYS1-2) was increased at day 5 (p = 0.02); however, canonical GYS-1 was not upregulated, and the maximal activity of GS was not altered (Supplemental Figs. S3,S4). These observations by proteomics were strengthened by immunoblotting, revealing a coordinated increase in the protein expression of HKI, HKII, GLUT1, and GLUT4 (Figure 2E–H and Fig. S8). Overall, these alterations induced by a single bout of exercise became apparent the day following exercise (day 2) and remained throughout the whole glycogen supercompensation regime.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that a single bout of exercise induces a robust increase in glucose uptake capacity at the level of glucose transport and phosphorylation. We interpret the temporal order of these cellular alterations as a mechanism to antagonize the otherwise negative feedback that glycogen normally exerts on insulin-stimulated muscle glucose uptake.
Muscle AMPK activity is elevated for 5 days following a single bout of exercise
Given that AMPK contains a glycogen-binding domain and serves as a cellular fuel-sensor, we evaluated regulation of muscle AMPK throughout the human glycogen supercompensation regime. A temporal and heterotrimeric-specific regulation of AMPK activity was evident in muscle (Figure 3A,B and E). Thus, AMPK α2-containing complexes were highly activated in recovery from exercise (day 1) (p < 0.05) and reversed to resting levels the subsequent days (day 2 and 5) (Figure 3A–B). This regulation coincided with enhanced insulin-stimulated muscle glucose uptake (Figure 2B) and elevated phosphorylation at Ser704 and Ser341 of the AMPK downstream target TBC1D4 (day 1) (p < 0.001) (Figure 3C–D). In accordance with previous studies demonstrating that the proximal insulin-signaling cascade in human muscle remains unaffected by prior exercise, we observed that Akt phosphorylation at Ser308 and Thr473 increased similarly in both legs in response to insulin (data not shown). Given the link between AMPK and insulin sensitivity in rodent muscle, these findings support that enhanced α2-AMPK signaling via distal insulin signaling molecule – TBC1D4 – mediates enhanced insulin sensitivity also in muscle of man.
A selective increase in activity of the AMPK α1-containing complex was present throughout the 5 days supercompensation regime in muscle of the exercised leg only (p < 0.05) (Figure 3E). This unexpected observation was supported by increased phosphorylation under basal conditions of the well-established AMPK target acetyl-CoA carboxylase 2 (ACC2) (p < 0.05) (Figure 3F). Given that AMPK promotes fatty acid oxidation by phosphorylation of ACC2 in the resting state, these observations suggest substrate selection towards fat oxidation in the prior exercised muscle. Notably, judged by proteomic analyses, this fuel switch was largely independent of alterations in expression of proteins involved in fatty acid β-oxidation, glycolysis and glucose oxidation (Supplemental Table S1). However, we observed that exercise induced phosphorylation (hence deactivation) of the glucose oxidation-controlling protein complex pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH-Eα) on day 1 (Figs. S5–7). Notably, elevated PDH phosphorylation was still present (p < 0.05) when glycogen had reversed to resting levels in the prior exercised muscle on day 2 (Figs. S5–7).
Collectively, these observations suggest that glycogen supercompensation involves AMPK-dependent reduced glucose oxidation in expense of fat oxidation as a cellular mechanism for sustained glycogen synthesis and hence glycogen supercompensation.
Acute deletion of AMPK activity in skeletal muscle abrogates the ability for glycogen supercompensation following exercise
In order to illuminate a necessary role of AMPK in muscle glycogen supercompensation, we generated a muscle-specific inducible AMPK catalytic isoform knock out mouse model (AMPK α1/α2 imdKO). Three weeks after induction of gene deletion, these mice show marked deletion of both AMPK α1 and α2 protein expression (Figure 4A). In line with previous AMPK deficient models, muscle of these mice shows markedly lower phosphorylation of the AMPK downstream targets TBC1D1 and ACC (Figure 4A). Importantly, and in contrast to previous AMPK deficient models, these mice do not suffer from a mitochondrial phenotype (Figure 4B and Fig. S9). This is highly relevant because 1) mitochondrial dysfunction may affect substrate utilization and glucose partitioning toward glycolysis, and 2) muscle of all previous models used to link AMPK to glycogen storage display mitochondrial dysfunction. Intriguingly, muscle glycogen synthesis in vivo was markedly reduced in the AMPK imdKO mice (p < 0.05) when glucose was administered orally following exercise (Figure 4C) even though muscle glucose uptake in vivo was similar between genotypes (Figure 4D). As a consequence of the reduced glycogen synthesis following exercise, the ability to supercompensate muscle glycogen was abrogated in mice with acutely induced deletion of AMPK catalytic activity (p < 0.001) (Figure 4E).
In combination with our observations in human muscle, these findings suggest that sequential activation of AMPK trimeric complexes in recovery from exercise enhances insulin sensitivity to stimulate glucose uptake and may promote fat oxidation so that intracellular glucose is directed towards glycogen synthesis even when muscle glycogen has returned to normal levels. Thus, AMPK is essential for glycogen supercompensation.
Glycogen synthase remains in an activated state beyond normalized muscle glycogen content
Next, we examined whether glycogen supercompensation in human skeletal muscle was associated with alterations in proteins involved in the pathway of glycogen synthesis. The formation of new glycogen particles is initiated by the self-glucosylated enzyme glycogenin. The observation of unchanged expression of glycogenin-1 (p ≥ 0.60) and other key proteins in glycogen synthesis suggest that glycogen supercompensation is associated with increased particle size of existing glycogen granules rather than formation of additional glycogen particles (Supplemental Table S1).
GS promotes the elongation of glucose chains within the glycogen particle and is considered as rate-controlling enzyme for glycogen synthesis. Protein expression of GS remained similar between the exercised and rested muscle (Fig. S3). In contrast, fractional enzyme activity of GS was markedly elevated in the prior exercised muscle (day 1) (p < 0.001) and remained elevated the following days (p < 0.01) even though muscle glycogen content was normalized to resting levels or supercompensated (Figure 5A). In accordance, phosphorylation of key inhibitory residues on GS was markedly reduced by exercise (day 1) (p < 0.001) and remained lower the day after exercise (day 2) (p < 0.05) (Figure 5B–C). Lowered phosphorylation of GS enhances the sensitivity for allosteric activation by intracellular G6P. Thus the maintained dephosphorylation by exercise presents a mechanism for sensitizing GS for allosteric activation by G6P beyond normalized glycogen content. By using knockin mice (KI) (R582A/R582A) carrying a G6P-insensitive form of GS in muscle, we verified that allosteric activation of GS by G6P indeed is essential for glycogen supercompensation following exercise (Figure 5D). It has previously been reported that G6P tends to accumulate in muscle of GS KI (R582A/R582A) compared to WT controls. As G6P accumulation exerts negative feedback on glucose uptake, we cannot fully exclude that the absence of glycogen supercompensation in these mice partly arises from inhibited glucose uptake due to accumulation of G6P. However, in an additional experiment with saline injection, in which accumulation of G6P would not be expected, we could demonstrate that in vivo muscle glucose uptake was similar between genotypes (Figure 5E). Under these experimental conditions prior exercise increased in vivo glycogen synthesis rate in WT mice but not in GS KI (R582A/R582A) mice (Figure 5F), demonstrating that muscle glycogen synthesis following exercise is fully dependent on allosteric regulation of GS. Because GS is rate-limiting for glycogen synthesis from intracellular glucose, the above described alterations on GS regulation in man will indeed favor glycogen storage in the prior exercised muscle.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Glycogen is formed as a branched polymer of glucose serving as an essential energy depot in times of nutritional surplus that can be readily mobilized when energy is needed. While liver glycogen directly contributes to glucose homeostasis by releasing glucose into the blood, skeletal muscle lacks this ability but accounts for ∼80% of glucose disposal under insulin-stimulated conditions; in this way, muscle glucose uptake and storage becomes crucial for controlling blood glucose levels. The majority of glycogen is stored in skeletal muscle (a total of ∼400 g) and the “set-point” for glycogen concentration in human skeletal muscle appears to be tightly controlled at a level of ∼1.5 g/100 g muscle. This is mediated by an efficient feedback-regulation of glycogen synthase (GS) by muscle glycogen concentration. Intriguingly, when a single bout of exercise is followed by intake of carbohydrates, the muscle cell favors glycogen synthesis far beyond resting levels (i.e. glycogen supercompensation) and muscle glycogen concentration can increase up to ∼4 g/100 g muscle. In 1966, Bergström and Hultman demonstrated that the ability to supercompensate muscle glycogen is restricted to the prior exercised muscle. The authors concluded that a single bout of exercise enhances factors within the prior exercised muscle that were maintained for several days after exercise, elevating the “set-point” for muscle glycogen storage. It is noteworthy that the molecular nature of these exercise-induced “enhancing factors” that allow for glycogen synthesis far beyond normalized muscle glycogen concentration remains to be demonstrated.
The activity of glycogen synthase (GS), the key regulatory enzyme in glycogen synthesis, is controlled by the allosteric activator glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), and by covalent phosphorylation at inhibiting residues. Insulin enhances glycogen synthesis through increased glucose uptake and by promoting de-phosphorylation and thus activation of GS. Compared to insulin, exercise results in a more pronounced de-phosphorylation and hence higher activation of GS in skeletal muscle than during insulin stimulation. A synergy exists between allosteric and covalent regulation of GS such that GS affinity for the allosteric activator G6P is enhanced in the de-phosphorylated state. It remains an open question whether this molecular regulation of GS is involved in the phenomenon of glycogen supercompensation in skeletal muscle.
AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK) serves as a cellular energy regulator by monitoring cellular nucleotide status. AMPK binds to the glycogen particle and may also act as a cellular fuel sensor as muscle glycogen is a negative regulator of AMPK activation. Supporting this concept, prolonged AMPK activation in vivo by different pharmacological means (e.g. AICAR, PF739 and MK-8722) is accompanied by elevated muscle glycogen concentration. Moreover, missense mutation (gain-of-function) of the AMPK γ3 or γ1 regulatory subunits is associated with elevated muscle glycogen content. Thus, a tight coupling exists between muscle glycogen and AMPK. AMPK in human skeletal muscle exists in three different complexes (α2β2γ1, α1β2γ1 and α2β2γ3) and kinase activity increases in a trimer-specific manner during exercise, and may stay elevated for several hours into exercise recovery. Studies in rodents suggest that this AMPK activation is necessary for insulin sensitization of skeletal muscle in the period immediately following exercise. However, whether AMPK is involved in the regulation of glycogen supercompensation in skeletal muscle remains to be investigated.
Here, we have used an invasive study in man and advanced muscle proteomics to revisit the phenomenon of glycogen supercompensation in skeletal muscle. In the course of 5 days both in vivo physiological measurements and classical biochemical as well as proteomic analyses in muscle biopsies revealed temporal regulation of insulin sensitivity for muscle glucose uptake, intracellular signaling, capacity for glucose uptake as well as glucose/fatty acid oxidation.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary data
The following are the supplementary data related to this article:
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2018.07.001.