PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Skeletal muscle; Myotube; Cell culture
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Phosphoproteomics; Donor variability; Insulin signaling; Skeletal muscle; Mrna splicing

ABSTRACT:
Insulin is a pleiotropic hormone that elicits its metabolic and mitogenic actions through numerous rapid and reversible protein phosphorylations. The temporal regulation of insulin’s intracellular signaling cascade is highly complex and insufficiently understood. We conducted a time-resolved analysis of the global insulin-regulated phosphoproteome of differentiated human primary myotubes derived from satellite cells of healthy donors using high-resolution mass spectrometry. Identification and tracking of ~13,000 phosphosites over time revealed a highly complex and coordinated network of transient phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events that can be allocated to time-phased regulation of distinct and non-overlapping subcellular pathways. Advanced network analysis combining protein-protein-interaction (PPI) resources and investigation of donor variability in phosphosite occupancy over time identifies novel putative candidates in non-canonical insulin signaling and key regulatory nodes that are likely essential for signal propagation. Lastly we found that insulin-regulated phosphorylation of the pre-catalytic spliceosome complex is associated with acute alternative splicing events in the transcriptome of human skeletal muscle. Our findings highlight the temporal relevance of protein phosphorylations and suggest that synchronized contributions of multiple signaling pathways form part of the circuitry for propagating information to insulin effector sites. In this sub-experiment of our main project, the global phosphoproteome of human primary myotubes under starving conditions over time in the absence of insulin has been investigated.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Temporal phosphoproteomics reveals circuitry of phased propagation in insulin signaling

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Differentiated myotubes from three different donors were starved for 6 h. Subsequently, the cells were harvested at 0 min, 2.5 min, 15 min and 60 min, representing additional controls for the time periods of the early (T2.5), intermediate (T15) and late (T60) stage. Protein concentration was determined by PierceTM BCA assay kit. Sample preparation and mass spectrometry (MS) For phosphoproteomic profiling, the cells were solubilized in denaturing SDS buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 4% SDS and 100 mM DTT, supplemented with CompleteTM (Roche) and PhosSTOP (Merck)). After centrifugation at 75.000 xg for 30min at 4°C, supernatants were transferred to fresh reaction tubes and protein concentrations were determined by direct photometric measurements (nanodrop, ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were digested using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) and purified by C18 solid phase extraction (Strata C18-E, 1g/6ml, Phenomenex). Eluates were lyophilized and subjected to Sequential enrichment from Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography (SMOAC): first peptides were subjected to HiSelect TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo FisherScientific PN#A32993) and second corresponding flow-through and wash fractions were subjected to HiSelect Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (ThermoFisher Scientific PN#32992). Phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 1% TFA (v/v) including iRT peptides (indexed retention time peptides, Biognosys) and separated by liquid chromatography (VanquishNeo, Acclaim PepMap C18-LC-column (ID: 75 μm, 2 cm length; PN 164535, ThermoFisher Scientific; 25cm Aurora (HTS 8421290065, Ionopticks). Mass spectrometry was done on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with Nanospray ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 100 min linear gradient from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 1-34% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a 20 min linear gradient increasing buffer B to 50% and a 1 min linear gradient increasing buffer B to 90%. Column temperature was set to 40 C°. MS data were acquired in duplicate using data dependent acquisition mode. MS spectra were obtained at 120,000 resolution (3 s cycle time), m/z range of 350-1,600 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. For fragmentation precursor selection filter were set to charge state between 2 and 7, dynamic exclusion of 30 s and intensity threshold of 2.54. Fragmentation of precursors was done with an isolation window (m/z) 1.2, HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) energy of 32%, Orbitrap resolution of 30,000 and maximum injection time of 120 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 3.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). SpectrumRC node was used with FASTA database (UniProtKB database, reviewed SwissProt, Homo Sapiens TaxID=9606, (v2023-11-08) to recalibrate spectra. For quantification purposes Minora feature detector node was used with standard settings (minimum trace length 5, max. delta RT of isoptope pattern multiplets of 0.2 min and for feature to ID linking use only high confident PSMs). HTsequest search was done against UniProtKB database (reviewed SwissProt, Homo Sapiens TaxID=9606, (v2023-11-08), enzyme was set to trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavage sites allowed, and for HCD fragmentation b and y Ions were selected with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal methionine loss, N-terminal methionine loss and acetylation, methionine oxidation as well as phosphorylation (+79.699Da) of serine, threonine or tyrosine (latter for phosphoproteome analysis only) were allowed as variable modifications. Percolator-node (max delta Cn: 0.01) and the ptmRS-node included in Proteome Discoverer 3.1 were applied. Label free quantification of phosphopeptides using nested-design, was performed with RT alignment of max 10 min, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a minimum S/N threshold of 5 for linked and mapped features. Precursor abundance quantification were based on intensity and a min auf 20% are present in the replicate features. Missing values were imputed using replicate-based resampling.