PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Hela cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Proteomics n2-alkyl-dg hmgb3 sub1

ABSTRACT:
DNA alkylation at the N2 position of guanine (N2-dG) is a prevalent type of DNA minor-groove lesions arising from various exogenous environmental contaminants and endogenous cellular processes. These N2-alkyl-dG lesions can induce G → T mutations during transcription if left unrepaired. However, the repair pathways of N2-alkyl-dG lesions remain incompletely elucidated. In this study, we identified a series of potential N2-alkyl-dG-binding proteins utilizing an affinity pulldown coupled with quantitative proteomic approach. We investigated their roles in DNA damage response and repair of these lesions. High-mobility group protein B3 (HMGB3) and activated RNA polymerase II transcriptional coactivator P15 (SUB1) exhibited preferential binding toward N2-nBudG-containing duplex DNA in quantitative proteomics analysis and in vitro binding assay using recombinant proteins. The presence of HMGB3 and SUB1 protected cells against alkylating agents (e.g., BPDE). Both HMGB3 and SUB1 modulated the repair of N2-nBudG and trans-N2-BPDE-dG in genomic DNA, while HMGB3 wasn’t involved in the repair of cis-N2-BPDE-dG. Together, our findings provided new knowledge about the cellular sensing and repair of minor-groove N2-alkyl-dG lesions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification and characterizations of DNA N2-alkylguanine-binding proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The 20-mer N2-nBu-dG-containing ODNs (50 pmol) were annealed individually with a 5’-biotin-conjugated complementary strand (5’-biotin-ATAGGATCATGTCCCYCCGT, Y = 4-thiolT) in a buffer containing 100 mM potassium acetate and 30 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) by raising the temperature to 95 °C and allowing to cool to room temperature over 3 h. The annealed double-stranded DNA was then incubated with high-capacity streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo Pierce) at room temperature with shaking for 60 min. After three washes with a buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 0.5 mM EDTA to remove any unbound DNA, the DNA-bound beads were incubated with nuclear lysates at 4 °C for 2 h in the above buffer with 10% glycerol.  The lesion-containing probe and a control lesion-free probe were incubated with heavy and light isotope-labeled lysates, respectively, in forward SILAC experiment. In reverse SILAC experiments, this was reversed. After washing, the beads were combined and the bound proteins were eluted with 1% TFA in CH3CN/H2O (7:3, v/v) at 75 °C. The eluent was dried in a Speed-vac and subjected to filter-aided sample preparation. Briefly, the dried samples were dissolved in a 400-L solution containing 8 M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (pH 8.5), transferred to an ultracentrifugal filter (10,000 MWCO, VWR International). After centrifugation at 14,000 g for 3 min, the filter devices were washed twice with 200 L of 50 mM ABC to remove urea. After the addition of dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide for cysteine reduction and alkylation, 200 L of 50 mM ABC containing 0.8 g of trypsin was added to each filter device and the digestion was continued at 37 °C for 16 h. The digestion mixture was subsequently centrifuged, and the filter device was rinsed with 200 L of 50 mM ABC and centrifuged again. The combined filtrates were dried in a Speed-vac, desalted using OMIX C18 Tips (Agilent Technologies), and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled with a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptide samples were loaded onto the trapping column (150 m × 50 mm) and separated on an analytical column (75 m × 120 mm) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (5 m and 3 m in particle sizes, respectively, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a 180-min linear gradient of 2-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was set up in the positive-ion mode, and the spray voltage was 1.8 kV. MS/MS was recorded in a data- dependent acquisition mode in which one full MS scan was followed with 25 MS/MS scans.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw LC-MS/MS data were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8)51. MaxQuant multiplicity was set to 2, and 13C6,15N2 L-lysine and 13C6 -L-arginine were selected as heavy amino acids. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification. Mass tolerance for full-scan MS was set as 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first and main search, respectively. The mass tolerance for MS/MS was set at 20 ppm. Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin. Peptide spectra were searched against target-decoy Uniprot human proteome database (UP000005640_9606) and the proteins were subsequently filtered at 1% FDR. The match between runs option was enabled with alignment windows and minimum protein ratio counts being 5 min and 1, respectively. The potential contamination and the decoys were removed from the output files.