PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Heart
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap
modifications: Deamidated; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Human; Ipsc; Cardiomyocyte; Engineered heart tissue

ABSTRACT:
Energy metabolism is a key aspect of cardiomyocyte biology. Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CM) are a promising tool for biomedical application, but they are immature and have not undergone metabolic shift related to early postnatal development. Cultivation of hiPSC-CM in 3D engineered heart tissue (EHT) format leads to morphological maturation. This study compared the mitochondrial and metabolic state of hiPSC-CM in standard 2D culture and the EHT format and determined the influence of contractile activity. HiPSC-CM in EHTs showed ~2-fold higher number of mitochondria (electron microscopy), mitochondrial mass (mitotracker), DNA (Mt-ND1, Mt-ND2), and protein abundance (proteome) than in 2D culture. While hiPSC-CM exhibited the principal ability to use glucose, lactate and fatty acids as energy substrates irrespective of culture format, hiPSC-CM in 3D performed more oxidation of glucose, lactate and fatty acid, and less anaerobic glycolysis. The increase in mitochondrial mass and DNA in 3D was diminished by pharmacological inhibition of contractile force, suggesting that contractile work participates in mitochondrial development hiPSC-CM. In conclusion, contractile work in the EHT format contributes to metabolic maturation of hiPSC-CM.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Contractile work contributes to maturation of energy metabolism in hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HiPSC-CM were cultured in either 2D (2x106 cells/6-well; coating: 0.1% gelatin, 1 h) or 3D (0.8x106 cells/EHT) for 21 days in parallel. Finally, cells were washed twice with PBS and digested with collagenase II (in HBSS, 200 U/ml; Worthington) for 4-5 h, reaction was stopped with fetal calf serum, centrifugated at 100 g for 15 min and washed twice with PBS. Cells of one 6-well or cells of 2 EHTs were snap frozen in 100 μl M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent plus phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific). Frozen human heart samples were cut into pieces and lysed in an ice-cold buffer containing sucrose 300 mM, HEPES-NaOH 250 mM, EDTA 1 mM, pH 8, plus EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche). The tissue was homogenized using a tissue disruptor (Precellys 24, setting 6500-2x20-020) at 4°C and the samples were incubated for 15 min on ice. Insoluble cell debris was pelleted (14,000 rcf for 20 min) and the resulting supernatant was used for analysis. Protein concentrations in all sample groups were measured with a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). 100 μg of each sample lysate was used for acetone precipitation of proteins by adding the 8x volume of acetone (-20 °C, overnight). The next day, precipitated proteins were pelleted (high speed spin, 12 °C, 10 min). The acetone was removed and the dry protein pellet was dissolved in guanidine hydrochloride (8 M, solution ready to use, Sigma G9284). The protein pellet was subjected to an in-solution-digestion. Briefly, the mixture was reduced using dithiothreitol (10 mM, DDT, Sigma 43815) in 25 mM TEA-Bic solution (25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, Sigma T7408) for 1 h at 60°C. Samples were subjected to alkylation (30 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma I1149) in 25 mM TEA-Bic solution for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark. The reaction was quenched with DTT (10 mM, Sigma 43815). Afterwards, the samples were diluted with 25 mM TEA-Bic solution to a concentration of guanidine hydrochloride <1 M. The samples were digested over night at 37°C in digestion buffer containing Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (1 μg/μl, protein:enzyme ratio of approximately 20:1; Promega v5111). The next day, the tryptic peptides were acidified with 100% of formic acid to pH < 3. The samples were desalted and concentrated with ZipTip Pipette Tips (Millipore, ZTC18S096) filled with a C-18 column as described in the manufacturer’s instructions. The collected eluents were vacuum-dried by SpeedVac and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS2 spectra were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the data was searched against the Swiss Prot (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics) database, taxonomy “Homo sapiens [human]” using the Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK) search engine with precursor mass tolerance at 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.8 Da, trypsin enzyme with 2 miscleavages with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. The resulting data file was loaded into the Scaffold software (version scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) to filter and quantify the peptides and proteins. For protein identification, filters were set to a 90% protein probability threshold and a 90% peptide probability threshold, which resulted in a final decoy FDR of less than 0.1%. For protein identification, at least 2 peptides per protein had to be recognized. Data analysis and clustering was performed in the Scaffold software. In general, relative quantification was done in a label-free approach by the setting Quantitative Value (Normalized Total Spectra). For comparison, the total number of spectral counts identified for each proteins were visualized and compared to the counterpart. For statistical analysis only proteins identified in 3/3 samples were used for comparative analysis. For a quantitative analysis of specifically unique peptides to precisely distinguish between protein isoforms, the measured peak areas from Proteome Discoverer were analyzed using Scaffold and the Multiplex Quantitation method. Protein FDR was set to 1.0% and Peptide FDR to 0.1% with a minimum of 2 peptides. Quantitative analysis was performed by adjusting the reference group to the 2D samples. To display the comparison the setting was adjusted to fold change ratio. No minimal fold change threshold was applied.

METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
The study was reviewed and approved by the Ethical Committee of the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (Az. 532/ 116/9.7.1991), and all patients gave written informed consent.
Generation of Human Cardiomyocytes for Monolayer (2D) or Engineered Heart Tissue (3D)
This study was performed using a human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) control line, which was reprogrammed by lentivirus. Key experiments were also verified with a second cell line, which was reprogrammed by Sendai virus according to the manufacturer's instruction (CytoTune-iPS Sendai Reprogramming Kit, #A1377801, Life Technologies). Figure S1A includes an overview of control cell lines used per experiment. Cardiac differentiation was performed with an EB-based protocol as recently described. Stem cell culture and mesodermal differentiation was conducted in 5% CO2 and 5% O2. Cardiac differentiation was conducted in 7% CO2 and atmospheric oxygen (21%). hiPSC-CMs in the EB format were subjected to collagenase digestion on day 17 after initiation of the differentiation, and for each construct 0.8 × 106 cells were used to either generate 2D or 3D samples, respectively. hiPSC-CMs were cultured in 7% CO2 and 40% O2 for 21–45 days and analyzed batch- and time-matched in 2D and 3D formats in parallel. 2D culture consisted of a very dense, confluent monolayer format (0.8 × 106 cells/2 cm2 in a 24-well Nunc plate coated with 0.1% gelatin). For 3D culture, 0.8 × 106 cells/24-well format EHT were embedded in a fibrin gel between elastic PDMS posts. Differentiation runs with 55%–98% of cardiac troponin T-positive cells, as analyzed by flow cytometry, were utilized in this study. Force-generating EHTs constituted within 2 weeks after casting. Video-optical analysis of contractile force was performed as recently described. Silicone racks (C001), Teflon spacers (C002), and EHT analysis equipment (A001) were purchased from EHT Technologies (Hamburg).
Mass Spectrometry
Protein identification by LC-MS/MS analysis of peptides was performed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced with an Ultimate 3000 Nano-HPLC apparatus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were fractionated by reverse-phase HPLC on a Picofrit column (250 mm long, internal diameter 75 μm, tip internal diameter 15 μm, packed with BetaBasic 5-μm 300-Å particles; New Objective, Woburn, MA) using a 120-min linear gradient of 5%–35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 300 to 2,000 m/z were performed at 60K resolution. Tandem MS was performed with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with collision energy of 35, and rapid-scan MS analysis using an ion trap. The instrument was run in a top speed mode with 3-s cycles. This experiment was performed from biological replicates from one differentiation. Additional details on sample preparation and data analysis are provided online.
Statistical Analysis
All data were expressed as means ± SEM. Student's t test (two-tailed, homodynamic variance) was calculated in GraphPad Prism to compare between two groups, and one-way or two-way ANOVA was used for multiple comparisons of one or more factors, respectively. Technical replicates are defined as repeated measurements of the same biological replicate. Biological replicates are separate 2D/3D hiPSC-CM samples from the same differentiation. Independent experiments are 2D/3D hiPSC preparations from separate differentiations and time points. All statistical comparisons between 3D and 2D cultures were batch- and time-matched in three independent experiments, except for the proteome experiment, TEM, 70-day time point (Figure S4B), and the Seahorse experiment (S5C).
More information on all experiments is available online.

RESULTS:
Results
Culture of hiPSC-CMs as 3D Engineered Heart Tissue Improves Mitochondrial Structure
hiPSC lines from two healthy donors were differentiated utilizing an embryoid body (EB)-based protocol (Movie S1). EBs were dissociated into single cells, and differentiation runs consisting of 55%–98% cardiac troponin T-positive hiPSC-CMs were cultured in 40% oxygen in parallel as either 2D monolayer or 3D EHT, respectively (Figure 1A). Phase-contrast microscopy imaging of coherently beating hiPSC-CMs showed the typical irregular alignment of hiPSC-CMs in 2D (Figure 1B and Movie S1) compared with a biconcave shape of hiPSC-CM network in 3D format after 3 weeks of culture (Figure 1C and Movie S1). Figure 1D describes force development of hiPSC-EHTs over time (frequency depicted in Figure S1B). Functional experiments were performed with cell line-, differentiation run-, and age-matched 2D and 3D preparations in parallel between days 21 and 45 of EHT development (box in Figure 1D). Similar cellular composition of 2D and 3D format by the time of functional analysis was determined by qPCR. Figure 1E demonstrates that gene expression for cardiac (MYL3, MYL4, cTNT1), fibroblast (Vimentin, POSTN), and endothelial (CD31) markers were not significantly different between 2D and 3D format (p > 0.05). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis showed that 3D hiPSC-CMs contained more mitochondria with crisp membrane structures and cristae formation (black arrows in Figures 1F, 1G, and S1C–S1F) compared with less developed mitochondria (white arrows, Figures 1F′ and 1G′) in 2D hiPSC-CMs. In addition, more glycogen deposits (black granules, open arrowhead, Figures 1F′, 1G′, and S1C–S1F) were visible in 2D hiPSC-CMs, as described previously.
Quantitative Proteomics Revealed Greater Abundance of Mitochondrial Proteins in 3D and Nuclear and Ribosomal Proteins in 2D hiPSC-CMs
For a quantitative assessment, we performed an unbiased proteomic comparison of 2D and 3D with lysed, time-matched samples from the same hiPSC-CM batch (Figure S2A). liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer identified 1,222 proteins, 697 of which were present in at least two of three samples in 2D and 3D hiPSC-CMs. Scatterplots of log10 normalized spectral counts showed low variance as characterized by high values of R2 between the samples of the respective groups (Figure S2B). A total of 614 proteins, which were detected in three of three samples of both groups, underwent comparative quantitative analysis. Quantitative analysis showed that there were clear differences between the proteomic profiles of 2D and 3D cardiomyocytes (Figure 2A and Table S1). Among these 614 proteins, 256 (41%) significantly differed in abundance between the groups, 133 proteins being more and 123 proteins less abundant in 3D than in 2D hiPSC-CMs (p < 0.05; Tables S1 and S2). Interestingly, 93 of 256 proteins with altered abundance were mitochondrial proteins, all of which were more abundant in 3D (highlighted in Table S1). For nuclear proteins, ∼75% showed lower abundance in 3D than in 2D. Most of the ribosomal proteins with significant differences showed also lower abundance in 3D than in 2D. To gain more insight into differences between proteins of cellular compartments, we performed volcano and scatterplot analyses, which showed clear differences in the proteomic profiles of subcellular compartments by highlighting nuclear, mitochondrial, and ribosomal proteins (Figures 2B and 2C), very similar to the proteome difference between fetal and adult non-failing human heart. Figure 2C shows relevant cardiac proteins such as troponin C, titin, myosin heavy chain 6 and 7, and myosin light chain 2, which were all more abundant in 3D than in 2D. Cardiac proteins such as troponin I were less abundant in 3D in comparison with 2D. We further analyzed the abundance of fatty acid oxidation proteins in 3D versus 2D and highlighted 11 proteins that were higher in abundance in 3D in comparison with 2D (Figure 2D). We next searched the proteomic profiles of 2D and 3D hiPSC-CMs for the proteins with the largest differences in protein abundance. We found that extracellular matrix proteins laminin subunits β1 (LAMB1) and γ1 (LAMC1) as well as fibrillin-2 (FBN2) were abundant in 3D, but not 2D cultures (Table S1). Mitochondrial proteins made up the rest of the ten proteins that were most abundant in 3D versus 2D format. These included ATP synthase subunit γ (ATPG), succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid coenzyme A transferase 1 (SCOT1), aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase (THIM), isocitrate dehydrogenase (NAD) subunit γ (IDH3G), NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1β subcomplex subunit 9 (NDUB9), and dynamin-like 120-kDa protein (ODPA) (Table S1).
Cardiomyocytes in 3D Cultures Exhibit Increases in Proteins Involved in ATP Synthesis and Fatty Acid Oxidation
A gene ontology analysis with the Genomatrix Genome Analyzer software for biological processes revealed that processes significantly more abundant in 3D included cellular respiration, energy derivation by oxidation of organic compounds, or generation of precursor metabolites and energy as well as respiratory electron transport chain or oxidative phosphorylation (Table S3 and Figure S2C). Processes less abundant in 3D included cytoskeleton organization, protein complex subunit organization, actin filament-based processes, cellular organization, and cellular complex assembly. A pathway analysis with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) depicted that cardiomyocytes in 3D were most significantly associated with metabolic processes as seen by the annotations “mitochondrial dysfunction,” “oxidative phosphorylation,” or “TCA cycle,” where we found significantly different proteins to be more abundant in 3D hiPSC-CMs (Figure S2D). Other important pathways for the characterization of metabolism included fatty acid oxidation and glycolysis. Panther analysis for pathways and protein classes consistently showed that most targets more abundant in 3D hiPSC-CMs were involved in ATP synthesis and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle (10.8% each of total pathways, Figure S2E) and that the target group of proteins more abundant in 3D hiPSC-CMs was annotated to oxidoreductases (21.7% of total protein classes, Figure S2F).
The Mitochondrial Proteomes in 3D hiPSC-CMs and Adult Human Heart Are Similar
We then compared the proteomic profiles of 2D, 3D, and non-failing adult human hearts (NFH) with a focus on the mitochondrial protein compartment. Biological replicates of all three groups clustered closely together, and 3D samples clustered nearby the heart samples (Figures 3A and S3A). The mitochondrial proteomes of 3D and NFH samples were more similar to each other than 2D to 3D or 2D to NFH. We performed gene ontology and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of different clusters as indicated in Figure S3A. Processes such as mitochondrial electron transport and TCA cycle as well as fatty acid oxidation were particularly lower in 2D than in 3D (Figure S3B). In general, fatty acid oxidation, oxidative phosphorylation, and cardiac muscle contraction were highest in the NFH and higher in 3D than in 2D. TCA cycle and the generation of precursor metabolites and energy were particularly enriched in 3D (Figure S3B). To further substantiate these findings, we specifically compared proteome data for different subunits of the ATP synthase among the groups, and found that 9 out of 11 subunits showed an ∼2- to 4.5-fold increase in 3D and heart samples in comparison with 2D (p < 0.05) (Figure 3B). We verified our proteomic results in a western blot analysis and probed for ATP5H and THIM (ACAA2), which verified significantly higher abundance in 3D and NFH samples in comparison with 2D (Figures 3C and 3D).
Increase in Mitochondrial Proteins Includes the PGC-1α (PPARGC1A) Transcriptional Regulatory Cascade and Is Accompanied by Higher Mitochondrial Mass and mtDNA Content in 3D
To better understand the molecular mechanism, we further analyzed proteins that were significantly different between 2D and 3D hiPSC-CM “Regulator Effects” using the IPA software. This analysis helps to understand the effects that result from differences in protein levels on molecular functions or diseases. The effectors network with the highest consistency score was shown to be the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ coactivator 1α (PGC-1α/PPARGC1A) transcriptional regulatory cascade involved in the biogenesis of mitochondria, purine ribonucleotides, and nucleoside triphosphates (Figure 4A). Consistently, important upstream activators of this network are PGC-1α (PPARGC1A) and estrogen-related receptor α (ESRRA) both showed higher expression in 3D versus 2D hiPSC-CMs (Figures 4B and 4C). As these signaling pathways are known to be master regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis, we hypothesized a gain in mitochondria mass in 3D hiPSC-CMs similar to early postnatal development. Comparing normalized spectral counts (as a measure of relative protein abundance) between 2D, 3D, and NFH for all detected mitochondrial proteins (Figure 3A and Table S4; 2D, 3.3; 3D, 7.4; NFH, 9.6; protein must be detected in at least 2 out of 9 samples), we found a 2.2-fold higher amount of mitochondrial proteins in 3D than in 2D and a 2.9-fold higher amount of mitochondrial proteins in NFH than in 2D (Figure 4D). In addition to the higher abundance of mitochondrial proteins, we measured the mitochondrial mass and mtDNA content. Mitochondrial mass was analyzed by flow cytometry of live cells stained with MitoTracker Green FM, selected for localizing to mitochondria regardless of mitochondrial membrane potential. This was 1.5-fold higher in 3D than in 2D (Figures 4E and S4A). Mitochondrial encoded NADH dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (Mt-ND1, Mt-ND2) DNA levels were 3-fold higher in 3D than in 2D, but still 1.5-fold lower than in NFH (Figure 4F). To exclude that this is due to a small difference in developmental kinetics, we also analyzed ND1/2 after 70 days and confirmed the difference in ND1/2 DNA level (Figures S4B and S4C). These data are in line with the proteomic and TEM results and suggest that mitochondrial density is 3-fold higher in 3D than in 2D, but still substantially lower than in adult human heart tissue.
2D and 3D hiPSC-CMs Are Able to Use Fatty Acid, Glucose, and Lactate as Sources of Energy
hiPSC-CMs in 2D and 3D format were incubated overnight in feeding medium containing only one energy source, either 1 mM fatty acid, 1 mM lactate, or 5 mM glucose. Beating frequency and contractile force as integrated parameter for the ability of hiPSC-CMs to use the different energy substrates were determined by video-optical recording for 3D hiPSC-CMs, and beating frequency was counted microscopically for 2D hiPSC-CMs. Figures 5A and 5B demonstrate no significant differences at baseline and after overnight culture, demonstrating that hiPSC-CMs have the ability to use all three energy substrates. 2D and 3D hiPSC-CMs incubated in medium without any energy source stopped beating completely and could not recover (Figures 5A, 5B, S5A, and S5B), verifying that hiPSC-CMs were not able to meet their energy needs from endogenous energy stores. To demonstrate the ability of 2D cardiomyocytes to oxidize energy substrate, we conducted the Seahorse XF Cell Mito Stress Test. Changes in the oxygen consumption rate in the presence of oligomycin, carbonyl cyanide-4-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP), and rotenone were qualitatively similar to previously reported findings in hiPSC-CMs (Figure S5C), but the Seahorse assay could not be adapted reliably to 3D culture. To demonstrate the relevance of oxidative metabolism for 3D hiPSC-CMs, we studied their hypoxia sensitivity. Since lactate and fatty acids can only be metabolized by mitochondrial aerobic respiration, we hypothesized that under these conditions the glycolysis-mediated low hypoxia sensitivity of hiPSC-CMs should be substantially increased. We tested this hypothesis by subjecting 3D hiPSC-CMs adapted to glucose, lactate, or fatty acid to a 100-min hypoxia interval followed by reoxygenation under continuous video-optical contractility recording. Different energy substrates indeed have significant impact on hypoxia sensitivity: While force development remained unaltered under glucose conditions, it dropped to zero under lactate and fatty acid conditions and only partially recovered after switching back to 40% oxygen conditions (Figure 5C, exemplified original recordings in Figures 5D, 5E, and S5D; Movie S2).
Anaerobic Glycolysis Decreases in Favor of More Oxidative Metabolism in 3D hiPSC-CMs
Given the fact that 2D and 3D hiPSC-CMs could metabolize all three energy substrates, we hypothesized that the difference in mitochondrial mass and DNA content might influence the amount of glycolysis and aerobic oxidation. To this end, we first analyzed glucose consumption and lactate production in hiPSC-CMs in 2D and 3D format in cell culture media containing all three energy substrates (1 mM fatty acid, 1 mM lactate, 5 mM glucose). Based on the scheme in Figure 6A, glucose consumption and lactate production were 2- to 3-fold higher in 2D hiPSC-CMs than in 3D (Figures 6B, 6C, S6A, and S6B). To determine whether this was due to overall higher metabolism in 2D or more oxidative mitochondrial metabolism in 3D, we analyzed mitochondrial flux. We supplemented cell culture media with one 14C-labeled energy substrate ([14C]glucose, [14C]lactate, or [14C]oleic acid) and analyzed the production of 14C-labeled CO2 as a surrogate for mitochondrial TCA-cycle activity. 3D hiPSC-CMs produced several-fold more 14C-labeled CO2 than 2D hiPSC-CMs from oxidation of glucose (+230%), lactate (+388%), or fatty acid (+214%) (Figures 6D, 6E, 6F, and S6C–S6E). Under the assumption of a fully efficient ATP production, the total amount of ATP produced by mitochondrial respiration was 2.3-fold higher in 3D than in 2D hiPSC-CMs (671 nmol versus 291 nmol per 4-hr incubation, respectively). The relative contribution to ATP production in 2D and 3D was 49% and 14%, respectively for glycolysis (ignoring about 1% simultaneous lactate oxidation) and 40%, 9%, and 2% and 65%, 14%, and 6% for fatty acid, glucose, and lactate oxidation, respectively (Figure 6G). Taken together, these experiments imply that if all energy substrates are provided, 3D hiPSC-CMs have a higher mitochondrial metabolism, suggesting a higher metabolic preference for oxidation than glycolysis compared with 2D hiPSC-CMs.
Pharmacological Reduction of Contraction Decreases mtDNA Content in 3D
Auxotonic contraction and defined tension are important differences between the 2D and 3D EHT model of hiPSC-CMs, and contractile work also increases substantially in early postnatal life. We analyzed the impact of contractile work on mitochondrial mass and DNA content by cultivating EHTs for 7 days in the presence of two different myosin II inhibitors (blebbistatin and N-benzyl-p-toluene sulfonamide [BTS]). Blebbistatin was chosen for this experiment, since it does not have off-target effects on mitochondrial metabolism in contrast to 2,3-butanedione monoxime. Blebbistatin led to a reduction in force while other parameters of contraction remained unchanged (Figures 7A, 7B, and S7A–S7D). qPCR analysis revealed significantly lower copy numbers for mtDNA (Figure 7C) and lower mitochondrial mass (mitotracker fluorescence-activated cell sorting [FACS], Figure 7D). In line with this, the myosin II inhibitor BTS also led to lower mtDNA copy numbers (Figure 7E). In contrast, in 2D hiPSC-CMs both blebbistatin and BTS do not change mtDNA content (Figures S7C and S7D), suggesting that contractile work contributes to mitochondrial biogenesis in this model.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Human cardiomyocytes differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC-CMs) are becoming an important source of human cardiomyocytes for biomedical applications such as preclinical drug testing and disease modeling. However, a current limitation for some of these applications is the immaturity of hiPSC-CMs regarding key parameters such as force of contraction, electrical activity, calcium handling, and metabolism. Enhancing maturation of hiPSC-CMs is therefore a priority in the field. Different approaches including long-term culture, maturation media containing compounds such as T3 or fatty acids and others, overexpression of LET-7 microRNA, and electrical pacing during three-dimensional (3D) tissue culture succeeded in improving certain aspects of mitochondrial maturation.
Energy metabolism is a key aspect of cardiomyocyte biology, changing drastically during postnatal development. In non-failing adult hearts, fatty acid is the most important source of ATP production, with a substantial contribution of lactate during physical activity. Relying heavily on mitochondrial oxidative metabolism to meet their constant energy demand, adult cardiomyocytes have the highest mitochondrial-to-cytoplasmic volume fraction of all cell types and are very sensitive to hypoxia. In fetal cardiomyocytes, in contrast, anaerobic glycolysis is a major contributor to energy supply. Interestingly, in heart failure the metabolism switches to more glucose consumption.
We recently established the hiPSC-CM engineered heart tissue (EHT) model based on former studies on neonatal rat and mouse, and human embryonic stem cell-derived CMs in a 3D EHT format. In EHT, hiPSC-CMs are embedded in a fibrin-based matrix between flexible silicone posts, enabling spontaneous, coherent, auxotonic contraction and force development. We demonstrated advanced morphological maturation regarding cellular alignment and sarcomeric organization as well as responses to physiological and pharmacological stimuli similar to non-failing human heart tissue. As this suggests an improved maturation status of 3D hiPSC-CMs, we hypothesized that hiPSC-CMs might also develop a higher degree of metabolic maturity in this format, i.e., having less fetal-like glycolysis and more adult-like mitochondrial oxidative metabolism.
To assess this, we compared the metabolic properties of hiPSC-CMs from two established control cell lines cultured in 3D versus two-dimensional (2D) monolayer culture. Our findings suggest that culturing hiPSC-CMs in 3D format improves metabolic maturation and promotes a switch from glycolysis to oxidation, mimicking important metabolic aspects of early postnatal development. These findings will increase the relevance of hiPSC-CMs for drug testing and disease modeling, particularly for diseases associated with alterations in cardiac energetics or mitochondrial abnormalities.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures, seven figures, four tables, and two movies and can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2018.01.039.