PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Rectal cancer cell; Colonic cancer cell
diseases: Rectum adenocarcinoma; Colon adenocarcinoma
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: Gln->pyro-Glu; Glu->pyro-Glu; Deamidated; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Cptac cptac-tcga_colorectal_cancer cptac-vu

ABSTRACT:
The goal of the CPTAC, TCGA Cancer Proteome Study of Colorectal Tissue is to analyze the proteomes of TCGA tumor samples that have been comprehensively characterized by molecular methods. Ninety-five TCGA tumor samples were used in this study.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
CPTAC, TCGA Cancer Proteome Study of Colorectal Tissue: Proteome, VU, part 9

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Analytical Sample Protocol - Alkylation: Iodoacetamide, Fractionation: Peptide IEF, Fractions: 15, Proteolysis: Trypsin, Starting Amount: 200 ug; Chromatography Protocol - Column Length: 11 cm, Column Type: C18, Gradient Length: 95 min, Injected: 1 ug, Inside Diameter: 100 um, Particle Size: 5 um; Mass Spectrometry Protocol - Dissociation: CID, Instrument: Thermo LTQ Orbitrap Velos, MS1 Resolution: 60000, Precursors: Top 8. See associated protocols and methods documents at https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu.

DATA PROCESSING:
Processed using the CPTAC Common Data Analysis Pipeline at NIST. Peptide identifications from MSGF+. Filtered at 1% FDR. See associated protocols and methods documents at https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu.

METHODS:
Methods Summary
All tumor samples for the current study were obtained through the TCGA Biospecimen Core Resource (BCR) as described previously. No other selection criteria other than availability were applied for this study. Patient-derived xenograft tumors from established Basal and Luminal-B breast cancer intrinsic subtypes  were raised subcutaneously in 8 week old NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, Maine) as previously described. Normal colon biopsies were obtained from screening colonoscopies performed between July 2006 and October 2010 under Vanderbilt University IRB approval #061096.
Tissue proteins were extracted and tryptic peptide digests were analyzed by multidimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Xenograft QC samples were run after every 5 colorectal tumor samples. Raw data were processed for peptide identification by database and spectral library searching and identified peptides were assembled as proteins and mapped to gene identifiers for proteogenomic comparisons. Quantitative proteomic comparisons were based on spectral count data. Detailed descriptions of the samples, LC-MS/MS analysis, and data analysis methods can be found in Supplementary Methods. All of the primary mass spectrometry data on TCGA tumor samples are deposited at the CPTAC Data Coordinating Center as raw and mzML files and complete protein assembly datasets for public access (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu).
Extended Data

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) has characterized the genomic features of human cancers and thereby presents the challenge of explaining how genomic alterations drive cancers. Because proteins link genotypes to phenotypes, the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) is performing proteomic analyses of TCGA tumor specimens for selected cancer types. Here we present the first integrated proteogenomic characterization of human cancer with an analysis of the TCGA colorectal cancer (CRC) specimens.
The TCGA study affirmed well-established genomic features of CRC and described three transcriptional subtypes, 17 chromosomal regions of significant focal amplification and 28 regions of significant focal deletion, and linked genomic features of CRC to critical signaling pathways. The drivers underlying copy number alterations (CNAs) and transcriptional subtypes are largely unknown, and an integrative analysis of both genomic and proteomic data may provide a more comprehensive understanding of the information flow from DNA to protein to phenotype.
Identification of peptides, proteins and variant sequences
We performed liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based shotgun proteomic analyses on 95 TCGA tumor samples (Extended Data Fig. 1, Supplementary Methods 1–4), the clinical and pathological characteristics and TCGA datasets for which are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. Benchmark quality control (QC) samples from one basal and one luminal human breast tumor xenograft were analyzed in alternating order after every five CRC samples (Supplementary Methods 2).
We identified a total of 124,823 distinct peptides among the 95 samples, corresponding to 6,299,756 spectra in an assembly of 7,526 protein groups with a protein-level False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 2.64% (Supplementary Methods 5.1–5.2, Extended Data Fig. 2). To facilitate integration between genomic and proteomic data, a gene-level assembly of the peptides identified 7,211 genes.
A fundamental question in proteogenomics is which protein coding alterations are expressed at the protein level. Because standard database search approaches cannot identify variant pe3ptides from MS/MS data, we also performed database searches with customized sequence databases from matched RNA-Seq data for individual samples (Supplementary Methods 5.3, Extended Data Fig. 3).
We identified 796 single amino acid variants (SAAVs) across all 86 tumors for which matched RNA-Seq data was available (Fig. 1a–b, Supplementary Table 2–3), among which 64 corresponded to somatic variants reported by TCGA and 101 were reported in the COSMIC database (i.e. COSMIC-supported variants). Of the remaining SAAVs, 526 were listed in the dbSNP database (i.e. dbSNP-supported variants) and are likely to be germline variants. The 162 previously unreported SAAVs might be explained by novel somatic or germline variants, RNA editing, or, in some cases, false discovery.
The identified somatic variants were clearly enriched in the hypermutated samples, whereas the germline variants showed no association with hypermutation (Fig. 1a). Although 58% of the germline variants occurred in two or more samples, almost all somatic variants occurred in only one sample (Fig. 1c). The low identification rate for somatic variants may reflect relatively low sequence coverage in shotgun proteomics; however, somatic variants also might negatively impact protein abundance, possibly by reducing translational efficiency or protein stability. Using the protein abundance quantification method described below and detailed in Supplementary Methods 5.4, we found that somatic variants exerted a significantly stronger negative impact on protein abundance than did dbSNP-supported variants (p<2.2 × 10-16, Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test, Fig. 1d, Supplementary Methods 5.5). The percentage of variants with an impact score of less than −2 was doubled for somatic variants compared to dbSNP-supported variants (p<2.2 × 10-16, Chi-squared test, Fig. 1d).
Cancer-related variant proteins may serve as candidate protein biomarkers or therapeutic targets. The 108 somatic or COSMIC-supported protein variants mapped to 105 genes, including known cancer genes in the Cancer Gene Census database such as KRAS, CTNNB1, SF3B1, ALDH2, and FH. The list also included 14 targets of FDA-approved drugs or drugs in clinical trials, such as ALDH2, HSD17B4, PARP1, P4HB, TST, GAK, SLC25A24, and SUPT16H. A subset of variant peptide sequences, including K-ras (G12D) were verified by targeted analyses of tumor lysates spiked with synthetic, isotope-labeled peptide standards (Supplementary Methods 6). One example is shown in Extended Data Fig. 4.
Quantification of protein abundance
To quantify protein abundance, we used spectral counts, which are the total number of MS/MS spectra acquired for peptides from a given protein (Supplementary Methods 5.4, Supplementary Table 4). Analysis of data from benchmark QC samples demonstrated platform reproducibility throughout the analyses and enabled evaluation of data normalization methods (Extended Data Fig. 5a–b). Based on the minimal spectral count requirement established using the QC data set (Extended Data Fig. 5c), 3,899 genes with a protein-level FDR of 0.43% were used to compare relative protein abundance across tumor samples.
mRNA abundance does not reliably predict protein abundance
The matched proteomic and RNA-Seq measurements from the TCGA CRC tumors allowed the first global analysis of transcript-protein relationships in a large human tumor cohort (Supplementary Methods 7). First, we compared the steady state mRNA and protein abundance for each gene within individual samples (Supplementary Methods 7.2–7.3, Extended Data Fig. 6a). All samples showed significant positive mRNA-protein correlation (multiple-test adjusted p value < 0.01, Spearman’s correlation coefficient) and the average correlation between steady state mRNA and protein abundance in individual samples was 0.47 (Fig. 2a), which is comparable to previous reports in multi-cellular organisms.
Next, we examined the concordance between mRNA and protein variation of individual genes across the 87 tumors for which 3,764 genes had both mRNA and protein measurements suitable for relative abundance comparison (Supplementary Methods 7.2, 7.4). Although 89% of the genes showed a positive mRNA-protein correlation, only 32% had statistically significant correlations (Fig. 2b). The average Spearman’s correlation between mRNA and protein variation was 0.23, which was comparable to reported values for yeast, mouse and human cell lines.
To test whether the concordance between protein and mRNA variation is related to the biological function of the gene product, we performed KEGG enrichment analysis (Supplementary Methods 7.5, Supplementary Table 5). Genes involved in several metabolic processes showed concordant mRNA and protein variation, whereas other gene classes showed low or even negative concordance in mRNA and protein variation (Figure 2c). We also found that genes with stable mRNA and stable protein tend to have higher mRNA-protein correlation than those with unstable mRNA and unstable protein (p = 5.27 × 10-6, two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test, Supplementary Methods 7.6, Extended Data Fig. 6b). mRNA measurements thus are poor predictors of protein abundance variations and both biological functions of the gene products and mRNA and protein stability may govern mRNA-protein correlation.
Impact of copy number alterations on mRNA and protein abundance
The TCGA study identified 17 regions of significant focal amplification and 28 regions of significant focal deletion. We examined the impact of CNAs on mRNA and protein abundance, including both cis-effects on the abundance of genes in the same loci and trans-effects on the abundance of genes at other loci in the genome (Supplementary Methods 8).
For all 23,125 genes with a CNA measurement in the TCGA data set, we calculated Spearman’s correlation with mRNA and protein abundance, respectively for the 3,764 genes with both mRNA and protein measurements (Supplementary Methods 8.1). Examination of the matrix visualizing significant CNA-mRNA correlations (multiple-test adjusted p value < 0.01) revealed strong positive correlations along the diagonal (Fig. 3a), suggesting strong cis-effects of CNAs on mRNA abundance. Most of the diagonal signals corresponded to previously reported arm-level changes. In contrast, the diagonal pattern was much weaker for CNA-protein correlations (Fig. 3b).
To further investigate the cis-effects of CNAs, we separated all genes with CNA, mRNA, and protein measurements into those in focal amplification regions, focal deletion regions, and non-focal regions (i.e., chromosomal regions without focal amplification or deletion). As shown in Extended Data Figure 7, CNA-mRNA correlations were significantly higher than CNA-protein correlations for genes in all three groups (p<1.0 × 10-10, KS test). Moreover, genes in the focal amplification regions showed significantly higher CNA-mRNA and CNA-protein correlations than genes in the non-focal regions (p=4.4 × 10-4 and 0.02, respectively, KS test). However, the same trend was not observed for genes in the focal deletion regions. Therefore, focal amplifications have the strongest cis-effects on both mRNA and protein abundance, suggesting that selection for high protein abundance may drive CNA in regions of focal amplification. On the other hand, many CNA-driven mRNA level increases do not translate into increased abundance of the corresponding proteins.
Figure 3a–b also revealed multiple trans-acting CNA hot spots, defined as chromosomal loci whose amplification is significantly associated with abundance changes of many transcripts or proteins at other loci. Chromosomes 20q, 18, 16, 13 and 7 contained the five strongest hot spots driving global mRNA abundance variation. These hot spots also were strongest at the protein level. Most hot spot-related transcript changes did not propagate to the protein level, presumably reflecting buffering of protein abundance by post-transcriptional regulation. Notably, many hot spot-associated protein level alterations occurred in the absence of corresponding mRNA alterations, suggesting that the same trans-acting hot spot may exert independent effects at both the transcriptome and proteome levels.
The 20q amplification was associated with the largest global changes in both mRNA and protein levels in this univariate analysis. The same conclusion was reached with a regularized multivariate regression analysis method, remMap (Supplementary Methods 8.2, Supplementary Table 6–9). These data highlight the importance of 20q amplification in CRC, which has not been well documented in previous studies. Among the 79 genes in the 20q region with quantifiable protein measurements, 67 (85%) showed significant CNA-mRNA correlation, but only 40 (51%) showed significant CNA-protein correlation (multiple-test adjusted p value < 0.01, Spearman’s correlation coefficient, Supplementary Table 10).
Because significant CNA-protein correlations identify amplified sequences that translate to high protein abundance, proteomic measurements can help prioritize genes in amplified regions for further examination. Of particular interest among the 40 genes is HNF4A (Fig. 3c), a candidate driver gene nominated by TCGA for the 20q13.12 focal amplification peak. HNF4α is a transcription factor with a key role in normal gastrointestinal development and is increasingly being linked to CRC. However, there are contradictory reports on whether HNF4α acts as an oncogene or a tumor suppressor gene in CRC. Upon reanalysis of the HNF4A shRNA knockdown data for CRC cell lines from the Achilles project, we found that the dependency of CRC cells on HNF4α correlated significantly with the amplification level of HNF4A (Supplementary Methods 8.3, Extended Data Fig. 8), which may partially explain the contradictory roles reported for HNF4α in CRC. Other interesting candidates included TOMM34 (Fig. 3d), which is over-expressed frequently in CRC tumors and is involved in the growth of CRC cells, and SRC (Fig. 3e), which encodes a non-receptor tyrosine kinase implicated in several human cancers including CRC.
Proteomic subtypes of CRC
The TCGA study reported three transcriptomic subtypes of CRC, designated “MSI/CIMP” (microsatellite instability/CpG island methylator phenotype), “Invasive”, and “CIN” (chromosomal instability). Given the limited correlation between mRNA and protein levels, we asked whether CRC subtypes can be better represented with proteomics data. Using the Consensus Clustering method (Supplementary Methods 9.1–9.2, Extended Data Fig. 9), we identified five major proteomic subtypes in this tumor cohort, with 15, 9, 25, 11, and 19 cases in subtypes A through E, respectively (Fig. 4a–b).
We tested the association between the subtype classification and established genomic and epigenomic features of CRC using Fisher’s exact test (Fig. 4c, Supplementary Table 11). Almost all hypermutated and MSI-high tumors were included in subtypes B and C, as well as tumors with POLE and BRAF mutations. However, statistically significant association with these features was only observed for subtype B (multiple-test adjusted p value < 0.05). Moreover, whereas subtype B was significantly associated with the TCGA CIMP-H (CIMP-high) methylation subtype, subtype C was significantly associated with a non-CIMP subtype (cluster 4). Another unique feature of subtype B was the lack of TP53 mutations and chromosome 18q loss. These results clearly established the association between proteomic subtype B and MSI-High and CIMP, but suggest that subtype C might have different biological underpinnings.
The remaining three subtypes were associated with CIN, another well-accepted genetic property of CRC. In particular, subtype E was significantly associated with both TP53 mutations and 18q loss, genomic features frequently associated with CIN tumors. Interestingly, subtype E was also associated with HNF4A amplification and relatively higher abundance of HNF4α protein (Fig. 4d). HNF4α abundance was significantly higher in subtype E tumors compared to normal colon samples (multiple-test adjusted p value = 1.09 × 10-6, two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test); however, significant up-regulation of HNF4α was not observed for other subtypes (Supplementary Methods 10). This result, together with our reanalysis of shRNA knockdown data from the Achilles project (Extended Data Fig. 8), suggest that HNF4α dependency might be particularly associated with the subset of tumors or cells with HNF4A amplification.
We also examined the association between the subtype classification and clinical features and found only that stage II tumors were significantly enriched in subtype C (multiple-test adjusted p value < 0.05, Supplementary Table 11). Supervised statistical analyses at the individual protein level for 13 clinical and genomic features also identified few, if any significant protein effects of these features, except for hypermutation status, MSI status, and 18q loss (Supplementary Table 12), suggesting that the proteomic subtypes identified by the unsupervised clustering analysis captured the major proteome variations across the tumors.
Next, we compared the proteomic subtype classification with the TCGA transcriptional subtype classification for the 62 samples that had both subtype labels. Proteomic subtypes B and C both showed significant association with the TCGA subtype “MSI/CIMP” (Fig. 4b, Supplementary Table 11); however, they differ considerably at genomic, epigenomic, and proteomic levels (Fig. 4b). We also examined alternative classifications of the TCGA samples based on two recently published transcriptomic subtype classifiers. Proteomic subtype C, but not subtype B, showed enriched overlap with the “Stem-like” subtype described by Sadanandam et al. and the “CCS3” subtype described by De Sousa et al.. Interestingly, tumors with “Stem-like” and “CCS3” classifications both have poor prognosis, which suggests that proteome subtype C also may be associated with poor prognosis. Therefore, the ability to distinguish subtype B from C through proteomics data is important, because MSI-High tumors typically have better prognosis.
Protein signatures and networks associated with proteomic subtypes
To better understand the biology underlying the proteomic subtypes, we identified protein signatures for each subtype by supervised comparison of protein abundance in that subtype against all others; we also required signature proteins for a subtype to be significantly different in abundance compared to normal colon samples from 30 individuals analyzed on the same proteome analysis platform (Supplementary Methods 10, Supplementary Table 13–14). As shown in Extended Data Figure 10a, all CRC subtypes displayed more than 2,000 (>60%) significant protein abundance differences compared to normal colon. Although a full validation of the proteomic subtypes and protein signatures for the subtypes will require proteomic profiling data from an independent tumor cohort, a low cross-validation error rate of 3.8% demonstrated good generalizability of the subtypes and their signature proteins (Supplementary Methods 11).
We performed Gene Ontology enrichment analysis for the subtype signatures using WebGestalt (Supplementary Methods 11, Supplementary Table 15). Genes involved in “response to wounding” were significantly enriched in the up-signature of subtype C (multiple-test adjusted p value < 2.2 × 10-16, Fisher’s exact test). The wound-response gene signature is a powerful predictor of poor clinical outcome in patients with early stage breast cancers. This result further links our subtype C to poor prognosis.
To better understand the functional networks underlying this subtype with potential clinical importance, we uploaded the up- and down-signatures of subtype C to NetGestalt for enriched protein-protein interaction network module analysis. Four network modules were enriched with genes in the up-signature for subtype C, whereas two modules were enriched with genes in the down-signature (multiple-test adjusted p value < 0.01, Fisher’s exact test, Extended Data Fig. 10b). Notably, the down-signature enriched module (III) included the E-cadherin (CDH1)-β-catenin (CTNNB1)-α-catenin (CTNNA1) complex (Extended Data Fig. 10c, 10e). E-cadherin, the most under-expressed protein in the sub-network, suppresses invasion in lobular breast carcinoma and is a switch for the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), which is associated with poor prognosis in colon cancer. Other components of the module were desmosomal proteins (PKP2, JUP and DSG2) and cytokeratins (KRT18, KRT6A and KRT8). Reduction in both desmosome formation and cytokeratin expression is associated with EMT. Moreover, proteins in the most significantly up-regulated network module (Extended Data Fig. 10d, 10f) included collagens (COL1A1 and COL3A1) and extracellular matrix glycoproteins (FN1, BGN, FBN1, and FBN2) that also are markers of EMT. These data strengthen the association of subtype C with poor prognosis and relate it to EMT activation.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of this paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Author Contributions B.Z., R.J.C.S., D.L.T., L.J.Z. and D.C.L. designed the proteomic analysis experiments, data analysis workflow, and proteomic-genomic data comparisons. K.F.S., L.J.Z., R.J.C.S. and D.C.L. directed and performed proteomic analysis of colon tumor and quality control samples. J.W., X.W., J.Z., Q.L., Z.S., P.W., S.W., R.J.C.S. and B.Z. performed proteomic-genomic data analyses. M.C.C., S.K., R.J.C.S. and D.L.T. performed analyses of mass spectrometry data and adapted algorithms and software for data analysis. S.R.D., R.R.T and M.J.C.E. developed and prepared breast xenografts used as quality control samples. S.A.C, K.F.S. and D.C.L. designed strategy for quality control analyses. R.J.C.S., C.R.K, R.C.R, and H.R. coordinated acquisition, distribution and quality control evaluation of TCGA tumor samples. B.Z., J.W., R.J.C.S., R.J.C. and D.C.L. interpreted data in context of colon cancer biology. B.Z., R.J.C.S. and D.C.L. wrote the manuscript.
All of the primary mass spectrometry data on TCGA tumor samples are deposited at the CPTAC Data Coordinating Center as raw and mzML files for public access (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of this article at www.nature.com/nature.

SDRF SUMMARY:
Total runs: 150
organism: Homo sapiens
organism part: rectum
disease: rectal mucinous adenocarcinoma; rectum adenocarcinoma
sex: Female; Male
age: 49; 55; 57; 58; 59; 64; 67; 68; 80; 86
instrument: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
cleavage agent details: Trypsin
label: label free sample
dissociation method: CID