PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Umbilical artery
instruments: LTQ
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Proteomics; Cardiovascular disease; Cytoskeletal proteins; Lc/ms; Human umbilical arteries; Extracellular matrix proteins; Biomechanical analysis; Collagen; Fibronectin; Enzymes; Decellularization

ABSTRACT:
Currently the use of tissue engineered small diameter vascular grafts (d< 6 mm) as substitutes in vascular reconstruction has gained significant attention by the cardiovascular surgeons. Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is among the leading causes of death, worldwide. It is estimated that more than 17 million people have been diagnosed with CVD. As vascular substitutes autologous vessels such as saphenous vein, radial and mammary arteries, are currently used. Although that these vessels are used in an autologous manner, avoiding thrombus formation and immune rejection, suitable grafts can be found in less than 40% of the patients. During the last years, synthetic polymer grafts derived either from Dacron or expanded tetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) have been developed and applied in vascular bypass surgeries. These grafts also have received FDA approval for their use in CVD. As large diameter vascular grafts (d > 6 mm), the synthetic conduits have shown promising results. On the other hand, significant adverse reactions have been reported, when are used as small diameter vascular grafts (SDVGs, d< 6 mm). The most important adverse reaction is the low patency rate that is observed, within the first year of implantation (< 70%). The lack of the endothelium layer makes these grafts susceptible to platelets aggregation and thrombus formation. Also, mismatch compliance could result to intima hyperplasia, activation of Th1/ Th2 response, calcification and overall graft failure. Taking into consideration the above data, alternative sources of SDVGs must be established. In this way, the human umbilical arteries (hUAs) may represent significant candidates for SDVGs development. HUAs, are muscular arteries, responsible for transportation of non-oxygenated blood from the fetus to mother. Their inner diameter is approximately 2-4 mm, while their length can be varied and it is dependent to the length of the human umbilical cord (hUC) . The length of a typical hUC is 30- 60 cm. HUAs can be isolated non-invasively from the hUC, a material which is discarded after the gestation. These muscular arteries are characterized by three distinct layers, tunica intima, media and adventitia, where specific cellular populations such as endothelial cells (ECs) and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are located. Decellularization approach, a tissue engineering method, can be applied in hUAs, in order acellular non-imunogenic SDVGs to be developed. Decellularization approach uses a combination of physical, chemical and enzymatic methods, to remove the cellular populations, while at the same time preserve the extracellular matrix (ECM) and tissue’s ultrastructure. Then, these vascular conduits can be repopulated with recipient’s ECs and VSMCs, in order to be fully compatible and functional. The aim of the current project is mainly focused to the proteomic identification and characterization of hUAs, before and after the application of the decellularization approach. The preservation of the ECM proteins like collagen, fibronectin, laminin in the decellularized hUAs, are of major importance for their key mechanical and functional properties. Until date, only a few studies have performed a broad proteomic approach in decellularized SDVGs such as the hUAs. Also, the proteomic data will be compared with the histological, biochemical and biomechanical analysis results. For this project, the hUAs were isolated from the delivered human umbilical cords to Hellenic Cord Blood Bank (HCBB) of Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens (BRFAA). Human umbilical cords were obtained from end term gestations (38-40 weeks), either with normal or caesarian delivery. Each hUC was accompanied by signed informed consent by the mother before the gestation. The informed consent was in accordance with the Helsinki declaration and fulfilled the ethical standards of the Greek National Ethical Committee. After the isolation of hUAs, the decellularization approach was performed. Specifically, the hUAs were incubated in decellularization buffer 1 (DB1), consisted of 8 mM CHAPS, 1 M NaCl and 25 mM EDTA in PBS 1x, for 12 hours (h) at room temperature (RT). Briefly washes of hUAs for removal of the excess of DB1 with PBS 1x, was performed. Then, the hUAs were placed in DB2, consisted of 1.8 mM SDS, 1 M NaCl and 25 mM EDTA in PBS 1x for another 12 h at RT, followed by briefly washes with PBS 1x. Finally, the hUAs were incubated at 37o C for 12 h in α-Μinimum Essentials Medium (α-ΜΕΜ) with 40% v/v Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), ensuring the complete removal of genetic material remnants. To evaluate the impact of the current decellularization protocol in hUAs, histological analysis, biochemically, biomechanically evaluation and full spectrum proteomic analysis were performed.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic evaluation of decellularized human umbilical artery

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Native (n=5) and decellularized (n=5) hUAs were digested with sample buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTE and 3.6% Protease inhibitors). Bradford assay was performed for the determination of samples concentration. Then, samples were reduced with 10mM DTE for 20 min, RT and buffer exchange was performed in Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter devices (0.5 mL, 30 kDa MWCO; Merck Millipore) at 16,000 rcf for 15 min at room temperature. Each sample was diluted with urea buffer (8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 8.5) and centrifuged. The concentrate was diluted again with urea buffer and centrifugation was repeated. Alkylation of proteins was performed with 0.05M iodoacetamide in urea buffer for 20 min in the dark, RT, followed by a centrifugation at 16,000 rcf for 10 min at RT. Additional series of washes were conducted with urea buffer (2 times) and ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.5, 2 times). Tryptic digestion was performed overnight at RT in the dark, using a trypsin to protein ratio of 1:100. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 16,000 rcf for 10 min, lyophilized and stored at –80°C until further use. LC-MS/MS Analysis All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high resolution nano-ESI Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was reconstituted in 200 μL loading solution composed of 0.1 % v/v formic acid. A 5 μL volume was injected and loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with the ulPickUp Injection mode with the loading pump operating at flow rate 5 μL/min. For the peptide separation the Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Ȧ column retrofitted to a PicoTip emitter was used for multi-step gradient elution. Mobile phase (A) was composed of 0.1 % formic acid and mobile phase (B) was composed of 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were eluted under a 240 minute gradient from 2% (B) to 33% (B). Flow rate was 300 nL/min and column temperature was set at 35 °C. Gaseous phase transition of the separated peptides was achieved with positive ion electrospray ionization applying a voltage of 2.5 kV. For every MS survey scan, the top 10 most abundant multiply charged precursor ions between m/z ratio 300 and 2200 and intensity threshold 500 counts were selected with FT mass resolution of 60,000 and subjected to HCD fragmentation. Tandem mass spectra were acquired with FT resolution of 15,000. Normalized collision energy was set to 33 and already targeted precursors were dynamically excluded for further isolation and activation for 45 sec with 5 ppm mass tolerance.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data processing Raw files were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software package (Thermo Finnigan), using the Sequest search engine and the Uniprot human (Homo sapiens) reviewed database, downloaded on December 15, 2017, including 20,243 entries. The search was performed using carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modifications. Two missed cleavage sites, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) validation was based on q value: target FDR (strict): 0.01, target FDR (relaxed): 0.05.

METHODS:
2. Experimental Section
2.1. Isolation of hUAs from Delivered hUCs
HUAs were isolated from hUCs (n = 10), that were delivered to the Hellenic Cord Blood Bank (HCBB). HUCs were obtained from end term gestations (38–40 weeks), either with normal or caesarian delivery. Each hUC was accompanied by a signed informed consent by the mother before the gestation. The informed consent was in accordance with the Helsinki declaration and fulfilled the ethical standards of the Greek National Ethical Committee. The overall study has been approved by the Bioethics Committee of BRFAA (No. 7580, 11 October 2018). In this study, only hUCs with gestational days above 38 weeks, were used. The hUCs were delivered to HCBB sooner (less than 36 h) after the gestation and the overall storage time until processing did not exceed 24 h. 
Before the isolation of hUAs, the hUCs were washed with a phosphate buffer saline 1× (PBS 1×, Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), to remove excess blood and blood clots. Then, sterilized forceps and scissors were used for the removal of human umbilical vein, and Wharton’s jelly tissue and finally for the isolation of hUAs. The intact hUAs (n = 10, l = 5 cm) were used for the next series of experiments. HUAs with entrapped clots in the vessel lumen were excluded, due to possible damage of the vascular wall. Then, each hUA was cut into two parts of equal length. One part served as a native hUA, whereas the other (of the same hUA) was submitted to decellularization. Moreover, the infant’s gender, weight, and gestation days were also recorded in this study. 
2.2. Decellularization of hUAs 
HUAs (n = 10, length = 2 cm) upon isolation from hUCs, were submitted to decellularization according to a previous described protocol from our lab with some modifications. Initially, the hUAs were incubated in a decellularization buffer 1 (DB1), which consisted of 8 mM CHAPS, 1 M NaCl, and 25 mM EDTA in PBS 1× (Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), for 12 h (h) at room temperature (RT). Briefly washing of hUAs for the removal of the excess of DB1 with PBS 1×, was performed. Then, the hUAs were placed in DB2, consisting of 1.8 mM SDS, 1 M NaCl, and 25 mM EDTA in PBS 1× (Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) for another 12 h at RT, followed by briefly washing with PBS 1× (Gibco). Finally, the hUAs were incubated at 37 °C for 12 h in a α-Minimum Essentials Medium (α-ΜΕΜ, Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) with 40% v/v Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, Gibco, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), ensuring the complete removal of genetic material remnants. All incubation steps were performed under continuous agitation.
2.3. Histological Analysis
Histological analysis of hUAs was performed for the evaluation of the decellularization process. Native (n = 10) and decellularized (n = 10) hUAs, were fixed overnight with 10% v/v neutral buffered formalin (Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), dehydrated, paraffin embedded, and sectioned at 5 μm. For the histological analysis, Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E, Sigma-Aldrich), Sirius Red (SR, pH = 2, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and Orcein (OS, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) stains were performed for the evaluation of cellular and nuclear materials, collagen and elastin, respectively. Images were acquired with a Leica DM L2 light microscope (Leica microsystems, Weltzar, Germany) and processed with Image J v. 1.46r (Wane Rasband, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
2.4. Immunofluorescence of hUAs
Further histological analysis, the indirect immunofluorescence of hUAs against collagen I and fibronectin were involved. Slides of native and decellulized hUAs were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and blocked. The sections were incubated with monoclonal antibodies against collagen I (1:2000, Sigma-Aldrich) and fibronectin (1:200, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), followed by incubation with FITC-conjugated mouse IgG (1:80). In addition, the DAPI stain (Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), was added to all samples. Finally, the sections were dehydrated and glycerol mounted. Images were acquired with a Leica SP5 II coupled with LAS Suite v. 2 software (Leica microsystems, Weltzar, Germany).
2.5. Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis was also performed in native (n = 3, l = 0.5 cm) and decellularized (n = 3, l = 0.5 cm) hUAs. Segments of native and decellularized hUAs were fixed with a 1% v/v glutaraldehyde solution (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min, followed by briefly washing with distilled water. Then, the samples were dehydrated in 70, 80, and 95% v/v aqueous ethanol and absolute ethanol with 20 min exchanges. The segments of hUAs were incubated for 10 min with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and sputter coated with gold (Cressington Sputter, Coater 108 auto, Watford, United Kingdom). Finally, the samples were examined with a Phillips XL-30 SEM (Phillips, FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA).
2.6. Biochemical Analysis of hUAs
Collagen, sGAGs, and DNA quantification was performed in native (n = 10, l = 1 cm) and decellularized (n = 10, l = 1 cm) hUAs. 
Specifically, the collagen content was estimated based on the quantification of hydroxyproline. For this purpose, the Hydroxyproline Assay kit (MAK008, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was applied, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For sGAG quantification, all samples were initially digested with a papain buffer (125 μg/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) at 60 °C for no more than 12 h. Then, dimethylene blue (DMB, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) was added to the digests, followed by a photometrically measurement at 525 nm. The estimation of sGAG concentration in each sample was performed through interpolation to a standard curve. Chondroitin sulfate in a concentration of 12, 25, 50, 100, and 150 μg/mL was used as a standard for the development of the standard curve.
The DNA content was quantified in native (n = 10, l = 1 cm) and decellularized (n = 10, l = 1 cm) hUAs samples. Briefly, the samples were digested in a lysis buffer (0.1 mol Tris, 0.2 mol NaCl, 5 mmol NaCl, and 25 mg/mL Proteinase K, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The incubation time was 12 h at 55 °C with mild agitation, followed by inactivation of Proteinase K at 65 °C for 5 min. The DNA was ethanol cleaned and photometrically measured with Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 260 to 280 nm.
2.7. Specimen Preparation for Biomechanical Analysis and Geometrical Evaluation
A ring-like (~1-mm width) and a strip-like sample (~5-mm long) were kept for qualitative histological observations. The left-over arterial segment was kept for biomechanical studies, during which it was stored in a Krebs-Ringer solution at 4 °C and slowly warmed to 37 °C before testing. At that time, the vessel was cut into a ring and a strip sample along the circumferential and longitudinal direction, respectively. These were placed inside a Petri dish containing a Krebs-Ringer solution at 37 °C, and their frontal and lateral aspects were photographed with a color digital camera (Leica DFC500; Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) coupled to a stereomicroscope (Nikon SMZ800; Nikon Instruments Europe BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). The inner and outer circumference, thickness, cross-sectional area, and width of the ring sample, as well as the length, thickness, and width of the strip sample were measured from the pictures in their unloaded state with the Image-Pro Plus software (v. 4.5, Media Cybernetics Inc, Bethesda, MD, USA). Thickness and width measurements were automatically conducted at a hundred equidistant locations along the circumference of rings and the length of strips, and then by taking the average. 
2.8. Uniaxial Tension: Setup and Methods
The experimental device (Vitrodyne V1000 Universal Tester; Liveco Inc, Burlington, VT, USA) consisted of (a) a stationary lower grip and an upper grip attached to the actuator, gradually extending the samples that were vertically mounted in the grips; (b) a load cell (GSO-250; Transducer Techniques, Temecula, CA, USA) with 0.01-g accuracy for the evaluation of load; (c) a rotary encoder providing feedback on the vertical displacement of the upper sample grip with 10-μm accuracy; (d) a saline bath wherein the samples were submerged during testing to sustain normal tissue hydration; (e) a heater coil (1130A, PolyScience, Niles, IL, USA) regulating the temperature of the saline bath at 37 °C; and (f) an accompanying personal computer, interfaced with the controller of the device via the Material Witness software package (v. 2.02, Liveco Inc, Burlington, VT, USA), to store the data. Hook-shaped grips were used for mounting the ring samples and parallel plate grips for the strip samples. Small pieces of non-slip paper were attached to the inner surfaces of the parallel plate grips, thereby providing sufficient friction to avoid sample slippage. The unloaded length of the samples was obtained by adjusting vertically the upper grip to record only their weight and certified by the absence of sample folding. The samples were submitted to a progressively increasing tensile load at a 10-μm/s rate until full rupture of the wall, as in previous studies from our group. Unlike the rings, the majority of strips exhibited multiple ruptures. Only data up to the first rupture were evaluated and presented. Synchronized output from the load cell and the rotary encoder was transmitted to the accompanying computer with a 50-Hz sampling frequency. Tissue properties in both directions were examined to determine direction-dependent differences.
2.9. Biomechanical Data Processing
Stretch was calculated as the ratio of sample length at each load to the unloaded length and strain as stretch minus one. Stress was calculated by dividing the product of the load and stretch by their unloaded cross-sectional area, assuming tissue incompressibility. The stress-strain data were regressed with 9th-order polynomials, affording correlation coefficients r > 0.95, and the elastic modulus (tangent) at each strain level was calculated as the first derivative of stress over strain. Failure stress, representing tissue strength, and failure strain, representing extensibility, were calculated as the maximum stress and strain values at the first rupture. Peak elastic modulus, representing maximum tissue stiffness, was calculated as the highest elastic modulus value before the first rupture. All calculations were semi-automatically performed using a routine programmed in Mathematica (v. 9.0, Wolfram Research Inc, Boston, MA, USA). 
2.10. HUAs Preparation for Proteomic Analysis
Native (n = 5) and decellularized (n = 5) hUAs were digested with a sample buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 1% DTE, and 3.6% Protease inhibitors. Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The Bradford assay was performed for the determination of samples concentration. A sample reduction with 10 mM DTE for 20 min at room temperature (RT), was performed. The next step involved the addition of the buffer exchange to the samples, followed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min. This step was performed in Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter devices (0.5 mL, 30 kDa MWCO; Merck Millipore). The addition of an urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in all samples was followed. Protein alkylation was performed with 0.05 M iodoacetamide in an urea buffer for 20 min at RT. Briefly washing with an urea buffer (two times) and an ammonium bicarbonate buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.5, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) in all samples was performed. Finally, trypsinization of proteins (trypsin ratio 1:100, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min, and lyophilization were performed.
2.11. LC-MS/MS of hUAS
The proteomic analysis of all samples was performed using LC/MS on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high resolution nano-ESI Orbitrap-Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). A loading solution of 0.1% v/v formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) was used for the reconstitution of the samples. The samples were loaded on the Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm C18, 5 μm, 100 Ȧ trapping column with the ulPickUp Injection mode with the loading pump operating at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. In order for the peptides of the samples to be separated the Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Ȧ column retrofitted to a PicoTip emitter was used. The mobile phases A and B were composed of 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) and 100% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), 0.1% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany), respectively. Then, the elution of peptides for 240 min from 2% to 33% was performed. The flow rate and the temperature of the column were 300 nl/min and 35 °C, respectively. Positive ion electrospray ionization was applied in order to achieve the gaseous exchange transition of the peptides. Top 10 precursor ions between m/z ratio 300 and 2200, intensity threshold 500 counts, and FT mass resolution of 60,000, were subjected in a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Tandem mass spectra were finally acquired. Normalized collision energy was set to 33 and the precursor ions were excluded for final activation (45 s, 5 ppm mass tolerance).
2.12. Protein Identification
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Finnigan) coupled with the Sequest search engine and Uniprot database (Homo sapiens) was used for the analysis of the raw files. Peptide identification was performed taking into consideration the following parameters. (1) Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as static and dynamic modifications. (2) Two missed cleavage sites, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed. In addition, the q-value (target False Discovery rate FDR-strict: 0.01, target FDR-relaxed: 0.05) was applied for the FDR validation.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD020187 (Appendix A). The classification of the identified proteins was performed using the Panther classification system (). Furthermore, key specific protein associations were obtained, using the STRING v11 protein database. The proteins COL3A1 (P12111), COL1A2 (P12110), and FN1 (PO2751) were subjected to the STRING v11 database to map the canonical pathways and protein networks.
2.13. Statistical Analysis
Microcal Origin (v. 9.0; OriginLab® Corp., Northampton, MA, USA) was used for the statistical analysis of the current study. Collagen, sGAG, and DNA quantification data were compared using the Mann-Whitney test. Statistical significance was considered when the p-value was less than 0.05. Indicated values were the mean ± standard deviation. The unpaired Student’s t-test was used for comparisons of the biomechanical parameters between decellularized and native arteries, while comparisons between directions were assessed with the paired t-test. The Pearson correlation coefficient r was used for identifying associations of the biomechanical parameters with gestational age, infant’s weight, and arterial caliber, i.e., wall thickness and diameter. The effect of infant’s gender on the biomechanical properties was assessed with the unpaired t-test. 

RESULTS:
3. Results
3.1. Histological Evaluation of hUAs
HUAs were effectively decellularized with the use of the proposed protocol, as has been indicated by histological analysis. No cellular or nuclear materials were evident in decellularized hUAs stained with H&E stain (Figure 1). Moreover, key ECM components such as collagen and elastin were retained after the decellularization according to SR and OS (Figure 1). Specifically, collagen fibers are distributed in the vascular wall of hUAs in a specific orientation. In tunica intima and media the collagen fibers are mostly circumferentially aligned, whereas in tunica adventitia, the collagen fibers are characterized by a combination of longitudinal and circumferential alignment (Figure 2). In addition, this specific orientation of collagen fibers was preserved in decellularized hUAs (Figure 2). On the other hand, hUAs were characterized by a few circumferentially oriented elastin fibers, localized mostly to tunica intima. Tunica media contains a few elastin fibers, whereas no elastin fibers were observed in tunica adventitia. Elastin fibers with the same orientation were preserved in decellularized hUAs, according to the OS results (Figure 2).
Indirect immunofluorescence analysis indicated the presence of collagen type I and fibronectin in the vascular wall of the vessels, which were successfully preserved after the decellularization process (Figure 3, Figures S1 and S2). No DAPI stain was evident in decellularized hUAs, suggesting the successful removal of cellular and nuclear materials (Figures S1 and S2). Moreover, SEM images revealed the distribution of cellular populations to the entire native hUAs (Figure 3). Decellularized hUAs were characterized by the elimination of these cellular populations, while the ECM was preserved intact (Figure 3). Indirect immunofluorescense and SEM images, further confirm the initial histological analysis, indicating the successful decellularization of hUAs. 
3.2. Biochemical Analysis and DNA Quantification
Biochemical analysis of the hUAs involved the quantification of total hydroxyproline content (which corresponds to the collagen content) and sGAGs content. The hydroxyproline content was decreased in decellularized hUAs (110 ± 24 μg hydroxyproline/mg dry tissue weight) compared to native hUAs (119 ± 27 μg hydroxyproline/mg dry tissue weight), but this decrease was not statistically significant (p < 0.05, Figure 4). On the other hand, a statistically significant difference was observed in the sGAGs content between native and decellularized vessels (p < 0.01). Specifically, the sGAGs content before the decellularization was 6 ± 1 μg sGAG/mg dry tissue weight, and after the decellularization was 2 ± 1 μg sGAG/dry tissue weight (Figure 4). The DNA content appeared to significantly decrease in decellularized hUAs. The DNA amount of native and decellularized hUAs was 1577 ± 158 and 33 ± 5 ng DNA/mg dry tissue weight, respectively (Figure 4).
3.3. Biomechanical Analysis of hUAs
The stress-strain behavior of hUAs was determined with the performance of uniaxial biomechanical testing. For this purpose, native and decellularized hUAs were tested both in a longitudinal and circumferential direction (Figure 5). 
Specifically, in a longitudinal direction the maximum stress (σ), peak elastic modulus, and maximum strain for native and decellularized vessels were 755 ± 393 and 1373 ± 566 kPa, 3458 ± 1601 and 3867 ± 1141 kPa, 1.4 ± 0.1 and 1.7 ± 0.2 kPa, respectively (Figure 6). Accordingly, in circumferential direction the maximum stress (σ), peak elastic modulus, and maximum strain for native and decellularized vessels were 1102 ± 426 and 1480 ± 388 kPa, 3781 ± 1476 and 5153 ± 1368 kPa, 2.1 ± 0.3 and 2.7 ± 0.6 kPa, respectively (Figure 6). Statistically significant differences in longitudinal direction between native and decellularized hUAs were observed only in maximum stress (p < 0.013) and strain (p < 0.001). On the other hand, all parameters tested for circumferential direction exhibited statistically significant differences (p < 0.05) between the two study groups. In both artery types, greater parameter values were found circumferentially than longitudinally. Figure 6 shows the relationships between the failure parameters and wall thickness, noting that similar relationships were acquired when considering associations with the diameter. All parameters were inversely related to thickness, with the correlation coefficients being moderate to strong and significant in several occasions. At each thickness level, the failure stress and failure strain values of decellularized arteries were higher than those of native arteries in either direction, and the same was evidenced in regards to the peak elastic modulus yet only circumferentially, providing further validation to the bar charts shown in Figure 6. Non-significant and weak were the associations found between the failure parameters and the gestational age and infant’s weight, and the infant’s gender had a non-significant effect (Figure 6 and Figure S3).
3.4. Proteomic Evaluation of hUAs
Proteomic analysis of hUAs was conducted in order to further evaluate the efficacy of the current decellularization protocol. For this purpose, LC/MS was performed in hUAs before and after the application of the decellularization method. In total, 1109 ± 20 and 801± 68 proteins were identified in native and decellularized hUAs, respectively. Representative data with the 50 most abundant identified proteins in both samples are presented in Table 1 and Table 2. Detailed description and the total number of identified proteins are provided as supplementary material (Tables S1–S10). Among them, ECM, cytoskeletal, structural, and enzymes were identified both in native and decellularized hUAs. Based on the Panther online tool, molecular function classification of the identified proteins of native and decel hUAs, was performed. Specifically, the classification involved proteins with (1) translation regulator activity, (2) transcription regulator activity, (3) molecular transducer activity, (4) binding, (5) structural molecule activity, (6) molecular function regulator, (7) catalytic activity, and (8) transporter activity, as shown in Table 3.
Based on the STRING database analysis, interactions between ECM proteins (preserved in decellularized hUAs) including collagen alpha-3 (VI) chain, fibronectin, collagen alpha-2 (VI) chain, and laminin subunit alpha-1 with cell adhesion molecules such as α1β1, α2β1, α5β1, and α5β8, were shown (Figure S4). These molecules are expressed in a wide variety of cellular populations, such as ECs and VSMCs, indicating further their possible adhesion to the produced acellular matrix, upon repopulation.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Modern cardiovascular surgery requires the use of suitable vascular grafts for bypass operations. Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the leading causes of death worldwide. CVD is a group of disorders, including peripheral arterial disease, coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, and rheumatic heart disease. In most of these cases, bypass grafting with the use of small diameter vascular grafts, holds a promising solution. It is estimated that more than 17.9 million people are suffering from CVD. Additionally, each year more than 500,000 bypass surgeries are performed. From an economical point of view, CVD costs annually more than 210 billion euros to the European Union (EU) and more than 300 billion dollars to the USA, indicating that better therapeutic approaches must be established. Vascular applications, such as hemodialysis treatment and femoral popliteal bypass, also require vessel conduits for their performance. 
In cardiovascular reconstruction, the use of autologous vessels, such as saphenous vein, mammary and radial arteries may be used as a potential source of vascular grafts. These vessels are fully compatible with the recipient, and are characterized by in vivo remodeling properties and antithrombogenic surface. However, only 40% of patients with CVD have suitable autologous vessels, which can be applied in cardiovascular surgeries. Furthermore, when a second vascular replacement is required in the patient, the finding of a secondary suitable autologous vessel is quite a demanding task. In addition, the differences in mechanical properties between vessels (arteries and vein), can result in compliance mismatch, leading to aneurism formation, vessel occlusion, and rejection.
Currently, the gold standard conduits for CVD applications are the FDA approved vascular grafts derived either from Dacron or ePTFE. Moreover, ePTFE based vascular grafts are used in the above and below the knee bypass surgeries, such as femoro-popliteal bypass. Indeed, these synthetic grafts have extensively been applied as substitutes for damaged large diameter vessels (d > 6 mm), maintaining approximately 80% of patency rate after 5-years of implantation. In the case of small diameter vascular grafts replacement (d< 6 mm), the use of synthetic grafts is limited. Significant adverse reactions such as Th1/Th2 response, intima hyperplasia (due to differences in mechanical properties), and thrombotic complications have been reported, decreasing significantly their implantation lifetime. Moreover, the patency rate of ePTFE based vascular grafts, when applied as coronary artery substitutes, is below 60% within the first year of implantation and 32% within the second year. On the other hand, when the saphenous vein is used for the same vascular reconstruction, it is characterized by 95% and 90% patency rates within the first and second year of implantation, respectively. In regards to below the knee bypass surgeries, ePTFE based vascular grafts also exhibited low patency rates (39% within the second year of implantation). To overcome these issues, a new surgical operation is required, in order to avoid life threating manifestations. In the last decade, a great effort is performed by the research society to develop suitable vascular grafts including cellularized synthetic grafts, hybrid grafts, and natural polymer derived grafts, to improve further the patency rates. Additionally, the use of xenogeneic vascular grafts in cardiovascular operations, has been also proposed. However, animal-derived grafts are bearing a-gal epitopes, which can induce hypersensitivity reaction to the recipient, leading to calcification and graft failure. 
In the context of vascular engineering, the human umbilical arteries (hUAs) could be used as an alternative source for the production of small diameter vascular grafts. The human umbilical cord (hUC) contains one vein and two arteries. The hUAs are responsible for the transportation of approximately 40 liters of non-oxygenated blood from the fetus to the mother. In addition, their inner diameter is less than 3 mm and their average length (l) could be ranged between 50–60 cm. HUAs are characterized by three distinct layers, tunica intima, media, and adventitia. Endothelial cells (ECs), vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), and perivascular cells (PCs) are located in the tunica intima, media, and adventitia of hUAs, respectively, contributing to various vessels functions. ECs and VSMCs are responsible for vasoconstriction and vasodilation, through eNOs activation, cyclic GMP accumulation, and phosphorylation of protein kinase A (PKA). Moreover, ECs of tunica intima are forming the endothelium layer, a formation with antithrombogenic properties.
HUAs can be isolated non-invasively from the hUC after the gestation, and then can be submitted to decellularization, in order to eliminate the donor’s cellular populations. The decellularization process can remove the cellular populations of a tissue or organ, while preserving the extracellular matrix (ECM). Moreover, decellularization is a tissue engineering method, which involves physical, chemical, enzymatical methods or a combination of those, to achieve an optimum result. The preservation of the tissue’s or organ’s ECM is of major importance for ensuring the proper function of the decellularized end product.
Until today, several research groups have used the hUC and its byproducts in several tissue engineering approaches, such as wound healing applications, immunomodulation, bone and cartilage repair. In the past, the use of a human umbilical vein in peripheral bypass surgeries, was also evaluated, but due to significant drawbacks such as difficulties in handling, lack of elasticity, increased fragility, and poor patency rates, soon its application was stopped. Additionally, the development of tissue-engineered vascular grafts from decellularized hUAs, have also been proposed. However, in most of these studies, time consuming decellularization protocols, which can last over a week, have been applied to hUAs. These laborious protocols may induce significant alterations to the mechanical properties and protein profile of vessels. This in turn, could result in reduced cell adhesion, during the repopulation process, leading to an impaired function. It is known that the loss of the proper folding of arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD)-binding motifs due to the destruction of a tertiary structure of collagen and fibronectin, can lead to impaired EC adhesion. An ideal scaffold, should retain its initial properties (three-dimensional structure, biochemical and biomechanical properties) and efficiently can be repopulated with the desired cellular populations, in order to repair or replace damaged tissues and organs. In the literature, several methods have been described for obtaining specific cellular populations such as ECs and VSMCs, derived either from tissue biopsy, stem cell differentiation, and utilization of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)-technology. However, prolonged decellularization periods or low recellularization efficacy could lead to innate immunity activation, initiation of calcification, and rejection, which could be proved as life-threating for the patients. 
In order to assess the potential of hUAs as an alternative source of small diameter vascular grafts, an extended biomechanical and proteomic evaluation, should be performed. In this study, we introduced a rapid decellularization protocol based on modifications of a previously described protocol from our lab, for the production of tissue engineered vascular grafts derived from hUAs. Furthermore, histological and biochemical analysis were performed in decellularized vessels. The evaluation of the mechanical properties of the produced vascular grafts involved the uniaxial testing in circumferential and longitudinal directions. To identify the preserved proteins after the decellularization approach, liquid chromatography (LC) combined with tandem mass spectrometry (MS) was used. The results of this study provide insights on the biomechanical behavior and proteomic profile of the decellularized hUAs, which could serve as small diameter vascular grafts.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
Supplementary materials can be found at .