PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Macrophage; Monocyte
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: SRM/MRM; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Macrophage; Thermal proximity coaggregation; Interferon-beta; Human cytomegalovirus; Herpes simplex virus-1; Interferon-gamma; Adenovirus; Parallel reaction monitoring; Monocyte; Interferon-stimulated gene; Gingival keratinocyte

ABSTRACT:
The cornerstone of mammalian intrinsic and innate immune defense against pathogens is the production of interferons (IFN), cytokines that stimulate anti-pathogen signaling pathways through the simultaneous expression of hundreds of interferon-stimulated genes (ISG). We compared the effects of IFN classes on the cellular proteome and relative restriction of virus progeny production across multiple physiologically relevant cell types and viruses. We integrated global proteome analyses with targeted mass spectrometry (MS), thermal proximity coaggregation-MS (TPCA-MS), and molecular virology assays to determine how ISGs differentially contribute to host antiviral capacities between immune-modulatory cell types. In differentiated macrophage-like monocytic cells, we classified sets of both shared and distinct ISG proteins responsive to each IFN class. We orthogonally confirmed the relative protein alterations using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) by developing a proteotypic peptide library for ISG markers induced by each IFN class. Additional comparison to stimulation with pro-inflammatory LPS helped to contextualize the observed IFN signatures. We further assessed ISG protein interactions upon IFN types I and II stimulation, observing maintenance of key ISG protein complexes across treatments. Subsequent comparison of macrophage-like monocytic cells to primary keratinocytes enabled us to identify relative ISG abundances, cytokine induction, and antiviral capacities of both cell types across infections with several ubiquitous human viruses. Infections with herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), adenovirus (AdV), and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) revealed cell type-dependent differences in virus progeny production.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Differential contributions of interferon classes to driving host inflammatory responses and restricting virus progeny production

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
In biological triplicate for the whole proteome analysis and biological duplicate for the TPCA analysis, IFN-treated cells were collected and lysed by resuspension in 5% SDS and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.5. For whole proteome analysis, samples were trypsinized and prepared for MS analysis using S-Trap micro spin columns (Protifi). Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled online to an EASYSpray ion source and a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Peptides (1.5 μg on column) were separated using an EASYSpray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 µm x 50 cm) via a 150 min linear gradient of 3 to 30% solvent B over 80 min, followed by an increase from 30 to 40% solvent B over 70 min at a 250 nL/min flow rate. MS1 scans were acquired at a 120,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3e6, a maximum inject time (MIT) of 30 ms, and a scan range of 350 to 1800 m/z recorded in profile. The top 20 precursors were selected for fragmentation and MS2 scans were acquired at 15,000 resolution, an AGC target of 1e5, an MIT of 25 ms, an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, a fixed first mass of 100.0 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 28. Peptide match was set to preferred with a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. For TPCA analysis, IFN-stimulated cells were collected and subjected to heat denaturation with a thermal cycler, each placed at one temperature along a gradient ranging from 37°C to 64°C. Upon lysis, protein extraction by methanol-chloroform, trypsinization, peptides were labeled using 11-plex isobaric labeling TMT reagent. Quantitative mixtures were dried down in a speed-vac, resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and separated into eight fractions using basic reverse phase fractionation. All samples were analyzed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled online to an EASYSpray ion source and a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Test mixtures were resolved using a linear gradient of 6 to 18% solvent B over 60 min, then 18 to 29% solvent B over 30 min at a 250 nL/min flow rate. Full scan MS1 was set at a resolution of 120,000, an AGC of 3e6, an MIT of 30 ms, and a scan range of 350 to 1800 m/z. MS2 scans were set to acquire the top 20 most intense precursor ions, a resolution of 45,000, an AGC of 1e5, an MIT of 72 ms, an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, a fixed first mass of 100.0 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 34. Dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s. Quantitative mixtures were resolved similarly, with the following exceptions: the linear gradient of 6 – 18% solvent B was performed over 80 min, and an isolation window of 0.8 m/z.

DATA PROCESSING:
For the whole proteome analysis, RAW files were analyzed through Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) wherein spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database (downloaded January 2021) appended with common contaminants. Using the SEQUEST HT algorithm, the search parameters required tryptic peptides with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 4 ppm, and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Permitted peptide modifications included static carbamidomethylation on cysteine, dynamic oxidation of methionine, dynamic deamidation on asparagine, dynamic phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine, as well as dynamic loss of methionine and acetylation on the N-termini of proteins. Matched spectra were scored by Percolator and PTMs were localized using ptmRS. For the TPCA analysis, RAW files were analyzed through Proteome Discoverer v2.4, as described for the DDA whole proteome analysis. The spectral recalibration node was used for offline recalibration of mass accuracy. Database search parameters included fully tryptic peptides, ≤ 2 missed cleavages, and static carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT labeling of the N terminus and lysine (dynamic for the test mixture searches and static for the quantitative mixture searches). Further dynamic modifications included oxidation of methionine, deamination of asparagine, as well as methionine loss and acetylation of NH2-termini. Precursor mass tolerance was placed at 4 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Percolator was used to calculate the false discovery rate (used at 1%). Under the reporter ion quantifier node, integration tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the integration method was placed as the most confident centroid. The co-isolation threshold was set to 30 and the average reporter signal:noise threshold was set to eight. Modified peptides containing deamidated asparagine or glutamine, phosphorylated serine, threonine, or tyrosine, or oxidized methionine were excluded from the quantification analysis.