PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Lc-msms; Cpk3; Snc1-tir

ABSTRACT:
Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain proteins are immune signaling components and function as NAD+-cleaving enzymes to activate defense responses. Activation of TIRs represses growth and drives cell death in plants and promotes axon degeneration in animals, but how plant TIRs are repressed remains unclear. Here, we show that TIR NADase activity requires a conserved serine residue spatially close to the catalytic glutamate. The plant Ca2+-dependent protein kinases (CPKs), the mammalian Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II delta (CAMK2D) and TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1) phosphorylate TIR domains at this conserved serine, which blocks TIR NADase activities and functions and thus maintains growth in plants and suppresses SARM1 TIR signaling in animals, respectively. Our findings define a fundamental molecular mechanism by which phosphorylation at a conserved serine residue blocks TIR signaling to balance growth and defense trade-offs.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
CPK3 phosphorylates SNC1-TIR LC-MSMS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For in vitro phosphorylation assays, recombinant GST-CPK3 was incubated with GST-SNC1TIR  in reaction buffer containing 25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.25 mM DTT at 30℃for 1 h.

DATA PROCESSING:
The spectra of the full MS scan and DIA scan were recorded in profile and centroid type, respectively, and then the DIA MS data were analyzed using Spectronaut 18 (Biognosys AG, Switzerland).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain proteins are immune signalling components and function as NAD<sup>+</sup>-cleaving enzymes to activate defence responses. In plants, TIR activation triggers cell death and severely represses growth, especially under osmotic stress, while in animals, it promotes axon degeneration. However, the mechanisms regulating TIR suppression remain unclear. Here we show that TIR NADase activity requires a conserved serine residue spatially close to the catalytic glutamate. The osmotic-stress-activated plant Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent protein kinases (CPKs), the mammalian Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II delta (CAMK2D) and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) phosphorylate TIR domains at this conserved serine, which blocks TIR NADase activities and functions, thereby maintaining growth in plants and suppressing SARM1 TIR signalling in animals. Our findings define a fundamental molecular mechanism by which phosphorylation at a conserved serine residue inhibits TIR signalling in plants and animals and sustains plant growth.