PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Kidney
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Pcmt1; Tgf-β1-smad pathway; Isoaspartyl residues; Tgfbr2; Extracellular matrix; Renal fibrosis

ABSTRACT:
Protein L-isoaspartyl/D-aspartyl Methyltransferase (PCMT1) plays a pivotal role in repairing a spontaneous post-translational modification (PTM) of L-isoaspartyl residues resulted from asparagine deamidation or aspartate isomerization. This PTM is particularly important for extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins because their low turnover rate and are susceptible to factors that could accelerate such modification. Therefore, it becomes imperative to comprehensively investigate the impact of PCMT1 on ECM homeostasis and its associated pathological alterations. In this study, we revealed that secreted PCMT1 repairs the isoaspartyl residues of the TGFBR2 protein on the cell membrane to suppress TGF-β1/Smad pathway. Through this novel PTM regulation, PCMT1 played essential roles in combating renal fibrosis, as lack of PCMT1 worsened tubular injury, collagen deposition, myofibroblast activation, and macrophage infiltration in total kidney and tubular contexts in a mouse model of chronic kidney disease. Moreover, PCMT1 level decreased in fibrotic kidney tissues and inversely related to kidney function in mice and in humans. Our study highlights the important function of PCMT1 in modifying proteins in the extracellular space and identified a novel role of PCMT1 in regulating TGF-β1 pathway in renal fibrosis. This study holds the potential of innovative therapeutic avenue for the mitigation of renal fibrosis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Repairing of isoaspartyl residues by PCMT1 alleviates renal fibrosis through the repression of TGF-β1/TGFBR2/Smad signaling pathway

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
TMT (Tandem Mass Tag)-labeled LC-MS was used to detect the differentially protein between pcmt1+/+ and pcmt1-/- mice. Briefly, the pre-cardiac perfused kidneys (pcmt1+/+ and pcmt1-/-) ware homogenized in RIPA cell lysis (Radio immunoprecipitation assay, 50 mM Tris pH 7.6, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Sodiumdeoxycholate and 0.1% SDS). The centrifuged protein supernatants were reduced by 1M DTT (Dithiothreitol, Roche, 10197777001), alkylated by IAM (Iodoacetamide, Sigma, I6125). Then the sample was precipitated using Methanol–Chloroform methods. The protein sediment was resolved by NaOH and adjusted the pH to 7.5 by adding 100 mM TEAB (Tetraethyl-ammonium bromide, Sigma, T7408) for the further tryptic digestion. Then the peptides were labeled with TMT126 ~ TMT131 (Thermo, 90061). Equal labeled samples were mixed together, fractionate, cleaned-up and finally performed on LC-MS/MS analysis. The samples were then pre-processed and injected into an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY-nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatograph Instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Bioinformatics and statistical analyses of the original mass spectrometric data were performed using Peaks Studio based on the UniProt database. Raw mass spectroscopy data was analyzed using PEAKS Studio version 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada) with 7 ppm MS and 0.05 Da MS/MS tolerances applied.