PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Testis
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human; Noa; Itraq; Testicular biopsies

ABSTRACT:
We collected testes biopsies from NOA (severe spermatogenic defects, no spermatids or sperm) and OA (normal spermatogenesis, tubular lumen obstruction) patients for iTRAQ proteomics analyses, to screen the genes for which the altered expression is involved in spermatogenic defects

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human testicular biopsies iTRAQ proteomics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Frozen testes were grinded by liquid nitrogen and then lysed in 500 μl of SDS lysis buffer (Add 1× PMSF before use) containing 7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 20 mM Tris base and 0.2% SDS. Then the samples were sonicated and centrifuged to collect the supernatant. Protein concentration was estimated by the Bradford method. Then, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) at 37 °C at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme-to-substrate) overnight. Each sample was labeled separately with two of the eight available tags (OA: 114 and 116 tags; NOA: 117 and 119 tags) (Applied Biosystems, Sciex).. All labeled peptides were pooled together. The Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, USA) equipped with a 2.00-mm-inner diameter *100-mm-long Gemini-NX 3u C18110Acolumns (Phenomenex, USA) was used for High-pH fractionation.

DATA PROCESSING:
The iTRAQ-tagged peptides fractionation was performed using a linear binary gradient from 15 to 50% B (20 mM HCOONH 4, 2 M NaOH, 80% ACN) (pH 10) at 0.2 ml/min for more than 45 min. The fraction was resuspended in loading buffer (0.1% FA,2% ACN) and separated with an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system equipped with a C18 reverse phase column (100-μm inner diameter, 10-cm long, 3-μm resin from MichromBioresources, Auburn, CA). Then, the LC eluent was subject to Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher) in an information dependent acquisition mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 400-1250 m/z in high resolution mode (> 30,000) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution > 15,000) with rolling collision energy on and iTRAQ reagent collision energy adjustment on.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Mammalian spermatozoa are highly polarized cells characterized by compartmentalized cellular structures and energy metabolism. Adenylate kinase (AK), which interconverts two ADP molecules into stoichiometric amounts of ATP and AMP, plays a critical role in buffering adenine nucleotides throughout the tail to support flagellar motility. Yet the role of the major AK isoform, AK1, is still not well characterized. Here, by using a proteomic analysis of testis biopsy samples, we found that AK1 levels were significantly decreased in nonobstructive azoospermia patients. This result was further verified by immunohistochemical staining of AK1 on a tissue microarray. AK1 was found to be expressed in post-meiotic round and elongated spermatids in mouse testis and subsequent mature sperm in the epididymis. We then generated Ak1 knockout mice, which showed that AK1 deficiency did not induce any defects in testis development, spermatogenesis, or sperm morphology and motility under physiological conditions. We further investigated detergent-modeled epididymal sperm and included individual or mixed adenine nucleotides to mimic energy stress. When only ADP was available, Ak1 disruption largely compromised sperm motility, manifested as a smaller beating amplitude and higher beating frequency, which resulted in less effective forward swimming. The energy restriction/recover experiments with intact sperm further addressed this finding. Besides, decreased AK activity was observed in sperm of a male fertility disorder mouse model induced by cadmium chloride. These results cumulatively demonstrate that AK1 was dispensable for testis development, spermatogenesis, or sperm motility under physiological conditions, but was required for sperm to maintain a constant adenylate energy charge to support sperm motility under conditions of energy stress.