PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Thermo Fisher Scientific instrument model
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human; Cerebrospinal fluid; Hydrogen-deuterium exchange; Limited proteolysis; Apolipoprotein; Plasma; Extracellular chaperone; Rational mutagenesis

ABSTRACT:
The conserved human secreted glycoprotein Clusterin (aka Apolipoprotein-J, ApoJ) is an abundant component of body fluids such as blood plasma and cerebrospinal fluid.  Clusterin is thought to function as an extracellular molecular chaperone stabilizing misfolded proteins in solution.  In addition, Clusterin forms lipoprotein complexes and fractions with HDL particles in plasma. Variants of the Clusterin gene constitute the third most important genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease.  To better understand its structure and functions, the crystal structure of a mutant form of Clusterin was determined.  In order to validate the structural data, hydrogen-deuterium exchange kinetics followed by pepsin proteolysis and mass spectrometry analysis of recombinant mutant and wildtype protein were performed (Part 1 of the deposited data). Based on the structure, rational mutants were designed and subjected to functional tests such as chaperone activity, cellular uptake and receptor binding and lipoprotein complex formation.  In order to probe the conformation of Clusterin in the lipoprotein complex, free and lipid-bound protein were subjected to limited proteolysis with chymotrypsin and the resultant fragments analyzed by LC/MS proteomics (Part 2 of the deposited data).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Structural analysis of human Clusterin/ApoJ, part 2

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Part 2: 
Limited proteolysis with chymotrypsin – Free human WT-Clu or TL4 mutant (R227Q) or their respective Clu–DMPC lipoprotein complex preparations at 10 µM Clu content were incubated with a series of bovine chymotrypsin (Merck) concentrations (0, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 nM) in TBS buffer containing 1 mM CaCl2 for 30 min at 25 °C. The protease reactions were stopped on ice by addition of PMSF (final concentration 10 mM), followed by SDS-PAGE and native PAGE analysis. Selective bands were excised and the protein content recovered, digested with trypsin and analyzed by mass spectrometry. 
Sample preparation for proteomics – The gel pieces were thoroughly washed multiple times with 150 µl of a destaining buffer (containing 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% ethanol) and then dehydrated with 150 µl of pure ethanol. After ethanol removal, the gel pieces were dried using vacuum centrifugation. Then, 50 µl of a digestion buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, 10% acetonitrile, 10 ng µl–1 trypsin) was added. The mixture was cooled on ice for 20 min, followed by the addition of 50 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The gel pieces were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The peptides in the supernatant were collected, and additional peptides were extracted by repeated incubation at 25 °C in 100 µl of an extraction buffer (3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 30% acetonitrile), followed by centrifugation and collection of the supernatants. Finally, the gel pieces were dehydrated by incubation at 25 °C in 100 µl of pure acetonitrile, and the supernatant was combined with those from the previous steps. Acetonitrile was removed by vacuum centrifugation, and 70 µl of a solution containing 2 M Tris-HCl, 10 mM TCEP, and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) was added. After a 30 min incubation at 37 °C, the peptides were acidified to 1% TFA. 
LC-MS/MS data acquisition – Desalted peptides were separated on a 30 cm column (75 µm inner diameter) packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-µm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 300 nl min–1 using a Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 system at 60 °C. Peptides were directly introduced into the Exploris 480 mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray interface. The LC-MS gradient used buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid): buffer B was increased from 5% to 30% over 30 min, then to 65% in 5 min, and finally to 95% over the next 5 min, maintaining 95% for an additional 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1650 m/z (resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200). Up to 15 top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 28. MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z 200). AGC targets for MS and MS2 scans were set to 3E6 and 1E5, with maximum injection times of 25 ms and 28 ms, respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Part 2: 
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 2.2.0.0){Cox, 2008 #240} with standard settings applied. Briefly, the peak list was searched against the UniProt sequences of human proteins (SwissProt and TrEMBL) with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was set as the protease, and the digestion mode was set to "semi-specific".