PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Bone marrow; Mast cell
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Tnf; Inflammation; Regnase; Mast cells; Rna-binding proteins; Proliferation

ABSTRACT:
Post-transcriptional regulation of immune-related transcripts by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) impacts immune cell responses, including mast cell functionality. Despite their importance in immune regulation, the functional role of most RBPs remains to be understood. By manipulating the expression of specific RBPs in murine mast cells, coupled with mass spectrometry and transcriptomic analyses, we found that the Regnase family of proteins acts as a potent regulator of mast cell physiology. Specifically, Regnase-1 is required to maintain basic cell proliferation and survival, while both Regnase-1 and -3 cooperatively regulate the expression of inflammatory transcripts upon activation, with Tnf being a primary target in both human and mouse cells. Further, Regnase-3 directly interacts with Regnase-1 in mast cells and is necessary to restrain Regnase-1 expression through the destabilization of its transcript. Overall, our study identifies protein interactors of endogenously expressed Regnase factors, characterizes the regulatory interplay between Regnase family members in mast cells, and establishes their role in the control of mast cell homeostasis and inflammatory responses.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Crosstalk between the RNA-binding proteins Regnase-1 and -3 shapes mast cell survival and cytokine expression

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
On-bead digestion of immunoprecipitated proteins was performed as follows. Beads were resuspended in 8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Proteins were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 60 minutes at 37°C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Digestion was carried out in 8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 2 hours at 37°C with 1 µg of Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Chemicals), after which the digestion buffer was diluted to final 2M urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) was added for overnight digestion at 37°C. All steps were performed in agitation to avoid beads precipitation. Digestion was stopped by adding acetonitrile to 2% and trifluoroacetic acid to 0.3% and the beads were collected with DynaMag-2 Magnet (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Digested peptides were purified by loading the supernatant into C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007), and eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. Finally, the elution buffer was evaporated by vacuum centrifugation and purified peptides were resolved in 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for single-shot LC-MS/MS measurements.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software v.1.6.7.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptides and proteins were identified with a 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) by employing the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) to search spectra against the Mouse UniProt database (July 2019) and a common contaminants database (247 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as “Trypsin/P” with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and minimum length of 7 amino acids. N‐ terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Match between runs was enabled to transfer identifications across samples based on mass and normalized retention times, with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Label‐free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) with a minimum required peptide ratio count of 1. Data analysis was performed using the Perseus software v.1.6.2.3 (Tyanova et al., 2016). Data were pre-processed by removing proteins only identified by site, reverse hits, and potential contaminants. After log2 transformation of LFQ intensities, biological replicates of each experimental condition were grouped and proteins were filtered for a minimum of 3 valid values in at least one group. Missing data points were then replaced by imputation from a normal distribution with 0.3 width and 1.8 downshift, and a two-sided two-samples t-test (0.05 FDR, 250 randomizations) was used to identify significant changes of protein intensity between each immunoprecipitation experiment and its corresponding isotype control.