PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Astn2; Purkinje cell; Neurodevelopmental disorder; Cerebellum; Autism spectrum disorder

ABSTRACT:
Astrotactin 2 (ASTN2) is a transmembrane neuronal protein highly expressed in the cerebellum that functions in receptor trafficking and modulates cerebellar Purkinje cell (PC) synaptic activity. Individuals with ASTN2 mutations exhibit neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), ADHD, learning difficulties and language delay. To provide a genetic model for the role of the cerebellum in ASD-related behaviors and study the role of ASTN2 in cerebellar circuit function, we generated global and PC-specific conditional Astn2 knockout (KO and cKO, respectively) mouse lines. Astn2 KO mice exhibited strong ASD-related behavioral phenotypes, including a marked decrease in separation-induced pup ultrasonic vocalization calls, hyperactivity, and repetitive behaviors, altered behavior in the three-chamber test, and impaired cerebellar-dependent eyeblink conditioning. Hyperactivity and repetitive behaviors were also prominent in Astn2 cKO animals but they did not show altered behavior in the three-chamber test. By Golgi staining, Astn2 KO PCs had region-specific changes in dendritic spine density and filopodia numbers. Proteomic analysis of Astn2 KO cerebellum revealed a marked upregulation of ASTN2 family member, ASTN1, a neuron-glial adhesion protein. Immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy demonstrated a significant increase in Bergmann glia volume in the molecular layer of Astn2 KO animals. Electrophysiological experiments indicated a reduced frequency of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs), as well as increased amplitudes of both spontaneous EPSCs and inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) in the Astn2 KO animals, suggesting that pre- and postsynaptic components of synaptic transmission were altered. Thus, ASTN2 regulates ASD-like behaviors and cerebellar circuit properties.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mice lacking Astn2 have ASD-like behaviors and altered cerebellar circuit properties

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
P21 cerebella were lysed using lysis buffer (50mM PBS, pH 7.4, 150mM sodium chloride, 0.5 %  sodium  deoxycholate, 1%  NP-40,  and 1X protease  inhibitor  cocktail). Proteins were  dissolved in 8M urea, 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Reduction and alkylation of  cysteines were carried out using dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA). Proteins were  extracted using chloroform/water/methanol extraction and pellets were dissolved in 100mM  TEAB containing endoproteinase Lys-C (Fujifilm-Wako).  Digestion was carried out overnight at room  temperature followed by the addition sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and further digesting for 6 hours  at 37°C.  Peptides were labeled with TMTpro mass tag (Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer  specifications. The labeling efficiency was evaluated by pooling aliquots from all channels,  storing the remaining material at -80°C meanwhile. Upon verification of labeling efficiency and  stoichiometry, reactions were quenched using hydroxylamine and samples were pooled. Pooled  peptides were fractionated using a high-pH spin column (Fisher Scientific) into 8 fractions. The fractions were  analyzed by LC-MSMS using an Easy nLC1200 equipped with a 250mm*75µm Easyspray C18  column (Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated across a 120-minute gradient and analyzed by an orbitrap  Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer operating in FT positive-ion mode. Fragmentation was done in  an MS2-data-dependent fashion and recorded in FT-mode. Spectra were queried against the Mus musculus proteome at  1% FDR as well as quantitated, using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5. Data analysis was performed within the Perseus computational environment.

DATA PROCESSING:
Spectra were queried against the Mus musculus proteome at  1% FDR as well as quantitated, using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.5. Data analysis was performed within the Perseus computational environment.