PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Heart failure; Cardiac remodelling; Fibroblast; Foxm1

ABSTRACT:
Aims: Cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) play a crucial role in cardiac remodelling, which is a common cause of heart failure (HF). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition remain largely unknown. Foxm1 is well known in various cardiopulmonary pathologies. However, Foxm1-driven CF activation in the progression of cardiac remodelling to HF remains to be investigated. Methods: Changes in Foxm1 expression were assessed in samples from patients with HF and mice with transverse aortic constriction (TAC)-induced cardiac remodelling. Pharmacologic antagonist FDI-6 was used to explore the effects of Foxm1 inhibition on post-TAC outcomes. Tcf21-Cre and PostnMCM were used to evaluate Foxm1 loss- and gain-of-function in CFs and myofibroblasts, respectively. Cardiac function and remodelling were examined by echocardiography and histological analysis. Foxm1 downstream target genes were identified by mass spectrometry (MS) and transcriptomic analysis. Post-translational regulation was evaluated by in vitro chromatin immunoprecipitation, co-immunoprecipitation, and ubiquitination assays. Pharmacological inhibition of Usp10 or knockout of p38γ in vivo verified the signalling pathway by which Foxm1 regulated cardiac remodelling. Results: Foxm1 was upregulated in human HF samples as well as in the mouse cardiac remodelling model. CFs were the primary cell type responsible for Foxm1 upregulation. Foxm1 pharmacological inhibition or genetic knockout in CFs or myofibroblasts significantly attenuated TAC-induced cardiac remodelling and HF. Conversely, conditional overexpression of Foxm1 in CFs or myofibroblasts resulted in more severe pathological cardiac remodelling and dysfunction. Combined RNA-sequencing and MS analysis revealed that Foxm1 promoted Usp10 expression by binding to its promoter. Usp10 interacted with p38γ, resulting in p38γ deubiquitination and thus inﬂuencing the downstream p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling pathway. Pharmacological inhibition of Usp10 or genetic knockout of p38γ ameliorated the exacerbated TAC-induced cardiac remodelling in mice with myofibroblast-specific Foxm1 overexpression. Conclusion: Our findings reveal an essential role of Foxm1 in CF activation during cardiac remodelling. These results suggest that targeting the Foxm1/Usp10/p38γ MAPK axis may represent a new potential therapeutic strategy against pathological cardiac remodelling and HF.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cardiac Fibroblast Foxm1 Deficiency Prevents Pressure Overload-Induced Cardiac Remodeling via the Usp10/p38γ MAPK Axis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The cultured cells for DIA analysis was denatured by 2% SDS buffer containing 50mM DTT for 20min RT and then boiled at 100oC for 5min. The protein sample was alkylated for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark by addition of a final concentration of 200mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Then, add five times volume of pre-cooled acetone, and precipitate the proteins overnight in the refrigerator at -20℃. Finally, the protein precipitates were resolved and digested by sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) at a protein-to-enzyme of 50:1 at 37oC overnight. Tryptic peptides were collected by centrifuge for 20 minutes at 14,000g at 20°C. The tryptic peptides were treated with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and were purified using the C18 Ziptips, eluted with 0.1% TFA in 50~70% acetonitrile. The eluted peptides were lyophilized using a SpeedVac (ThermoSavant), and resuspended in 1% formic acid 5% acetonitrile. The iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were spiked into the sample prior to analysis according to manufacturer instructions. The pooled digests were further fractionated using high pH reversed phase chromatography for building each spectral library. The pooled digests were lyophilized using a SpeedVac (ThermoSavant), and resuspended in 5% ACN in 0.05M ammonium format. the digested peptides were fractionated using high pH reversed phase separation on a Dionex UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States) with a 2.1*150 mm Ethylene Bridged Hybrid (BEH) C18 3um column (waters) at 40°C with 0.2 ml/min flow and a 60min ACN gradient (5~30%) in 5 mM ammonium format (pH 10). Fractions were collected at 1 min intervals and pooled at various intervals to 12 fractions. Then the samples were dried and resuspended in 1% formic acid 5% acetonitrile. The DDA analysis is to generate spectral library. DDA analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Easy-nLC 1200 via an Easy Spray (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides mixture was loaded onto a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column with integrated spray tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) (75μm x 40cm length) packed with ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-AQ 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated within a 120 minutes linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid / 2% acetonitrile / 98% water) to 28% solvent B (0.1% formic acid / 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250nl/min at 50°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and employed in the data-dependent mode within the specialized cycle time (3S) to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. One full MS scan from 350 to 1500 m/z was acquired at high resolution R=120,000 (defined at m/z=400); MS/MS scans were performed at a resolution of 30,000 with an isolation window of 4 Da and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with collision energy of 30% +/- 5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30s. All the raw data including depleted and undepleted sample with each fraction were analyzed to generate spectral library using the Pulsar search engine (only available in Spectronaut Pulsar).

DATA PROCESSING:
The DDA raw data were searched against the mouse Uniprot fasta database (53,099 entries, downloaded on November 04, 2018) within the default parameters. In brief, the digestion enzyme was allowed for specific trypsin enzyme with 2 missed specialized cleavages, and Carbamidomethyl of cysteine specified as a fixed modification and Oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. iRTs were calculated derived from median iRTs across all DDA runs. Fragment ions for the targeted data analysis were selected from 300-1800m/z, minimal relative intensity was set to >5% and fragment ion number >3. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for protein and peptide spectrum matches. Protein inference was performed using the ID Picker algorithm integrated within the spectronaut software. To best resolve the DIA data based on the spectral library of the DDA data, the DIA MS/MS acquisition should be performed with the same LC-MS systems and the same LC linear gradient method as DDA. For MS/MS acquisition, DIA method was set 50 variable isolation windows according to the FWTH (Full width at half maximum), and the specific windows lists were constructed based on the respective DDA data of the pooled sample. The full scan was set at a resolution of 1200,000 over m/z range of 350 to 1500; followed by DIA scans with resolution 30,000; CE: 30% +/- 5; AGC target: 1e6 and maximal injection time: 54ms. The DIA raw files were analyzed in Spectronaut X (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). The default settings were used for targeted analysis of DIA data in Spectronaut. In brief, retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT and correction factor for window 1. Interference correction on MS2 level was enabled. Systematic variance was normalized by local normalization strategy. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with the mProphet approach and set to 1% at peptide precursor level and at 1% at protein level. The protein intensity was summed by the intensity of their respective peptides which was calculated by the peak areas of their respective fragment ions of MS2. All results were filtered by a Q value cutoff of 0.01 (corresponds to an FDR of 1%).