PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture; Early embryonic cell; Stem cell
diseases: Mixed disorder as reaction to stress
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; 2-pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic acid (Gln); iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Phosphoproteomics; Neuron; Neural stem cells; Development; Proteomics; Maternal immune activation

ABSTRACT:
To undertake a comprehensive examination of the molecular mechanisms governing the alterations induced by maternal immune activation (MIA) during gestation that impacts the subsequent neurodevelopment of progeny, we have devised an in vitro model based on neural stem cells (NSCs) sourced from fetuses carried by animals subjected to Poly I:C treatment. These neural progenitors demonstrate proliferative properties and can be effectively differentiated into both neurons and glial cells. Through transcriptomic, proteomic, and phosphoproteomic analyses conducted on these cellular models, in conjunction with counterparts from control treatments, discernible shifts in the expression levels of a specific subset of proteins implicated in neuronal function were elucidated. Noteworthy is the absence of congruence between these alterations and the transcriptomic findings, suggesting a potential dysregulation at the level of protein translation. Furthermore, a discernible discrepancy in the basal phosphorylation of proteins was observed between differentiated cells from both experimental groups, particularly within proteins associated with cytoskeletal architecture and synaptic functionality, notably those belonging to the MAP family. These observed alterations were found to correlate with changes in neuronal function, particularly with respect to synaptic plasticity and the establishment of neuronal synapses, thereby reaffirming previous assertions regarding the potential impact of MAP2 function modulation via its phosphorylation state on neuronal structure and function.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Maternal Immune Activation imprints translational dysregulation and differential MAP2 phosphorylation in descendant neural stem cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cultured cells on 100 mm dishes were washed with ice-cold PBS supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (1mM Na3VO4 and 1mM NaF). Cells were scrapped and lysed with a Urea buffer (8M urea in 20mM in HEPES, pH 8.0 supplemented with 1mM Na3VO4, 1mM NaF, 1mM Na2H2P2O7 and 1mM sodium β-glycerophosphate) and lysates were then sonicated using a sonicator Vibra-Cells (Sonics Materials) at 20% of intensity, 3 cycles of 10 seconds. Samples were then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 5°C. Supernatant was transferred in 1.5mL Protein Lo-bind tube (Eppendorf). Protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein Assay Kit. For phosphoproteomics analysis, 110 µg of extracted proteins in a volume of 200 ul were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM) for 1 h at 25 °C, and alkylated with Iodoacetamide (IAM, 16.6 mM) for 30 min at 25 °C. Trypsin beads were equilibrated by three washes with 20 mM HEPES; pH 8.0. Then, samples were diluted with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0) to a final concentration of 2 M urea and digested with equilibrated trypsin beads (50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin) overnight at 37 °C. After that, trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation (2000×g for 5 min at 5 °C) and samples were transferred to 96 well plates and acidified by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptide solutions were desalted and subjected to phosphoenrichment using the AssayMAP Bravo (Agilent Technologies) platform. For desalting, protocol peptide clean-up v3.0 was used. Reverse phase S cartridges (Agilent, 5 μL bed volume) were primed with 250 μL 99.9% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1%TFA and equilibrated with 250 μL of 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. The samples were loaded (770 μL) at 20 μL/min, followed by an internal cartridge wash with 250 μL of 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Peptides were then eluted with 105 μL of 1M glycolic acid with 50% ACN, 5% TFA and this is the same buffer for subsequent phosphopeptide enrichment. Following the Phospho Enrichment v 2.1 protocol, phosphopeptides were enriched using 5µl Assay MAP TiO2 cartridges on the Assay MAP Bravo platform. The cartridges were primed with 100µl of 5% ammonia solution with 15% ACN at a flow rate of 300 μL/min and equilibrated with 50 μL loading buffer (1M glycolic acid with 80% ACN, 5% TFA) at 10 μL/min. Samples eluted from the desalting were loaded onto the cartridge at 3 μL/min. The cartridges were washed with 50 μL loading buffer and the phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 25 μL 5% ammonia solution with 15% ACN directly into 25 μL 10% formic acid. Phosphopeptides were lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -80˚C. For proteomics analysis, 30 μg of protein were digested and acidified as described above. Peptide solutions were desalted using the AssayMAP Bravo (Agilent Technologies) platform. Cartridges were primed, equilibrated, loaded and washed as described above and peptides were eluted with 105 μL of 70/30 ACN/ H2O + 0.1% TFA. Eluted peptide solutions were dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and peptide pellets were stored at −80 °C.  LC-MS/MS Analysis: Peptides were re-suspended in 20 µL of reconstitution (97% H2O, 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 50fmol/µl-1 enolase peptide digest) and sonicated for 5 minutes at RT. Following a brief centrifugation, 2μl was loaded onto a LC-MS/MS system. This consisted of a nano flow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano (Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus using an EASY-Spray system. The LC system used mobile phases A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and B (100% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were loaded onto a μ-pre-column and separated in an analytical column. The gradient: 1% B for 5 min, 1% B to 35% B over 90min, following elution the column was washed with 85% B for 7 min, and equilibrated with 3% B for 7min, flow rate of 0.25 µL/min. Peptides were nebulized into the online connected Q-Exactive Plus system operating with a 2.1s duty cycle. Acquisition of full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution was followed by data-dependent acquisition in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200-2,000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A 30s dynamic exclusion period was enabled with an exclusion list with 10ppm mass window. Overall duty cycle generated chromatographic peaks of approximately 30s at the base, which allowed the construction of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) with at least ten data points.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide identification from MS data was automated using a Mascot Daemon (v2.8.0.1) workflow in which Mascot Distiller generated peak list files (MGF) from RAW data, and the Mascot search engine matched the MS/MS data stored in the MGF files to peptides using the SwissProt Database restricted to Mus musculus (SwissProt_2021_02.fasta, 17080 sequences). Searches had an FDR of ~1% and allowed 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met, PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr as variable modifications (phosphorylation was only considered for searches performed in phosphoproteomics data). Pescal was used for label free quantification of the identified peptides (PMID: 17565973). The software constructed XICs for all the peptides identified in at least one of the LC-MS/MS runs across all samples. XIC mass and retention time windows were ±7 ppm and ±2 min, respectively. Quantification of peptides was achieved by measuring the area under the peak of the XICs. Individual peptide intensity values in each sample were normalized to the sum of the intensity values of all the peptides quantified in that sample. Phosphoproteomics and proteomics data was processed and analysed using a bioinformatic pipeline developed in a R environment (https://github.com/CutillasLab/protools2/). The normalised data was centered, log2 scaled and 0 values were inputted using the minimum feature value in the sample minus one.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Drugs
Poly (I:C) (Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid sodium salt, lots #059M4167V and #0000110446) were purchased from Sigma-Merck.
Animals
C57BL/6 J mice were purchased from Charles River (Spain). All the experimental work carried out in this study followed the ethical guidelines from Directive 2020/569/EU of the European Parliament on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes. Animals were housed in a controlled-temperature/humidity environment (22 ± 1 °C, 60–70% relative humidity) in individual cages with a 12 h light/dark cycle and food and water available at libitum. According to the protocol established by the experimental animal unit of the IPBLN-CSIC, mice were allowed to acclimatize to housing room for a minimum of 5 days after their reception in the animal facility.
Maternal immune activation (MIA) experiments
After mouse mating, female pregnancies were determined by visualizing seminal plug (E0.5) and by body weight increase. Poly(I:C) treatment was administered intraperitoneally on day E9.5. Various doses of Poly(I:C) were tested, starting at 20 mg/kg and gradually decreasing to 5 mg/kg due to the elevated animal mortality observed at the highest doses. The experimental control group was treated in parallel by injecting mice with an equivalent volume of saline. Blood samples from treated animals were taken 2.5 h after treatment by mandibular sinus venipuncture in order to test later IL-6 levels in serum. Pregnant females were submitted to cesarean surgery on day E12.5 to facilitate fetal dissection, collecting the pooled fetal tissue as the initial biological material for obtaining neural stem cells (NSC). Three different NSC lines were obtained from each experimental condition, i.e., Poly (I:C) and Saline treatments, coming from independent pregnant mice. Blood samples from females were also taken by cardiac puncture to verify IL-6 levels in serum at this time point. The temperature, weight, and any signs of sickness in pregnant females were monitored throughout the entire process. Additionally, recommendations on experimental practices in MIA experiments, published elsewhere, were followed. IL-6 serum levels were measured using an ELISA kit (88–7064, Invitrogen). The assay was performed following the manufacturer´s instructions and guidelines. Briefly, Nunc MaxiSorpTM flat-bottom 96-well-plates (Thermo Scientific) were coated with anti-mouse IL-6 capture antibody overnight at 4 °C. Plates were washed with PBS + 0.05% Tween20 and incubated with ELISA/ELISPOT Diluent for 1 h to block non-specific binding sites. Plasma samples diluted in ELISA/ELISPOT Diluent were incubated overnight at 4 °C. A standard curve was generated using the IL-6 standard provided. After washing, plates were incubated with biotin-conjugated anti-mouse IL-6 antibody for 1 h, then washed and incubated with Avidin-HRP for 30 min. Plates were washed and finally incubated with Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) Substrate Solution for 15 min. The reaction was stopped with 2 N H2SO4 and the signal was measured on a plate reader at 450 nm.
Cell culture
Adherent neural stem cell (NSC) lines from the mouse forebrain were obtained following the methodology previously described. Briefly, the fetus dorsal forebrain at E12.5 was dissected, and the obtained tissue was disaggregated in order to get a cell suspension. These cells were then transferred to cell-culture plastic plates that had been previously treated with poly-L-lysine 10 μg/mL (Sigma-Merck) to enhance cellular adhesion and promote monolayer cultures. NSCs were maintained and expanded in NS expansion medium composed as follows: DMEM/Ham’s F-12 media with l-glutamine (Gibco), Glucose solution 29 mm (Signa-Merck), MEM nonessential amino acids 1x (Gibco), Penicillin/Streptomycin 1× (Gibco), HEPES buffer solution 4.5 mm (Cytiva), BSA solution 0.012% (Gibco), 2-mercaptoethanol 0.05 mm (Gibco), N2 supplement 1× (Gibco), B27 supplement 1× (Gibco), murine epidermal growth factor (EGF) 10 ng/mL (PeproTech) and human fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2) 10 ng/mL (PeproTech). To induce differentiation of NSCs into various neural cell lineages, the expansion medium was replaced with the following differentiation medium: Neurobasal plus DMEM/Ham’s F-12 media with l-glutamine (1:1) (Gibco), N2 supplement 1× (Gibco), B27 supplement 1× (Gibco), Glutamax 1× (Gibco) and 2-mercaptoethanol 0.05 mm (Gibco). Cells were grown and maintained at 37 °C-5% CO2 under a humidified atmosphere.
Immunocytochemistry
Cells were seeded on glass-coverslips pretreated with poly-L-lysine 50 μg/mL plus laminin 3.3 μg/mL (Sigma-Merck) and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde before immunolabeling. Primary antibodies used were anti-Nestin (1:100) (Abcam, ab254048), anti-Sox2 (1:100) (Abcam, ab97959), anti-MAP2 (1:200) (SIGMA, M3696), anti-β-III tubulin (1:100) (R&D Systems, MAB1195-SP), anti-GFAP (1:100) (Cell Signaling, #3670) and anti-VGLUT2 (1:200) (Abcam, ab79157). Secondary antibodies were anti-mouse IgGAlexaFluor 488 (1:1000) (Abcam, ab150105) and anti-rabbit IgGAlexaFluor 594 (1:1000) (Abcam, ab150076). Fluorescent cell nuclei staining was performed with Hoechst 33342 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer instructions. Fluorescent images of cells were acquired using an Olympus I × 81 epifluorescence inverted microscope or a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope. Image processing was conducted with Image J software.
Dendritogenesis and neuritogenesis analysis
NSCs were seeded into 6-well plates pre-treated with poly-L-lysine 10 μg/mL plus laminin 3.3 μg/mL. After 7 days of differentiation, the complexity of dendritic arborization was assessed in images acquired through phase-contrast microscopy using a 40× objective, considering a population of 10–15 neurons. The Sholl analysis tool, included in ImageJ software, was utilized to estimate dendritic complexity. This analysis involves establishing concentric circles from the center of the neuronal body and counting the number of intersections these circles make with the various dendritic processes emerging from the neuron soma. The resulting data can be graphed, depicting the number of intersections in relation to the distance from the center of the neuron. The maximum number of intersections per neuron obtained from this graph was considered to compare and average the results from different experiments. Neuritogenesis were evaluated quantifying the emerging filopodia/neurite density in images acquired through phase-contrast microscopy using a 63× objective and Leica DMi8 microscope. The number of dendritic filopodia/neurites were quantified in 20 μm segments of dendrites using ImageJ software.
Synaptogenesis
The quantitative evaluation of established synapses among in vitro cultured neurons was conducted using a rabies virus monosynaptic tracing methodology, which involved the utilization of genetically modified rabies viruses pseudotyped to infect a specific set of neurons expressing the appropriate virus receptor. The engineered version of the rabies virus harbors in its genome a gene encoding a fluorescent protein, which replaces the original gene corresponding to the capsid glycoprotein. This modification enables rabies virus particles to be transmitted to presynaptic neurons through neurite terminals in a retrograde manner. The absence of the native capsid glycoprotein gene prevents the further transmission of the virus to subsequent neurons, limiting the infection to a unique presynaptic level. The generation of genetically engineered rabies virus was performed following the protocol previously described. Plasmids pSADdeltaG-F3 (32634), pcDNA-SADB19N (32630), pcDNA-SADB19P (32631), pcDNA-SADB19L (32632), pcDNA-SADB19G (32633) and pBOB-synP-HTB (30195) were acquired from Addgene. The original pSADdeltaG-F3 plasmid was modified by subcloning the encoding sequence of mCherry protein between NheI and SacII restriction sites. HEK 293T-TVA 800, B7GG and BHK-EnvA cell lines were generously provided by Edward Callaway from The Salk Institute for Biological Studies (California, USA). Recombinant lentivirus production was conducted according to standard protocols from Addgene using pBOB-synP-HTB in combination with psPAX2 and pCAG-VSVG as packaging and enveloping helper plasmids respectively. To visualize monosynaptic tracing with rabies virus in cultured neurons, NSCs were seeded in 6-well tissue culture plates pre-treated with poly-L-lysine (10 µg/mL) plus laminin (3.3 µg/mL) at a density of 200,000 cells per well. Once the differentiation process began (day 0), on day 3 cells were infected with the lentivirus to induce neurons to express the TVA receptor along with GFP and rabies capsid glycoprotein. Subsequently, on day 5, cells were infected with the recombinant rabies virus, and finally, on day 7, image acquisition from living cells was performed using a Leica DMI8 epifluorescence microscope with a 10x objective after staining cell nuclei with Hoechst 33342. Cells were illuminated to visualize fluorescent signals corresponding to GFP, mCherry, and Hoechst 33342 emission wavelengths, namely green, red, and blue, respectively. Thus, the blue channel showed the total population of cells within the microscopy field, whereas the green channel corresponded to those cells expressing the TVA receptor and therefore susceptible to infection by the recombinant rabies virus. Finally, the red channel showed those cells infected by the rabies virus. Within this population of cells expressing the mCherry protein, there were cells displaying both GFP and mCherry fluorescent signals, as well as cells emitting only the mCherry signal. These latter cells represent neurons infected by the rabies virus through monosynaptic connections (Supplementary Fig. 4 showing the 3 microscopy fields and pointing out neurons not co-expressing green and red signals). Image analysis to quantify the different cell populations was performed using FIJI software, employing a macro specifically created for this purpose. This macro consisted of Gaussian blur sigma filtering applied prior to image segmentation, which was based on autothresholding of cell nuclei stained with Hoechst 33324 reagent. Several morphological parameters could be adjusted to optimize the segmentation process, such as minimum and maximum cell size, minimum circularity, and thresholds of GFP and mCherry minimum and maximum fluorescence signals. To evaluate the extent of synapses formed among neurons present in the analyzed microscopy field, we considered the ratio between the total number of cells displaying only the mCherry signal and the total number of cells displaying both GFP and mCherry signals simultaneously.
Immunoblotting
Samples were heated at 65 °C for 15 min and subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis using 4–12% bis-Tris gels (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) and MOPS buffer. After electrophoresis, proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes that were incubated in a solution of 5% non-fat milk and 0.1% Tween-20 in Tris-buffered saline at room temperature on a rotating shaker for 2 h to block nonspecific binding sites. Afterwards, membranes were incubated overnight with a rabbit anti-MAP2 polyclonal antibody (1:1000) (SIGMA M3696). Protein antibody interactions were detected using horseradish peroxidise-linked anti-rabbit IgG (1:10,000) (Abcam ab6721). Immunoblots were developed by application of enhanced chemiluminescence solution (ECL, Cytiva). Immunoblots were stripped subsequently and re-blotted with anti-actin antibody (1:5000) (Hypermol, clone262) to assess the amount of loaded protein.
Sample preparation for proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis
Mass spectrometry experiments were performed as described previously with some modifications. Cultured cells on 100 mm dishes were washed with ice-cold PBS supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors (1 mm Na3VO4 and 1 mm NaF). Cells were scrapped and lysed with a Urea buffer (8 M urea in 20 mm in HEPES, pH 8.0 supplemented with 1 mm Na3VO4, 1 mm NaF, 1 mm Na2H2P2O7 and 1 mm sodium β-glycerophosphate) and lysates were then sonicated using a sonicator Vibra-Cells (Sonics Materials) at 20% of intensity, 3 cycles of 10 s. Samples were then centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 5 °C. Supernatant was transferred in 1.5 mL Protein Lo-bind tube (Eppendorf). Protein concentration was determined using BCA Protein Assay Kit. For phosphoproteomics analysis, 110 µg of extracted proteins in a volume of 200 ul were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mm) for 1 h at 25 °C, and alkylated with Iodoacetamide (IAM, 16.6 mm) for 30 min at 25 °C. Trypsin beads were equilibrated by three washes with 20 mm HEPES; pH 8.0. Then, samples were diluted with 20 mm HEPES (pH 8.0) to a final concentration of 2 M urea and digested with equilibrated trypsin beads (50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin) overnight at 37 °C. After that, trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation (2000 × g for 5 min at 5 °C) and samples were transferred to 96 well plates and acidified by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.1%. Peptide solutions were desalted and subjected to phosphoenrichment using the AssayMAP Bravo (Agilent Technologies) platform. For desalting, protocol peptide clean-up v3.0 was used. Reverse phase S cartridges (Agilent, 5 μL bed volume) were primed with 250 μL 99.9% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1%TFA and equilibrated with 250 μL of 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. The samples were loaded (770 μL) at 20 μL/min, followed by an internal cartridge wash with 250 μL of 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. Peptides were then eluted with 105 μL of 1 M glycolic acid with 50% ACN, 5% TFA and this is the same buffer for subsequent phosphopeptide enrichment. Following the Phospho Enrichment v 2.1 protocol, phosphopeptides were enriched using 5 µL Assay MAP TiO2 cartridges on the Assay MAP Bravo platform. The cartridges were primed with 100 µL of 5% ammonia solution with 15% ACN at a flow rate of 300 μL/min and equilibrated with 50 μL loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid with 80% ACN, 5% TFA) at 10 μL/min. Samples eluted from the desalting were loaded onto the cartridge at 3 μL/min. The cartridges were washed with 50 μL loading buffer and the phosphorylated peptides were eluted with 25 μL 5% ammonia solution with 15% ACN directly into 25 μL 10% formic acid. Phosphopeptides were lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator and stored at −80 °C. For proteomics analysis, 30 μg of protein were digested and acidified as described above. Peptide solutions were desalted using the AssayMAP Bravo (Agilent Technologies) platform. Cartridges were primed, equilibrated, loaded and washed as described above and peptides were eluted with 105 μL of 70/30 ACN/ H2O  +  0.1% TFA. Eluted peptide solutions were dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and peptide pellets were stored at −80 °C.
LC-MS/MS analysis
Peptides were re-suspended in 20 µL of reconstitution (97% H2O, 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA, 50 fmol/µL-1 enolase peptide digest) and sonicated for 5 min at RT. Following a brief centrifugation, 2 μL was loaded onto a LC-MS/MS system. This consisted of a nano flow ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano (Dionex) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus using an EASY-Spray system. The LC system used mobile phases A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and B (100% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were loaded onto a μ-pre-column and separated in an analytical column. The gradient: 1% B for 5 min, 1% B to 35% B over 90 min, following elution the column was washed with 85% B for 7 min, and equilibrated with 3% B for 7 min, flow rate of 0.25 µL/min. Peptides were nebulized into the online connected Q-Exactive Plus system operating with a 2.1 s duty cycle. Acquisition of full scan survey spectra (m/z 375–1500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution was followed by data-dependent acquisition in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200–2000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A 30 s dynamic exclusion period was enabled with an exclusion list with 10ppm mass window. Overall duty cycle generated chromatographic peaks of approximately 30 s at the base, which allowed the construction of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) with at least ten data points.
Peptide and protein identification and quantification
Peptide identification from MS data was automated using a Mascot Daemon (v2.8.0.1) workflow in which Mascot Distiller generated peak list files (MGF) from RAW data, and the Mascot search engine matched the MS/MS data stored in the MGF files to peptides using the SwissProt Database restricted to Mus musculus (SwissProt_2021_02.fasta, 17080 sequences). Searches had an FDR of ~1% and allowed 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met, PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr as variable modifications (phosphorylation was only considered for searches performed in phosphoproteomics data). Pescal was used for label free quantification of the identified peptides. The software constructed XICs for all the peptides identified in at least one of the LC-MS/MS runs across all samples. XIC mass and retention time windows were ±7 ppm and ±2 min, respectively. Quantification of peptides was achieved by measuring the area under the peak of the XICs. Individual peptide intensity values in each sample were normalized to the sum of the intensity values of all the peptides quantified in that sample. Phosphoproteomics and proteomics data was processed and analysed using a bioinformatic pipeline developed in a R environment (https://github.com/CutillasLab/protools2/). The normalised data was centered, log2 scaled and 0 values were inputted using the minimum feature value in the sample minus one. Then, p-values to assess statistical differences between comparisons were calculated using LIMMA, and then adjusted for FDR using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Differences were considered statistically significant when p-values < 0.05 and FDR < 0.25.
Sequencing and data processing of transcriptomic data
NSCs were plated in 100 mm culture dishes and washed with ice-cold PBS. Cellular pellets from either non-differentiated NSCs or cells differentiated for 7 days were collected and processed for transcriptomics approaches. Both, library preparation and Illumina sequencing were carried out at the IPBLN Genomics Facility (CSIC, Granada, Spain). Total RNA integrity was verified by Bioanalyzer RNA 6000 Nano chip electrophoresis (Agilent Technologies). Every RNA sample showed a RIN value above 8.5. RNA-seq libraries were prepared using Illumina stranded mRNA Prep Ligation kit (Illumina®) from 200 ng of input total RNA. Quality and size distribution of PCR-enriched libraries were validated through Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA assay and concentration was measured on the Qubit® fluorometer (Thermo). Final libraries were pooled, in an equimolecular manner, and then diluted and denatured as recommended by Illumina NextSeq® 500 library preparation guide. The 72 × 2 nt paired-end sequencing was conducted on a NextSeq® 500 sequencer with a final output of 48 Gbp and a quality score (Q30) of 88.5%. miARma-Seq pipeline was used to analyse transcriptomic samples. Firstly, raw data were evaluated using FastQC software to analyze the quality of the reads (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc). Subsequently, after sample filtering, we obtained a mean of 49% in GC content and an average of 23,636,605 reads per sample. No adapter accumulation and bad quality reads (q < 30) were found. Afterwards, the number of reads per sample were homogenized using Seqtk software (https://github.com/lh3/seqtk). In the second step, miARma-Seq aligns all sequences using STAR, resulting in a 93.28% of properly aligned reads. With this aim, we use the Mus musculus Gencode version M31 genome-build: mmGRCm39 was used. After that, featureCounts software was used to assign sequence reads to genes by using reference gene annotation that was obtained from Gencode from the same assembly and genome build. Expression analysis was carried out by edgeR package. Low expressed genes were removed, and remaining genes were normalized by the trimmed mean of M-values (TMM) method. The normalized gene expression (TMM) was log2 scaled and then, statistical differences between comparisons were calculated using LIMMA, and then adjusted for FDR using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Differences were considered statistically significant when p-values <0.05 and FDR < 0.25.
Statistics
Statistical analysis was carried out in Excel or in R (v4.3.1) using base functions or the ggpubr package (https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=ggpubr). When not specified, statistical differences were evaluated using unpaired T-Student test. Gene Ontology analysis of genes/proteins differentially expressed or phosphorylated was performed using the clusterProfiler package (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/clusterProfiler.html). Data was visualized using the ggplot2 package (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ggplot2/index.html).

RESULTS:
Results
Generation of neural stem cell lines from fetuses carried by mice exposed to MIA treatment
Neural stem cells (NSCs) were obtained from fetuses at E12.5 to establish adherent proliferative cell lines. Pregnant females were treated either with Poly(I:C) or saline three days before, corresponding to E9.5. This timing aligns with gestation day 9, a critical point when MIA treatment has been shown to induce significant behavioral alterations in the offspring. Of note, due to the high mortality rate observed when treating animals with the Poly(I:C) dose described previously (i.e., 20 mg/kg i.p.), we had to gradually reduce the dose and test different Poly(I:C) batches until reaching 5 mg/kg i.p. Because late behavioral analysis of offspring was not feasible in this experimental protocol as a phenotypic indicator of MIA during pregnancy, we assessed maternal levels of IL-6 in serum 2.5 h post-injection and significant fluctuations in body temperature as reliable indicators of MIA leading to disease-like phenotypes in the descendants. Supplementary Fig. 1A summarizes the protocol indicating the time points when body temperature and blood samples were taken, from the moment of the Poly(I:C) injection to the cesarean surgery. Substantial changes were observed in three of the four surviving animals treated with Poly(I:C) affecting both phenotypical parameters. Specifically, there was a considerable hypothermia 2.5 h post-injection (Supplementary Fig. 1B) accompanied by a robust increase of IL-6 concentration in serum to some 10,000 pg/mL (Supplementary Fig. 1C). Both body temperature and IL-6 levels in serum returned to levels similar to the saline group three days after Poly(I:C) administration. The animal that did not respond to immune activation elicited by Poly (I:C) treatment, along with its corresponding saline control, was excluded from the experimental group. Fetal forebrain tissue dissected from each of these pregnant females was pooled to generate three independent neural stem cell lines. A similar procedure was followed with animals treated with saline, serving as the experimental control group. Adherent cell lines obtained from both experimental groups proliferated after subsequent passages and expressed markers associated with pluripotency such as Sox-2 and Nestin (Supplementary Fig. 2). Next, we determined the cell culture conditions to prompt the differentiation of NSCs into distinct neural lineages, specifically neurons and glia. This was achieved by replacing the expansion growth medium with differentiation medium. Under these experimental conditions, NSCs underwent phenotypic transformation over time, resulting in cells that could be morphologically identified as neurons and astrocytes (Supplementary Fig. 3). The differentiation process was distinctly observable through phase-contrast microscopy after 4–5 days. Additional immunocytochemistry experiments were conducted to identify neuronal and glial cells using specific markers such as antibodies recognizing β-III tubulin and GFAP respectively (Fig. 1). Furthermore, in the case of neurons, they showed a preferential immunopositivity for VGLUT2, thereby indicating their glutamatergic neurochemical nature (Fig. 1). No differences were observed between the two experimental groups, i.e., NSCs obtained from Poly (I:C) treatments versus Saline, in terms of differentiation into neurons and glial cells, as well as regarding labeling with immunocytochemistry markers. We thus stablished a robust protocol for the generation of NSCs.
Transcriptomics and proteomics analysis from Poly I:C and Saline NSCs
To characterise our NSCs models molecularly, cells from Poly (I:C) and Saline groups were cultured and differentiated for 7 days and then subjected to transcriptomics and proteomics analysis. Non-differentiated NSCs were also subjected to the same analysis in parallel. The analysis of transcriptomic data showed that the differentiation of Saline NSCs modified the expression of 4409 genes (2990 increased and 1419 decreased, Fig. 2A left volcano plot). The differentiation of Poly (I:C) NSCs also significantly modified the expression of 5877 genes (3530 increased and 2347 decreased, Fig. 2A right volcano plot). The analysis of protein expression from proteomics data showed that differentiation of Saline NSCs significantly increased the expression of 389 proteins and decreased the expression of 569 proteins (Fig. 2B); whereas the differentiation of Poly (I:C) NSCs increased and decreased the expression of 336 and 649 proteins, respectively (Fig. 2B). We next performed Gene Ontology analysis for the significant genes and proteins modified in each group. These data showed that the differentiation of NSCs into neurons and glial cells significantly reduced the expression of genes associated with cell division and translation processes, and it increased the expression of genes related with cilium processes and axoneme assembly (Fig. 2C), as expected. All the significant Gene Ontology terms identified in both groups are indicated in Supplementary Table 1A, B. As observed for transcriptomic analysis, Gene Ontology analysis from proteomics data also showed that the differentiation process of both types of NSCs decreased the expression of proteins related with RNA processes (Fig. 2D, Supplementary Table 1C, D). In addition, we also observed an increase in the expression of proteins related with cytoskeleton organization and actin-based processes (Fig. 2D). To further evaluate the differentiation process of NSCs in both groups, we analysed common markers of stem cells and neuronal markers for differentiated neurons and glia. As stem cell markers we evaluated the expression levels of protein Ki-67 (Mki67), DNA replication licensing factor MCM2 (Mcm2), the RNA-binding protein Musashi-2 (Msi2), Nestin (Nes) and the transcription factor Sox2. For neuronal and glial markers, we evaluated the expression of the Neuronal migration protein doublecortin (Dcx), Cadherin-2 (Cdh2), the Kinesin light chain 1 (Klc1), Protein S100–B (S100b), the SNARE-associated protein SNAPIN (Snapin), the Excitatory amino acid transporter 1 (Slc1a3), Synapse-associated protein 1 (Syap1) and Synaptopodin-2 (Synpo2) (Fig. 2E, F). As expected, the differentiation of NSCs decreased the expression of stem cell markers and increased the expression of neuronal/glial markers in transcriptomics and proteomics analysis (Fig. 2E, F). After confirming that differentiation of NSCs induced changes in both type of cell lines, we evaluated the presence of differences between Saline and Poly (I:C) before and after the differentiation process. Interestingly, the analysis of transcriptomics data showed that no significant changes were present when analysing Poly (I:C) NSCs compared to Saline NSCs (Fig. 3A). In the case of differentiated NSCs, only one gene was significantly reduced in Poly (I:C) compared to Saline (Fig. 3A), Gasdermin-D (Gsdmd), involved in the response to pathogens. In agreement with transcriptomics analysis, the analysis of protein expression levels also revealed no significant differences between NSCs from Poly (I:C) and Saline groups (Fig. 3B). Unexpectedly, in contrast to transcriptomics data, differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs presented altered expression levels of 69 proteins compared to differentiated Saline NSCs (Fig. 3B). These proteins only showed significant changes at protein level, but not at transcript levels as shown in Supplementary Fig. 5. However, we also wanted to evaluate whether this discrepancy between transcriptomic and proteomic data was caused by the statistical method used and the effect of different number of identifications across the techniques. Thus, we calculated the ratio of significant entries across transcriptomics, proteomics and phosphoproteomic using unadjusted p-values from Limma only (Supplementary Fig. 6). The ratio of hits affected by the neuronal differentiation process was similar (~30%) in transcriptomic and proteomic (comparisons comp1 and 2) data. However, when comparing Poly (I:C) differentiated cells versus differentiated Saline cells, Poly (I:C) affected 1% of transcripts and 9% of proteins (Supplementary Fig. 6). This showed that q-value correction did have not an impact on the higher ratio of proteomics hits caused by Poly (I:C) in differentiated cells when compared to transcript hits. Of note, when comparing differentiated versus non differentiated cells our transcriptomics analysis was able to capture some differences detected in the proteomic data like Acp6, Hdac1, Irf2bp or Msh2, suggesting that our data integration was able to capture changes at protein level caused by changes in mRNA expression. In addition, we analysed the protein expression of different glial and neuronal markers in our proteomic data to confirm that the differences observed at protein level were not caused by different ratio of glia and neuron cells across the samples. The analysis of glial and neuronal markers showed equal protein abundance across the samples (Supplementary Fig. 7). For example, we observed similar protein levels of the beta III isoform of tubulin (Tubb3), Map2 and Gfap across the differentiated samples (Supplementary Fig. 7). Thus, the differences observed were not caused by a different proportion of glia and neuron cells between the proteomics samples.
We found 47 proteins significantly downregulated and 22 significantly upregulated in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs compared to differentiated Saline NSCs (Fig. 3B, C). In addition, we observed a distinct pattern of protein expression between the Saline and Poly (I:C) groups; specifically, while protein expression decreased or increased as a consequence of the differentiation of Saline NSCs, this trend was not observed in Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 3C, D). For example, this disparity can be observed in the case of Anapc1 expression, i. e., it decreased upon differentiation of Saline NSCs, whereas this effect was not observed in Poly (I:C) NSCs. In other cases, this decrease was higher after the differentiation of Poly (I:C) NSCs in comparison to differentiated Saline NSCs (e.g. Gatad2b, Fig. 3C, D). Also, an opposite pattern could be observed when analysing proteins which levels were increased after the process of differentiation in Saline NSCs (Fig. 3C), that is, the differentiation of Poly (I:C) NSCs did not show significant increase in their expression. An illustration of this circumstance is Histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1), which is involved in neuronal differentiation; it was only significantly increased after the differentiation of Saline NSCs (Fig. 3C, D). Similarly, we observed this trend in the protein levels of the neuronal SNARE-binding protein Snapin, important for endocytic trafficking in neurons; the differentiation of Poly (I:C) NSCs did not increase Snapin expression as occurred for the Saline group (Fig. 3D). A comparable pattern can be observed in other proteins as observed in Fig. 3C, D.
Differential phosphorylation pattern in differentiated Poly I:C derived NSCs
The results presented in previous sections showed that Poly (I:C) NSCs present differences in protein expression compared to Saline NSCs, only when these cells are differentiated into neurons and glial cells. Furthermore, the differential protein pattern expression occurs in proteins related to neuronal functions, protein transport or proteins involved in differentiation. To evaluate if Poly (I:C) induces changes in signalling pathway activation driven by phosphorylation and identify further differences between both types of NSCs, we performed phosphoproteomics approaches in differentiated cells from Poly (I:C) and Saline NSCs. The analysis of the basal phosphorylation levels revealed a different phosphorylation pattern between differentiated Poly (I:C) and Saline NSCs (Fig. 4A). We found 746 phosphopeptides with increased phosphorylation and 222 phosphopeptides with decreased phosphorylation levels in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs compared to differentiated Saline NSCs (Fig. 4A). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the phosphoproteomics data showed that significant phosphopeptides with increased phosphorylation are mostly related to cytoskeleton organization, cellular component organization and biogenesis, as observed in the top significant terms with higher number of counts (Fig. 4B, Supplementary Table 2A). No significant GO terms were found for proteins with decreased phosphorylation. Additionally, the GO analysis for Cellular Component terms showed that the most significant and populated terms are related with structures associated with synapse function, such as post-synaptic density or synapse, axon and dendrites (Fig. 4C, Supplementary Table 2B). In this case we observed peptides with decreased and increased phosphorylation corresponding to those terms, but most populated in the case of increased phosphorylation. To expand the evaluation of the proteins identified in both GO analyses, we categorized the GO terms into groups related to axons, cytoskeleton, dendrites, neuron projections, and post-synapses (Fig. 4D). We found that in most of the cases there was higher number of phosphopeptides with increased phosphorylation in comparison to decreased phosphorylation, specifically in cytoskeleton, dendrite and post-synapse terms (Fig. 4D). Of note, we found that proteins involved in GTPases signalling (RhoA, Ras, Cdc42 and Rac1) presented different levels of phosphorylation when comparing differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs to differentiated Saline NSCs. For example, PAK2 downstream of CDC42 and RAC1, showed higher phosphorylation on S197 in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 4E). In addition, cortactin (CTTN) also displayed altered phosphorylation on S407 and Y421 in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 4E). Catenin Delta-1 (Ctnnd1, also known as Cadherin-associated Src substrate (CAS) or p120 catenin) also presented higher phosphorylation on S920 in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 4E). Proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Src, also displayed higher phosphorylation on S21 in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 4E). Drebrin (Dbn1), involved in cytoskeleton dynamics also showed increased phosphorylation levels on S651 in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 4E). Other examples of differential phosphorylation between both groups are shown in Fig. 4E and in supplementary Table 3. Together, the phosphoproteomics data suggest that Poly (I:C) treatment induces profound changes in the activity of signalling pathways driven by protein phosphorylation.
Microtubule associated proteins (MAPs) present altered phosphorylation in differentiated Poly I:C NSCs
The analysis of proteins with altered phosphorylation pattern in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs suggest an alteration in cytoskeleton organization, which plays an essential role in neuronal function modulating the intracellular trafficking of signal transduction, as well as proper axon guidance and synapse formation. To test this conjecture, we focused on the analysis of proteins involved in cytoskeleton organization and we found a different pattern of phosphorylation in the family of microtubule associated proteins (MAPs). In. particular, we observed an altered phosphorylation status in almost all members of the MAP family, with Map1a, Map1b, Map2, and Map4 exhibiting a high number of phosphopeptides (Fig. 5A, top pannels). In the case of other members such as Tau (Mapt), Doublecortin (Dcx) and Doublecortin-like kinase (Dclk1), we found mostly decreased phosphorylation (Fig. 5A, bottom panels and Fig. 5B), but the number of altered phosphopeptides was considerably lower compared to Map2, Map4 and Map1a/b members. MAPs proteins play an important role in microtubule organization and remodelling during neuronal development, activity and maintenance, and their function are regulated by phosphorylation. Our results showed an alteration in the phosphorylation of MAPs family on differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs, suggesting an impairment in its function. For example, Map2, showed increased and decreased phosphorylation in 13 and 4 peptides, respectively (Fig. 5A). Interestingly, we also observed alteration in the phosphorylation of the kinases Mark2 and Mark3 (Fig. 5C), showing increased phosphorylation on both kinases in residues S592 (Mark2), and S543 and S543 (Mark3). Mark2/3 kinases are involved in the phosphorylation of members of MAPs family such as Map1b, Map2 and Map4, and modulate its affinity to microtubules through its phosphorylation.
Functional alterations in Poly (I:C) NCSs
Our results showing alterations in the phosphorylation pattern of members of MAPs family, specifically Map2, imply a potential alteration in neuronal function and plasticity in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs. To test this hypothesis, we first evaluated whether the differences in phosphorylation levels in Map2 were related to different protein expression in Saline and Poly NSCs before and after its differentiation. No relevant differences were observed in protein levels in any of the groups analysed as determined by LC-MS/MS data (Fig. 6A). Furthermore, no differences were observed in immunocytochemistry for Map2 in differentiated neurons from Saline and Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 6B). Interestingly, immunoblot analyses for Map2 showed a complete absence of specific immunoreactivity in differentiated Saline NSCs, accompanied by lower levels of Map2 in Poly (I:C) NSCs (Fig. 6C). We then investigated whether differentiated neurons from Poly (I:C) NSCs exhibited morphological and functional alterations, as connoted by the phosphoproteomics data. To do so, we evaluated the dendritic arborization complexity in neurons from both experimental groups and found no significant differences between them (Fig. 6D). However, we observed differences in dendritic filopodia/neurite density among differentiated neurons, with increased filopodia/neurite density in differentiated Poly (I:C) NSCs compared to differentiated Saline NSCs (Fig. 6E). Additionally, we assessed the establishment of synapses among in vitro cultured neurons using a rabies virus monosynaptic tracing methodology. Interestingly, we observed a decrease in established synapses in neurons derived from Poly (I:C) NSCs compared to Saline neurons (Fig. 6F). These data indicate that the changes in protein phosphorylation, as revealed by our phosphoproteomic data, are of biological relevance and result in an alteration in neuronal function in Poly (I:C) neurons.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
It is widely accepted that environmental stressors during pregnancy may affect the normal development of the central nervous system, leading to the manifestation of different neuropsychiatric diseases such as schizophrenia, autism, or bipolar disorders. Among the environmental factors that can influence fetal neurodevelopment from the post-conception period are the infectious processes experienced by pregnant females during gestation. Intriguingly, some behavioral manifestations corresponding to the pathological phenotype appear during late adolescence or early adulthood in the offspring, as observed in the case of schizophrenia.
Therefore, several preclinical models based on experimental animals have been developed in order to explore the biological mechanisms resulting from prenatal infections that act as primers for these neurodevelopmental diseases. Originally these models consisted essentially in exposing animals, preferentially rodents, to the infectious pathogen, namely bacteria or virus, during the early stages of pregnancy. In the case of viruses, alternative methodologies exist where the pathogen is substituted by chemical activating agents that induce an equivalent pro-inflammatory immune response in the mother. One such example is polyinosinic : polycytidylic acid or Poly (I:C), a synthetic analog of double-stranded RNA. When administered to animals, it can mimic the acute phase of viral infection, resulting in a comprehensive range of behavioral and cognitive abnormalities that become apparent only when the offspring reach late adolescence or early adulthood.
Previous studies conducted with Poly (I:C) in pregnant mice have demonstrated that the determinant factor responsible for neurodevelopmental disturbances after an infectious process is the acute generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including various interleukins and TNF-α, rather than the presence of the pathogen itself. Therefore, this maternal immune activation or MIA during pregnancy is sufficient for inducing a range of disease phenotypes in offspring. More precisely, it was demonstrated that the participation of IL-6 in the maternal immune response is necessary since the elimination of this cytokine through genetic engineering techniques deprived animals of the behavioral deficits associated with MIA in the adulthood. Similarly, the necessary participation of IL-17A in the neurodevelopment process following Poly (I:C) treatment was also demonstrated later on. Further investigations also determined the gestational time window during which maternal immune activation is most effective in inducing subsequent behavioral alterations in adult descendants. This aligns to the early period of pregnancy, specifically gestational day 9 in mice, which corresponds to the first to second trimester in humans.
Overall, these preclinical studies supported the neurodevelopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia and other mental diseases associated with infectious processes in the maternal host during early stages of pregnancy. This is evidenced by the pathological behavioral phenotype observed in offspring, which notably is not accompanied by significant anatomical alterations in their brains. Consequently, this leads to conjecture that all these neurodevelopmental disturbances initiated by MIA, which are responsible for the pathological phenotypes observed in descendants, may be regarded as transcriptomics and epigenomics alterations occurring during the fetal neurodevelopment. In this sense, a systematic review recently published compiles data from multiple investigations assessing quantitative changes in gene and protein expression as well as epigenetic markers obtained in brain samples from descendants of MIA models; the evaluation of a total of 118 studies concluded that changes in candidate genes were mainly associated with three key functional areas, including immune and stress responses, neurotransmission and neuronal signaling, and neurodevelopment. However, the precise molecular changes and mechanisms of this process remain elusive.
Here, to delve deeper into the biological mechanisms implicated in the MIA effects on neurodevelopment processes and investigate the alterations that persist in cultured neural lineages derived from their differentiation, we have generated neural stem cell lines from fetuses carried by pregnant mice treated with Poly I:C. Once stablished, we characterized these models using transcriptomics, proteomics and phosphoproteomics approaches. Our findings suggest that Poly I:C meditated immune activation during early gestation induces modest translational dysregulation, but interestingly, this treatment result in comparatively large alterations in the phosphorylation of proteins involved in processes critical for the organization of neuronal structure. Of relevance, we find these such changes have potential functional consequences in increasing neuronal filopodia/neurite density and while decreasing synaptogenesis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary information
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
These authors contributed equally: Sandra M. Martín-Guerrero, María Martín-Estebané.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41380-025-02905-5.
Data availability
The transcriptomic data presented in the study available in the Gene Expression Omnibus repository (GEO) with the accession number GSE278057. The mass spectrometry proteomic and phosphoproteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD056291 and 10.6019/PXD056291. Sample details for each RAW file deposited in GEO or PRIDE can be found in Supplementary Table 4.