PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Skin
diseases: Squamous cell carcinoma
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Diagnostics; Molecular pathology; Skin cancer; Basal cell carcinoma; Finite elements modeling; Squamous cell carcinoma; Electroporation

ABSTRACT:
Clinical misdiagnosis between cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC) and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) affects treatment plans and carries risks of potential for recurrence, metastases, morbidity and mortality. We report the development of a novel tissue sampling approach with molecular biopsy using electroporation. This method, coined e-biopsy, enables non-destructive non-thermal permeabilization of cells in the skin for efficient vacuum-assisted extraction of informative biomolecules for rapid diagnosis. We used e-biopsy for ex vivo proteome extraction from 3 locations per patient in 21 cSCC and 20 BCC pathologically validated human tissue samples. The total 123 extracted proteomes were profiled using LC/MS/MS. The obtained mass spectra presented significantly different proteome profiles for cSCC and BCC with several hundreds of proteins significantly differentially expressed in each tumor in comparison to the other. Notably, our study showed that proteomes sampled with e-biopsy from cSCC and BCC lesions are different, and that 7 proteins were significantly overexpressed in BCC in comparison to cSCC even after the Bonferroni correction (FDR=7.1e-03). Our results provide evidence that the e-biopsy approach could potentially be used as a tool to support cutaneous tumors classification with rapid molecular profiling.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Differential expression analysis of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma proteomic profiles sampled with e-biopsy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein pellets were resuspended in 8.5M urea, 400mM ammonium bi-carbonate, 10mM DTT, vortexed, sonicated for 5' at 90% with 10-10 cycles, and centrifuged. Protein amount was estimated using Bradford readings. 20ug protein from each sample were reduced 60ºC for 30 min, modified with 37.5mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (in the dark, room temperature for 30 min) and digested in 1.5M Urea, 66.66mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, overnight at 37oC. An additional second digestion with trypsin was done for 4 hours at 37oC. Mass spectrometry analysis The tryptic peptides were desalted using homemade C18 stage tip, dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) on a homemade capillary column (30 cm, 75-micron ID) packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides mixture was resolved with a 5 to 28% linear gradient of solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) for 180 minutes followed by gradient of 15 minutes of 28 to 95% and 25 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (HCD) of the 30 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

DATA PROCESSING:
The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.8 (Mathias Mann's group) vs. the human proteome from the Uniprot database with 1% FDR. The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software, based on extracted ion currents (XICs) of peptides enabling quantitation from each LC/MS run for each peptide identified in any of the experiments.