PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Extracellular vesicle; Blood plasma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human; Lc-msms; Small extracellular vesicles; Plasma

ABSTRACT:
The plasma-derived sEVs from a healthy human subject (62 years, male) were processed for mass spectrometry analysis, and a total ion liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) chromatogram with relative abundance against time was generated. This chromatogram derived from a two-hour Orbitrap LC-MS/MS run of tryptic-digested sEV-derived proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human plasma-derived small extracellular vesicles LC-MSMS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
High-select Depletion Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific, A36366) were utilized to remove highly abundant proteins from the plasma before isolating sEVs. After sEVs isolation, the BCA technique was used to prepare the sample in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and measure the total protein concentration of plasma-derived sEVs; 100 µg of total protein was used in further procedures. After gently vortexing to combine the 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), the mixture was incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. After gently vortexing with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), the mixture was incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature (25°C). A 1:50 ratio (trypsin: protein) was obtained by adding 2 µl of trypsin (1 µg/µl). For protein digestion, samples were stored at 37°C for the entire night. 0.1% formic acid was added to halt the enzymatic process, and the pH was carefully kept between 3.0 and 4.0. ZipTip was used to desalt the tryptic peptides using C18 resin (Millipore, ZTC18S096). The samples underwent vacuum drying and reconstitution in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid following elution prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The samples were analyzed using Orbitrap LC-MS/MS (Q-Exactive Plus Biopharma, Thermo Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Data Acquisition Software: Thermo Scientific Xcalibur, Version 4.2.28.14. Data analysis software: Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2. A chromatogram was generated.