PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Blood cell
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: Gln->pyro-Glu; Ammonia-loss; Dehydrated; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation; Acetyl
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Lc-ms; Adjuvants; Secretome

ABSTRACT:
Adjuvant-induced human monocyte secretome profiles reveal adjuvant- and age-specific protein signatures.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Adjuvant Secretomes -  Adjuvant-induced human monocyte secretome profiles reveal adjuvant- and age-specific protein signatures

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Peptides were analyzed on a nanoflow ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Eksigent/Sciex; Framingham, MA) hyphenated with a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive; Thermo Scientific; San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed 100 μm i.d. × 15 cm C18 column (Magic C18, 5 μm, 200Å; Michrom Bioresource; Auburn, CA) and separated at 400 nl/min (linear gradients from 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid). Full MS scans were obtained in an Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 350–2000 range with resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) and a target value of 3 x 106. The 10 most intense peaks (charge state ≥ 2) were fragmented in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) collision cell at normalized collision energy of 27%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 17500 at m/z 200 and a target value of 2 x 105. The ion selection threshold was 1.7 x 103, the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 millisecond (ms) for full MS scans and 120 ms for tandem mass spectrum. For each MS run, XCalibur software (version 2.2; Thermo Scientific) was used to generate RAW files, which were then converted to Mascot Generic Files (MGF) through an in-house script, extracting the 200 most intense fragment ions for each MS/MS spectrum.

DATA PROCESSING:
All peak list files (MGFs) were analyzed using the Mascot (Matrix Science; London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X!Tandem search engines (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was configured to search the Uniprot human sequence database (35,806 entries as of May 2011), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed. Searches were conducted with fixed modification for carbamidomethyl; variable methionine oxidation and variable pyroGlu formation (from N-terminal Glu and Gln); monoisotopic mass with peptide precursor mass tolerance of 10 parts per million (ppm); MS/MS ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Dalton (Da).

METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Ethics Statement
All experiments were conducted in accordance with relevant institutional and national guidelines, regulations and approvals. Cord blood samples were collected and de-identified with approval from the Ethics Committee of The Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA (protocol number 2000-P-000117) and Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston, MA (protocol number 2011P-000118). Blood from adult donors was obtained after written informed consent with approval from the Ethics Committee of Boston Children's Hospital; Boston, MA (protocol number X07–05-0223).
TLR Agonists, Adjuvants, Licensed Vaccines, and Assay Reagents
TLRAs included MPLA (TLR4), R848 (TLR7/8), and were obtained from InvivoGen (San Diego, CA). Adju-Phos (Al (PO4)3) was from The Statens Serum Institut (Copenhagen, Denmark) (Table I). TLRAs (other than MPLA) were verified to be endotoxin-free (< 1 EU/ml) as measured by the Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) assay per the manufacturer's instructions (Charles River; Wilmington, MA). Licensed adjuvanted vaccines were obtained from manufacturers as listed in Table II.
Monocyte Isolation and In Vitro Stimulation Assay
Peripheral blood was collected from healthy adult volunteers, whereas human newborn cord blood was collected immediately after Cesarean section delivery of the placenta. Placentas from HIV-positive mothers were excluded. Blood was anti-coagulated with 15–20 units/ml pyrogen-free sodium heparin (American Pharmaceutical Partners, Inc.; Schaumberg, IL), kept at room temperature and processed within 4 h of collection. Cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMC) or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were obtained after centrifugation over Ficoll-Hypaque gradients (Ficoll-Paque PREMIUM, GE Healthcare; Waukesha, WI). Monocytes were isolated from mononuclear cell fractions by positive selection with magnetic microbeads according to the manufacturer's instructions (Miltenyi Biotec; Auburn, CA) using CD14 as a pan-marker for monocytes. Monocyte preparations were verified to be > 95% CD14 positive as assessed by flow cytometry for CD14 with fluorophore-labeled antibodies (FITC, BD Biosciences) as previously described. For secretomic studies, isolated monocytes were cultured in tissue culture dishes at 4 × 106 cells/ml in high glucose Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Life Technologies; Grand Island, NY) supplemented with non-essential amino acids solution (Life Technologies) in the presence of sterile medium (negative control), Alum (5 μg/ml), MPLA (100, 1000 ng/ml), or R848 (5, 50 μm). For targeted protein confirmation assays, monocytes were cultured in 96-well tissue round bottom culture dishes at 1 × 106 cells/ml in either RPMI supplemented with 10% platelet poor plasma. Monocytes were then incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 with or without adjuvants for 18 h.
Supernatant Sample Preparation for Secretome Analysis
Conditioned culture media samples were collected after 18 h of incubation, centrifuged for 5 min at 500 × g, 4 °C and the resulting supernatant transferred to a new micro-tube before storage at −80 °C until further use. Upon thawing, proteins were precipitated from the supernatants using trichloroacetic acid and prepared for LC-MS analysis. Concentrated protein samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with acrylamide before they were applied to 12% gradient gels for sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) (NuPage; Invitrogen, NY). After staining with Coomassie Blue (SimplyBlue Safestain; Invitrogen), the gel lanes were excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion. Gel pieces were destained in ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile, dehydrated in acetonitrile, and dried using a SpeedVac. Finally, samples were digested overnight with 12 ng/μl trypsin at room temperature.
LC-MS Analysis
Peptides were analyzed on a nanoflow ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Eksigent/Sciex; Framingham, MA) hyphenated with a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive; Thermo Scientific; San Jose, CA). Peptides were loaded onto an in-house packed 100 μm i.d. × 15 cm C18 column (Magic C18, 5 μm, 200Å; Michrom Bioresource; Auburn, CA) and separated at 400 nl/min (linear gradients from 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid). Full MS scans were obtained in an Orbitrap mass analyzer over m/z 350–2000 range with resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) and a target value of 3 × 106. The 10 most intense peaks (charge state ≥ 2) were fragmented in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) collision cell at normalized collision energy of 27%, and tandem mass spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 17500 at m/z 200 and a target value of 2 × 105. The ion selection threshold was 1.7 × 103, the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 millisecond (ms) for full MS scans and 120 ms for tandem mass spectrum. For each MS run, RAW files, generated using XCalibur software (version 2.2; Thermo Scientific), were converted to Mascot Generic Files (MGF) through an in-house script, extracting the 200 most intense fragment ions for each MS/MS spectrum. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD003534 and 10.6019/PXD003534.
Protein Identification
All peak list files (MGFs) were analyzed using the Mascot (Matrix Science; London, UK; version 2.3.02) and X!Tandem search engines (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Mascot was configured to search the Uniprot human sequence database (35,806 entries as of May 2011), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin with one missed cleavage allowed. Searches were conducted with fixed modification for carbamidomethyl; variable methionine oxidation and variable pyroGlu formation (from N-terminal Glu and Gln); monoisotopic mass with peptide precursor mass tolerance of 10 parts per million (ppm); MS/MS ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Dalton (Da). X!Tandem was set up to search a subset of Uniprot human sequence database, also assuming trypsin, allowing for up to two missed cleavages; a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm; Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as a fixed, and Glu->pyro-Glu of the N terminus, Gln->pyro-Glu of the N terminus, ammonia-loss of the N terminus, and methionine oxidation were specified in X!Tandem as variable modifications. Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR; version 4.2.1) was used to combine the MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted at a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1%. Peptide probabilities from X!Tandem were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at > 95% probability to achieve an FDR <1% and contained at least one identified peptide. Of note: for several downstream data analyses steps, only proteins identified by 2 or more peptides were considered (see below). Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters. Next, a Scaffold output file was generated, containing exclusive unique spectral counts (termed raw spectral counts hereafter) for each identified protein per biological sample.
Bioinformatics and Hierarchical Cluster Analysis
Proteomic data underwent hierarchical cluster analysis, using PermutMatrix, a software packet originally designed for gene expression analysis (http://www.lirmm.fr/caraux/PermutMatrix/EN/index.html), that has subsequently been validated for proteomics. Briefly, relative label-free protein quantification analysis was performed based on unique spectral counts (SpCs), which were obtained using the Scaffold 4.2.1 software. Not all proteins were identified in all samples. For visualization, comparison and data analysis purposes, proteins with missing SpC values in one sample were imputed with a SpC value of 0.5 (corresponding to each data set's half minimum SpC), thus avoiding division by zero and preventing overestimation of fold changes. For each sample, raw SpC were normalized by multiplication with the ratio of maximum total SpC and the sample's total SpC. Fold change was calculated by dividing the normalized SpC from each treated condition with that of the corresponding untreated adult or newborn condition. Cluster analysis was restricted to proteins identified by ≥2 spectra and in at least two biological samples, which showed an adjuvant-induced fold change ≥2 in more than half of the biological replicates of the same treatment condition. For each protein, average log2-transformed fold changes observed under one treatment condition were imported into PermutMatrix and Z score-transformed for normalization. Then two-way clustering analysis was carried out using the Pearson and Ward's minimum variance methods for distance and aggregation, resulting in dendograms that display treatment conditions on the horizontal and protein names on the vertical axis.
Label-free Protein Quantification and Analysis of Differential Protein Expression
Protein expression in differentially stimulated primary human monocytes was compared based on length-normalized SpC, which were determined using the Scaffold 4.2.1 software (as outlined above). Based on results of a small pilot study (n = 3) using multiple replicates (∼ 3) of the adjuvants tested, which indicated that singlet samples were representative, one Scaffold file was generated containing all SpCs for each of the 6 individual adult and 7 individual newborn monocyte singlet samples treated with different adjuvants. Multiple isoforms underwent quantification only if they were classified as individual entries (with distinct gene names) by Scaffold. Proteins enriched after adjuvant treatment but not medium treatment were identified employing a customized version of the model-based statistical analysis tool QSpec based on SpC, using the count data model with paired design option and normalization by the total number of SpC in each sample replicate. Proteins with QSpec's new significance score (Z-statistic) above the threshold associated with 5% FDR underwent further evaluation.
Content Analysis
Secretome data were further analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Ingenuity® Systems, www.ingenuity.com). Canonical pathways analysis identified the pathways from the IPA library of canonical pathways that were most significant to each secretome induced in neonates and adults by Alum, MPLA and R848. Identified proteins that i) met the FDR cutoff of 5% and ii) were associated with a canonical pathway in the Ingenuity Knowledge Base were considered for the analysis. The significance of the association between the data set and the canonical pathway was measured using Fisher's exact test, which calculates the probability that the overlap between the genes in the data set and the canonical pathway is explained by chance alone. The Odds Ratio for the overlap was calculated for each significantly up-regulated pathway.
Whole Blood Assay (WBA)
Adjuvant and vaccine activity in whole blood (WB) was assessed by adapting previously described methodologies. Briefly, heparinized neonatal cord blood or adult whole blood, obtained from different study participants than those providing blood for the monocyte stimulation assays, was mixed 1:1 with sterile pre-warmed (37 °C) RPMI 1640 medium (Invitrogen) and cultured in 96-well U-bottom plates (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ) in the presence of adjuvants (Alum [0.5, 5 and 50 μg/ml]; MPLA [1, 10, 100 and 1000 ng/ml]; R848 [0.5, 5 and 50 μm]) or the vaccines listed in Table II (final dilutions 1:10, 1:100 and 1:1000). Suspensions containing 200 μl/well were gently mixed several times by pipetting and incubated for 6 h, 37 °C in a humidified incubator at 5% CO2. After culture, plates were centrifuged at 500 × g and 110–150 μl of supernatant was removed by pipetting without disturbing the cell pellet. Supernatants were assayed by ELISA to quantify concentrations of Lactoferrin (LTF; Hycult Biotech, Uden, The Netherlands), Pentraxin 3 (PTX-3; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9; R&D Systems), TNF (BD Biosciences), IL-1β (eBiosciences, San Diego, CA) and by competitive EIA for Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2; Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI). Adenosine deaminase-2 (ADA2) activity in whole blood assay supernatants was determined using a chromogenic enzyme activity assay (Diazyme Laboratories, Poway, CA), run in duplicate in the presence of erythro-9-(2-hydroxy-3-nonyl)adenine (EHNA; 20 μm) to inhibit ADA-1 activity. ADA2 is not EHNA-sensitive; thus, activity in the presence of EHNA reflects ADA2 activity.
Extrapolation of the Adjuvant-Induced Monocyte Secretome Data Set to an Adjuvanted-Vaccine-Induced PBMC Transcriptome Data Set
Each protein present in the adjuvant-induced monocyte secretomes was quantified based on spectral count data, using QSpec as described above. Changes relative to the secretomes of medium-treated controls were considered statistically significant based on Z-statistics corresponding to an FDR < 5%. PBMC transcriptome profiles of 24 adults vaccinated with the MPLA adjuvant-containing Mosquirix™ Malaria vaccine RTS,S/AS01 (dispersed lipid vesicles containing MPLA and saponin) or the similar formulation RTS,S/AS02 (an oil-in-water preparation containing MPLA and saponin), measured at four different time points (T1 = 0 h, T2 = 24 h, T3 = 48 h, T4 = 14 days post third vaccine dose), and publicly available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE18323, were analyzed for changes in gene expression after immunization. GSE18323 was Robust Multi-array Average (RMA) quantile normalized for all 11 vaccine-protected and 13 non-protected study participant transcriptome profiles at 4 time points (T1 - T4). Paired (by participant) nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test was applied at p < 0.05 significance threshold per microarray probe (i.e. gene) between T2 versus T1 time points across the non-protected participant subset, the protected participant subset, and combined non-protected and protected participant subsets respectively. A similar analysis was conducted for T3 versus T1, T4 versus T1. Each microarray probe was mapped to a gene identified by its Entrez Gene ID. For a gene with > 1 microarray probe, we used the microarray probe with the smallest p value from the paired differential analysis above as the unique representative for that gene. Each gene/Entrez Gene ID was matched to corresponding protein accession numbers of the secretome data set via ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2accession.gz version 2015 May 19. Molecules present in both in vitro monocyte secretome and in vivo PBMC transcriptome data sets were assessed for the direction of their change (versus the unstimulated condition and the T1 time point, respectively) and its statistical significance. The set of proteins displaying significant changes in the MPLA-induced adult secretome, and each set of genes displaying significant changes in one of the three time comparisons of GSE18323, underwent gene ontology (GO) analysis using https://david.ncifcrf.gov/with EASE score (alpha) of 0.05 to call significance. The resulting significant GO terms were evaluated with respect to their co-occurrence between MPLA secretome and each of the three transcriptome data sets in GSE18323.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
The total numbers of biological samples analyzed for the monocyte stimulation assay are 6 for adult and 7 for newborn, whereas the numbers of biological samples analyzed for WBA was n = 4 - 8. Data used to extrapolate adjuvant-induced secretome to adjuvanted-induced transcriptome, was from 24 adult study participants. Flow cytometry analysis employed a MoFlo Legacy cytometer (DakoCytomation; Fort Collins, CO) or FACSFortessa (BD Biosciences) cytometer and was analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star). Graphic output was generated using JMP v. 11.0 (SAS, Cary NC) and Prism v. 6.0c (GraphPad Software). For WBA confirmation assays, statistical significance was determined using two-tailed student t tests comparing stimulated samples to unstimulated controls. Results were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05. To assess differential expression of Recombivax (HBV)- versus EasyFive (DTwP-Hep B-Hib)- induced protein fold changes, the Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used, combining all dosages of each vaccine. This is a nonparametric test of the null hypothesis (that the two groups of fold changes result from the same treatment condition) against an alternative hypothesis, where the null hypothesis was rejected for p values less than 0.05.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Protein Identification by LC-MS from Monocyte Cultures
Culture supernatants from neonatal and adult human monocytes treated with medium alone (control), aluminum phosphate (Alum), MPLA or R848 (Table I) were analyzed by LC-MS using a nanoflow HPLC system hyphenated with a hybrid quadrupole/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (summarized in Fig. 1). Using the MASCOT and X!Tandem search engines, a total of 1894 nonredundant proteins was identified. The number of proteins identified in supernatants from differentially treated cells ranged from 829 to 1184 for the neonatal, and from 832 to 1406 for the adult samples, respectively. supplemental Table S1 gives an overview of these proteins, which were identified in seven biological replicates (i.e. six paired adult and newborn samples, and one unpaired newborn sample) combined, with a raw spectral count ≥ 1 and a protein FDR < 1%.
Protein Overlap in Supernatants from Differentially Stimulated Monocytes Samples and Hierarchical Clustering
Of the 1519 and 1717 non-redundant proteins identified for the newborn and the adult samples, respectively, 617 (41%) and 565 (33%) were common to all adjuvant treatment conditions and an average of 75 (5%) and 67 (4%) proteins were unique to each (Fig. 2A, 2B). Proteins detected at a spectral count of 1 in a single sample of only one condition were excluded from all subsequent analyses. As a first approach to compare secreted proteomes (secretomes) resulting from differential stimulation of newborn and adult human monocytes, we analyzed proteomic data sets using unsupervised two-way hierarchical clustering analysis, based on each protein's average fold change per treatment condition. A heat map was generated to visualize the results (Fig. 2C). Alum-induced newborn and adult monocyte secretomes demonstrated the most marked differences, exceeding the degree of variation observed between newborn and adult for each of the TLRAs. Age alone appeared to exert an effect on TLRA-induced secretomes, resulting in distinct newborn and adult clusters. Furthermore, both the TLRAs MPLA (TLR4) and R848 (TLR8), induced similar secretome clusters by age that were highly distinct from those induced by Alum (Fig. 2C).
Differential Expression of Proteins in Secretomes from Monocytes Treated with Alum, MPLA and R848
Next, the proteins differentially expressed between the un-stimulated and the adjuvant treatment conditions were further examined. For each treatment condition, proteins that were significantly enriched relative to the un-stimulated controls were identified using QSpec, a Bayesian statistical framework specifically designed to handle discrete, spectral count-based data. This software was customized for the purpose of this study to facilitate pairwise analysis within each stimulation experiment, aggregating evidence across multiple experiments. Fig. 3 visualizes, for newborns and adults, adjuvant-induced increases or decreases in protein expression levels, highlighting those changed significantly at an FDR < 5%. The distributions of the proteins in the three different treatments recapitulate the finding described in Fig. 2C that the MPLA and R848 treatments elicit much more similar responses than the Alum treatment. For each adjuvant, these proteins can be grouped into those that are significantly up-, or down- regulated in neonates exclusively (blue circle), adults exclusively (green) or both neonates and adults (red), at an FDR < 0.05. Among the total 218 significantly changed proteins, 115 were significantly enriched in response to at least one adjuvant in the neonatal secretomes (66 proteins/blue circles, Fig. 3A–3C) and/or the adult secretomes (100 proteins/green, Fig. 3A–3C). Further details on significantly enriched proteins are provided in the supplemental section online, which includes information on whether enriched proteins are induced by more than one adjuvant (supplemental Fig. S1, for which an interactive version is accessible at http://adjuvant-secretomes.herokuapp.com/), as well as accession numbers, predicted secretion mechanisms, fold changes, Z statistics and FDR values for each protein (supplemental Table S2, supplemental Table S3).
Pathway Analysis
The results of IPA pathway analyses are depicted in Table III. Pathways represented in the Alum-induced secretomes differed substantially between newborn and adult (Table III and supplemental Fig. S2A). The neonatal Alum-induced secretome was significantly enriched with proteins belonging to innate immune pathways, including granulocyte adhesion signaling, leukocyte extravasation/diapedesis, crosstalk between dendritic and NK T cells, and Interleukin-8 (CXCL-8) signaling. In contrast, many of thesepathways, such as DC/NKT cell crosstalk, T helper cell differentiation and communication of innate and adaptive immune cells were underrepresented in the adult Alum-induced secretome. The Alum-induced adult secretome, on the other hand, included unique proteins of the actin cytoskeleton pathway, possibly relating to cell degradation (Table III and supplemental Fig. S2A). Multiple pathways represented in the TLRA-induced monocyte secretomes (Table III and supplemental Fig. S2B–S2C), such as Acute Phase Response Signaling, LXR/RXR Activation and Granulocyte Adhesion/Diapedesis Signaling, are relevant to the immune response and correspond to some of those present in the neonatal Alum secretome. In contrast to the highly divergent Alum response by age, greater similarity was observed between newborn and adult secretomes induced by the two investigated TLRAs.
Selective Verification of Secretomics Results using in vitro Monocyte and Whole Blood Assays
Following secretomics analysis, we wished to confirm up-regulation of selected proteins in a different experimental system. Selection of proteins for confirmation took into account novelty, significance level and reproducibility across multiple samples as well as commercial availability of targeted quantification assays (e.g. ELISA). Four proteins were measured in human whole blood stimulation assays (Fig. 4E–4H; each protein's corresponding spectral counts observed in the previous monocyte secretome analysis are shown in Fig. 4A–4D): adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA-2) (Fig. 4E), lactoferrin (LTF) (Fig. 4F), pentraxin 3 (PTX-3) (Fig. 4G), and matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9) (Fig. 4H).
Whereas ADA-2 activity displayed only minimal changes in the WBA system, statistically significant elevations in response to adjuvant treatment of whole blood were observed for LTF, PTX-3 and MMP-9. LTF levels rose moderately after MPLA treatment of adult WB (100 ng/ml, p = 0.03 and 1000 ng/ml, p = 0.04), and over twofold after 50 μm R848 treatment of both newborn (p = 0.001) and adult WB to (p = 0.01). Significant PTX-3 increases were induced in newborn WB by MPLA (10 ng/ml, p = 0.01) and R848 (all concentrations, p = 0.01), as well as R848 in adult WB (0.5 μm, p = 0.048; 5 μm. p = 0.002; 50 μm, p = 0.002). MMP-9 levels significantly increased in response to 100 ng/ml of MPLA in both newborn (p = 0.004) and adult WB (p = 0.02), whereas titration dependent responses were observed in newborn (all concentrations, p = 0.01) to as well as adult WB (0.5 μm, p = 0.03; 5 μm. p = 0.002; 50 μm, p < 0.001). To further confirm that targeted biomarkers are directly produced by blood monocytes, we purified CD14+ monocytes by immunomagnetic bead selection, cultured them in RPMI supplemented with 10% plasma, and stimulated them with Alum, MPLA, or R848. Supernatants were collected for subsequent ELISAs that demonstrated production of LTF (supplemental Fig. S3A, S3B), PTX-3 (supplemental Fig. S3D, S3E) and MMP-9 (supplemental Fig. S3G, S3H) in a concentration dependent manner.
Induction of Verified Proteins and of Cytokines by Licensed Vaccines
To assess if LTF, PTX-3 and MMP-9 are also induced by adjuvanted vaccine formulations, we studied WB stimulation with five licensed vaccines that are adjuvanted with Alum alone or with Alum in combination with TLRAs (listed in Table II). When compared with the untreated control, significant elevations of LTF was observed in both newborn and adult WB treated with all of the Alum + TLRA-containing vaccines at multiple concentrations, but not with the hepatitis B vaccine (HBV) Recombivax, that is adjuvanted with Alum alone (Fig. 5A). LTF levels were also significantly higher when directly comparing the Alum-only Recombivax versus the (Alum + TLR agonist)-containing vaccines (i.e. Cervarix, Bexsero, PedvaxHIB and Easyfive), all at equivalent volume-to-volume (v/v) treatments concentrations. With respect to PTX-3, a similar trend was also observed. When compared at equivalent volume-to-volume (v/v) treatment concentrations, HBV (Recombivax) induced only moderate increases over the untreated control in newborn WB (p = 0.04 at the highest dose), whereas the (Alum + TLRA)-containing vaccines induced greater PTX-3 concentrations in both newborns and adults, in comparison to control and HBV (Fig. 5B). In contrast, MMP-9 was induced in a concentration- dependent manner in both newborn (p < 0.05) and adult (p < 0.05) WB by HBV (Recombivax) alone (Fig. 5C). Nevertheless, (Alum + TLRA)-containing vaccines induced significantly greater MMP-9 concentrations than HBV (Recombivax) in both newborns and adults (Fig. 5C). Interestingly, the licensed pediatric vaccine not indicated for neonatal administration in vivo (i.e. Bexsero, PedvaxHIB and Easyfive) induced age-specific PTX-3 release in newborn whole blood in vitro (p < 0.05), when compared directly to identically treated adult samples (Fig. 6A). In contrast, Alum-adjuvanted HBV (Recombivax), a vaccine indicated for neonatal administration and with potentially relatively lower reactogenicity rates, induced age-specific elevation of MMP-9 in adult blood (Fig. 6, 6B). Vaccine induced responses were also observed to be directly produced by blood monocytes (supplemental Fig. S3C, S3F, S3I).
In addition to the proteins described above, we also measured vaccine-induced TNF, IL-1β and PGE2 release in a subgroup of 8 biological individual samples (4 newborns and 4 adults) as the in vitro levels of these mediators may potentially predict in vivo vaccine reactogenicity. supplemental Fig. S4 demonstrates the relationships among vaccine-induced fold changes for TNF, IL-1β, and PGE2 as well as LTF, PTX-3, and MMP-9. We assessed whether the in vitro levels of LTF, PTX-3, and MMP-9 might also predict in vivo vaccine reactogenicity by comparing the fold changes of each protein across two vaccine treatment groups: (1) Alum-adjuvanted HBV (Recombivax) vaccine of low reactogenicity and (2) EasyFive, a combination vaccine containing whole cell pertussis vaccine of high reactogenicity. To assess whether a protein was differentially expressed in response to treatment with HBV (Recombivax) as compared with treatment with EasyFive, we employed the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. As shown in Table IV, EasyFive induced higher levels of positive biomarker controls TNF, IL-1β and PGE2 (p < 0.05) as compared with Recombivax, demonstrating the validity of our approach. Similarly, EasyFive also significantly induced LTF, PTX-3 and MMP-9 at the indicated fold changes as compared with Recombivax treated neonatal and adult whole blood.
Extrapolation of the Adjuvant-Induced Secretomes in vitro to Vaccine-Induced PBMC Transcriptomes In Vivo
Adjuvant-induced in vitro monocyte secretome data sets were compared with publicly-available in vivo PBMC transcriptome profiles from 24 individuals vaccinated with the MPLA-adjuvanted Malaria vaccines RTS,S/AS01B or RTS,S/AS02A. For each protein identified in the monocyte secretomes and represented in the transcriptome data sets, we assessed the expression profile of the corresponding gene. We found many molecules displaying statistically significant changes that were concordant (either both up or both down) between vaccine-induced transcriptomes and adjuvant-induced secretomes (Fig. 7A and supplemental Fig. S5). Gene ontological (GO) analysis was also performed on the in vitro adult MPLA-induced monocyte secretome, and each of the in vivo Mosquirix vaccine GSE18323 transcriptomes (24 h, 48 h and 2 weeks; supplemental Table S4), to compare the representation of gene and gene product. The GO terms significant for the MPLA secretome were compared with the GO terms significant for each transcriptome. GO terms between secretome and transcriptome overlapped at each post-vaccination time point by ∼13% (supplemental Fig. S6).
Of note, our analyses revealed that the number of the concordant (i.e. transcriptome in vivo with secretome in vitro) molecules appeared to correspond by adjuvant and age as it was higher for TLRA (MPLA and R848)-induced secretomes than Alum-induced secretomes; higher for adult than newborn secretomes; and higher at the 24 h time point than the later time points (Fig. 7B). For the purposes of comparative analysis, assuming the 12,893 unique genes of the Affymetrix Human Genome U133A microarray platform used in GSE18323 to be background set of commonly measurable genes/proteins in both proteomic and transcriptomic studies, we found significant number of concordant genes between GSE18323 at 24 h with the adult secretome conditions for Alum (p = 4.0e-4, Kendall's tau beta test), MPLA (p = 1.8e-7, Kendall's tau beta test) and R848 (p = 2.9e-4, Kendall's tau beta) and none for the newborn data sets at 24 h. All other pair-wise concordance analyses between the 6 secretomes and GSE18323 three time points are not significant. Of further note, the alignment of the transcriptomic-proteomic data sets was most significant for the adult MPLA conditions. This suggests that our in vitro model reflected age- and adjuvant-specific differences that are relevant in vivo.

INTRODUCTION:
Infections cause enormous morbidity and mortality worldwide, especially among those at the extremes of life, newborns and the elderly. Immunization is one of the most cost effective interventions to reduce infectious diseases but the efficacy of many vaccines varies with age with suboptimal vaccine responses especially common in the young and elderly, who display distinct immune system function. Adjuvants enhance the quantity and shape the quality of vaccine-induced immune protection. Most current adjuvanted vaccines have been developed empirically, formulating antigen with adjuvants, such as aluminum salts or oil-in water emulsions, whose mode of action, especially in different age groups, is incompletely elucidated. One approach to increase vaccine immunogenicity in these vulnerable populations is to use and develop adjuvants that are particularly effective in overcoming age-specific limitations in immune system function. Characterization of adjuvant action in different age groups may inform more rational adjuvant design.
Adjuvant activity can be age-dependent. Responses to Alum, the most commonly used vaccine adjuvant, vary with age. When tested in whole blood cultures in vitro, Alum induces greater cytokine production (e.g. IL-1β and CXCL8) from newborn than adult leukocytes. Moreover, the age at which Alum-adjuvanted Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine is given affects subsequent innate immune polarization such that subsequent Toll-Like Receptor (TLR)1-mediated cytokine responses are altered. Given the extensive use of Alum as an adjuvant, it is important to better characterize its age-specific actions.
The characterization of TLRs and other pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) linking innate and adaptive immunity has informed rational adjuvant design, with multiple PRR agonists in development as vaccine adjuvants. The first well-defined TLR agonist (TLRA) to be incorporated into a licensed vaccine was monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA; TLR4A), a low-toxicity lipopolysaccharide (LPS) derivative that is a component of the licensed human papilloma virus (HPV) and certain hepatitis B vaccine (HBV) formulations. Agonists of TLR3, -4, -5, -7/8 and -9 are currently in preclinical and clinical development, but TLR-mediated immune responses are often distinct at the extremes of age. For example, when compared with their adult counterparts in vitro, human newborn and infant leukocytes demonstrate reduced Th1-polarizing cytokine induction in response to most TLRAs, including the TLR4As LPS and MPLA. For this reason, we choose to study human monocytes, leukocytes with antigen-presenting properties that are key players in the vaccine-induced immune response. Adjuvants act via PRRs that mediate monocyte activation, triggering subsequent immune responses in vitro and in vivo.
Rational adjuvant design aims to maximize a vaccine's safety and efficacy profiles, inducing an optimal protective immune response without provoking short- or long-term adverse effects. Little is known regarding the global molecular impact of adjuvants and adjuvanted vaccines in early life. To this end, a detailed and comprehensive understanding of adjuvant action in special target populations as compared with healthy middle aged adults is of scientific and translational interest. For example, TLR8As such as the imidazoquinoline R848 (TLR7/8A), can induce adult-like Th cytokine induction and co-stimulatory molecule expression in neonatal leukocytes suggesting they may be promising candidate neonatal vaccine adjuvants. For novel adjuvants, a practical approach to characterize adjuvant-induced responses employs in vitro human cell systems that model the immune response, and may inform subsequent adjuvant selection for in vivo studies.
Systems-scale transcriptomic approaches have increasingly been employed to examine the global immune response to adjuvanted vaccines, raising novel hypotheses regarding mechanisms of adjuvant action and revealing vaccine-specific molecular signatures that may predict vaccine responses. However, alterations observed in the global gene expression profiles may not necessarily correspond closely to adjuvant-induced changes on protein level. Moreover, to date these studies have not taken into account age, even though the majorities of infection-induced mortality and of global immunization schedules are focused on newborns and infants.
The study of protein secretion in in vitro systems has largely depended on targeted detection methods, including measurement of cytokine production, limited by the specificity and availability of antibodies. Quantitative high-resolution mass spectrometry has been recently applied to characterize the secreted proteomes (secretomes) of murine antigen-presenting cells in a comprehensive manner. To gain fresh insights into the potential age-specific action of established and candidate adjuvants, we assessed the effect of treatment with Alum or the TLRAs MPLA or R848 on the secretomes of primary human monocytes. We found that (1) adjuvant-induced monocyte secretomes varied by adjuvant and age, (2) that adjuvants induce distinct innate immune pathways, that protein biomarkers defined by this approach were confirmed in adjuvant and licensed adjuvanted vaccine-stimulated whole blood assays in vitro as well as in (4) publicly available data sets of individuals receiving a novel adjuvanted vaccine in vivo. Our observations provide fresh insight into adjuvant action and suggest a novel paradigm for characterizing age-specific adjuvant effects in vitro in relation to their effects in vivo.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Author contributions: D.O., D.J.D., H.S., and O.L. designed research; D.O., D.J.D., S.A., S.B., I.B., J.F.S., and M.P. performed research; H.C. and S.T.B. contributed new reagents or analytic tools; D.O., D.J.D., S.T.B., and A.T.K. analyzed data; D.O., D.J.D., H.S., and O.L. wrote the paper; H.J.P. provided expert imput.
* D.Y.O. was supported by a Gerber Foundation Novice Researcher Grant and a Thrasher Research Fund Early Career Award. O.L. laboratory is funded by an internal award from the Boston Children's Hospital Department of Medicine in support of the Precision Vaccines Program, U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant 1R01AI100135–01 and administrative supplement PA-14–027, the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), NIH, Department of Health and Human Services, Adjuvant Discovery Program Contract No. HHSN272201400052C, Global Health (OPPGH5284) and Grand Challenges Explorations (OPP1035192) awards from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation as well as sponsored research support from Crucell (Johnson & Johnson). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
 This article contains supplemental material.
1 The abbreviations used are:
TLR
Toll-like receptor
AAHS
Amorphous aluminum hydroxyphosphate sulfate
Adju-Phos
Aluminum phosphate
Alum
Aluminum phosphate, Al (PO4)3, (Adju-Phos)
APC
Antigen-presenting cell
CBMCs
Cord blood mononuclear cells
CD
Cluster of differentiation
DAMPs
Danger-associated molecular patterns
DMEM
Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium
DTT
dithiothreitol
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EU
Endotoxin unit
FDR
False discovery rate
HCD
Higher-energy collisional dissociation
HPLC
High-performance liquid chromatography
HPV
Human papilloma virus
IL
Interleukin
IMQ
Imidazoquinoline
IPA
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
LAL
Limulus amoebocyte lysate
LC-MS/MS
liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry
LPS
Lipopolysaccharide
LTF
Lactoferrin
m/z
Mass-to-charge ratio
MFI
Mean fluorescent intensity
MGF
Mascot Generic Files
MMP
Matrix metalloproteinase
Mos
Monocytes
MPLA
Monophosphoryl Lipid A
ms
Millisecond
PBMCs
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
ppm
parts per million
PRRs
pattern recognition receptors
PTX
Pentraxin
RPMI
Roswell Park Memorial Institute Medium
SDS-PAGE
Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
SpC
Spectral count
TLRA
Toll-like receptor agonist
TNF
Tumor necrosis factor
WBA
Whole blood assay.