PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver; Hepatocyte
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Glucagon; liver; pde4; camp; pka; energy expenditure; lipid metabolism; obesity; phosphoproteomics; ptm; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Glucagon (GCG) analogues are gaining attention as promising components in incretin-based therapeutics for obesity and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis. However, the biology of chronic glucagon treatment, in particular, the molecular underpinnings of GCG-induced energy expenditure and lipid metabolism, remain poorly defined. We utilized a long-acting GCG analogue (LA-GCG) in conjunction with hepatic and adipose glucagon receptor knockout mouse models. Through an integrative approach that combined metabolic, biochemical and omics techniques, we investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying GCG-induced energy expenditure and metabolic benefits. We demonstrate that the LA-GCG enhances energy expenditure in diet-induced obese mice with an essential role of hepatic, but not adipose, GCGR signaling. Intriguingly, the enhancement in energy expenditure is observed only in obese but not in lean mice. The preferential efficacy is plausibly found in a prolonged activation of cAMP/PKA signaling through PDE4B/4D downregulation by LA-GCG. Conversely, the cAMP/PKA signaling is promptly attenuated by the PDE4B/4D activity in lean mice. Interestingly, unlike the EE phenotype, the lipid-clearing capacity of LA-GCG is independent of the PDE4/cAMP/PKA axis. These findings provide the molecular basis for GCG-induced energy expenditure and metabolic benefits and suggest the phenotypic segregation of cAMP/PKA-dependent and independent effects.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Glucagon controls obesity-specific energy expenditure via persistent cAMP/PKA signaling

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The livers were homogenized by lysis buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris / HCl pH 8.2 in a Quiagen Tissuelyser II with glass beads. Afterwards, 400 µg of extracted proteins were on-filter digested using 120 µl of 50 mM TEAB (pH 8) containing trypsin at a 1:100 ratio using an adaptation of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Finally, 5 µl of peptide mixture were taken and mixed with 5 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and 1:1 diluted for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of the proteomes. The remaining volume was dried almost to completeness (~5 µl) for enrichment of the phosphopeptides. The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a KingFisher Flex System and MagReSyn Ti-IMAC beads following the manufacturer’s instructions. The phosphopeptides were dried to completeness and re-solubilized with 10 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis.  MS analysis of was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source and coupled to an M-Class UPLC. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (350−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 300%, followed by HCD fragmentation on the ten most intense signals per cycle.

DATA PROCESSING:
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine.