PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
diseases: Temporal lobe epilepsy
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Human; Ms/ms; Tle; Temporal lobe epilepsy

ABSTRACT:
To scrutinize the proteomic changes that occur in human temporal lobe epilepsy, we compare peptides present in tissue from sclerotic and non-sclerotic temporal lobe epilepsy resected hippocampi and from non-epilepsy autopsy control tissue

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Hippocampal proteome in human model of Temporal Lobe Epilepsy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Total protein was extracted from ~ 30 mg of resected human hippocampal TLE tissue (n = 14) and non-epilepsy autopsy control tissue (n = 10). All work was carried out on ice. Briefly, 500 μl protein lysis buffer was added to each sample in 1.5 ml tubes and samples were then homogenised using a TissueRuptor II homogenizer (Qiagen). Samples were centrifuged at 10 000 rpm at 4 ° C for 5 min. The lysates were transferred to labelled sterile 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes and the pellets discarded. Supernatants were stored at -80 ° C and bicinchonic acid assay (BCA) was performed to determine the concentrations of protein present in the extracted protein samples. BCA’s were carried out using the Pierce Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. NP40 detergent (which interferes with mass spectrometry measurements) was removed before lysis of proteins to peptide fragments for proteomic analysis via acetone precipitation. Briefly, protein samples were transferred to acetone-compatible tubes. Four times the sample volume (200 µl) of cold (-20°C) acetone was added to each tube. Samples were briefly vortexed and then incubated for 60 min at -20°C. Samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14000 × g. The supernatants were decanted and disposed of, being careful to not dislodge the protein pellet. The acetone was allowed to evaporate from the uncapped tube at room temperature for 30 min making sure not to over-dry pellet. Samples were then processed in three distinct phases of preparation for proteomic analysis using the PreOmics iST preparation kit as per the manufacturer’s instructions. These were : 1. Lysis - 50 μl of Lyse reagent was added to 1-100 μg of protein samples and the samples were heated in a heating block to 95 °C for 10 min, with mixing at 1000 rpm. Samples were then centrifuged at 300 xg for 10 s at RT to collect. DNA in the samples was sheared via sonication in a water bath sonicator for 10 cycles of 30 s on and 30 s off. Cartridges were placed into waste tubes for each sample. Samples were transferred via pipette to cartridges and allowed to cool down to RT.  2. Digestion of protein lysates to fragments - 210 μl of “Resuspend” reagent was added to the “Digest” solution (1 tube per 4 reactions) with shaking for 10 min and 500 rpm at RT. “Digest” solution (50 μl) was added to the samples in the cartridge and placed in a heating block at 37 °C for 1-3 h, with mixing at 500 rpm. One hundred microlitres (100 μl) of “Stop” solution was added to the samples which were then incubated for 1 min with mixing at 500 rpm at RT.  3. Purification of peptide fragments for mass spectrometry - Samples in the cartridges were centrifuged at 3,800 rcf for 3 min allowing for complete flow through. “Wash 1” (200 μl) was added to each cartridge and they were centrifuged again as before. “Wash 2” (200 μl) was added to each cartridge and they were centrifuged again as before. Cartridges were placed in fresh labelled collection tubes. “Elute” buffer (100 μl) was added to each cartridge and they were centrifuged again as before keeping the eluent in the collection tube. This elution step was then repeated a second time. The collection tubes were placed in a vacuum evaporator at 45 °C until completely dry and the cartridges discarded. “LC-Load” solution was added to samples to attain a 1 g /l concentration in each based on starting protein amounts. Samples in collection tubes were sonicated RT for 5 min. Peptide samples were stored at -80 °C until they were analysed via liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) at the University College Dublin (UCD), Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, Proteomics Core Facility. All samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated on C18 home-made column (C18-AQ Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur 100 x 0.075 mm x 3 μm) over 60 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min with a linear gradient of increasing acetonitrile (ACN) from 1% to 27%. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode; a high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed to select the twelve most intense ions and fragmented using high energy C-trap dissociation for MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data from the Q-Exactive was processed using the MaxQuant (Cox & Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016) (version 2.0.3.0) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (ANDROMEDA). To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched against homo sapiens database (downloaded 2022_01 containing 75,777 entries). All searches were performed using the default settings of MaxQuant, with trypsin as specified enzyme allowing two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (CAM) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Initial data wrangling and filtering was performed in Perseus (version 1.16.5.0). All function calls / commands were carried out through the Perseus menus and dialogue boxes in the graphical user interface (GUI). The standard text file “proteinsGroup.txt” output from MaxQuant was loaded into Perseus via the Generic matrix upload function to obtain a matrix/dataframe of label free quantification (LFQ) intensity values as separate columns for each sample, with each row representing proteins identified via peptide database searches in MaxQuant. Filtering was then caried out to remove values that were probable contamination, proteins identified in reverse amino acid (aa) sequences, and proteins only identified by site. This was done using the “Filtering rows by categorical column” command and selecting for each of these criteria in the dialogue box. Next the LFQ intensity values were log (log2x) transformed. Following transformation histograms of data for each sample were checked for normality of data spread. The samples were then grouped by condition (S TLE, NS TLE and Control) by defining the appropriate annotations using the “Categorical annotation rows” command. The results were then further filtered to a high degree to only include proteins that were identified in at least 7 of the samples per group. In order to deal with missing values such that downstream analysis could be usefully carried out, imputation was done by correcting missing values or zeros to appropriate ascribed values based on the transformed normalised distributions using the “Replace missing values from normal distribution” command. Correlation analysis was done (Pearson correlation) to scrutinise whether similar samples were more highly correlated than between group samples. Preliminary hierarchical clustering was performed in order to determine the clustering of the samples via the “Hierarchical clustering” command, and heat maps were generated from these analyses. The resulting filtered matrixes were exported as .txt files and were then used for all further analyses in R (version 4.3.0). Briefly, the filtered Perseus generated text file was imported into R as a data frame (df). Further processing and data visualisation were carried out using the limma R package for differential (protein) expression analysis DEA, clusterProfile for enrichment analysis and ggplot2 for all graph generation.

METHODS:
Methods
Sex as a biological variable
This study involved both human tissue and animal models. Human hippocampal samples were obtained from individuals with TLE and included both male and female donors. PCA using sex as a variable did not reveal sex-specific clustering or patterns in m6A methylation, suggesting minimal influence of sex on the epitranscriptomic landscape in this cohort. All animal experiments were conducted using adult male mice to maintain consistency with previous studies using the IAKA model.
Mouse models of TLE and acute seizures
IAKA in mice.
For all mouse studies, we used 7- to 9-week-old-male C57BL/6JOlaHsd mice, originally from Harlan Laboratories and inbred in house at RCSI. Animals used (matching strains) at University College Dublin (UCD) were sourced from Envigo UK. Prior to IAKA administration, mice underwent a surgical procedure under general anesthesia (isoflurane; 5% induction, 1%–2% maintenance) to implant a surface injection cannula (Bilaney Consultants, custom cut 7.65 mm) over the amygdala (coordinates from Bregma: IA: antero-posterior (AP) = –0.95 mm, lateral (L) = +2.85 mm, ventral (V) = 3.1 mm).
Two to 3 days following this preparatory surgery, mice underwent IAKA microinjection (0.3 μg KA in 0.2 μL PBS; Sigma-Aldrich, K0250) to induce SE. After 40 minutes, mice then received an intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of lorazepam (Macure, L0227; 8 mg/kg) to reduce seizure severity and reduce mortality. Mice were then allowed to recover in a small animal recovery chamber (Vet-Tech, HE010) at 26°C. At selected time points, animals were euthanized by administering 0.1–0.2 mL 200 mg/mL pentobarbital (Dolethal) via i.p. administration followed by transcardial perfusion with ice-cold 1× RNase-free PBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, AM9625).
Following IAKA administration, mice generally develop spontaneous seizures after 3 to 5 days, with all animals displaying spontaneous seizures by 2 weeks after SE.
PTZ in mice.
A subcutaneous dose of PTZ (Sigma-Aldrich, P6500; 80 mg/kg prepared in PBS) was administered 24 hours after 20 μM FB23-2 (VWR International) or vehicle (0.5% DMSO, 40% PEG300, 5% Tween 80, 54.5% H2O) treatment. FB23-2 or vehicle was administered via a unilateral ICV administration in 0.4 μL volume. For ICV administration, the stereotaxic coordinates were determined using the Mouse Brain Atlas and verified using methylene blue in preliminary experiments (AP = –0.5 mm, L = –1.1 mm, V = –2.3 mm from Bregma). A 1-mm burr hole was prepared in the exposed skull and a 30-gauge stainless steel cannula connected to a Hamilton syringe was lowered to the correct depth and drug administered. The cannula was held in place for 8 minutes to prevent backflow. The incision was closed with tissue adhesive (Vetbond, IM1469SB). Seizures were recorded for 25 minutes following PTZ administration and scored using an adapted Racine scale (Supplemental Figure 7). Scorers were blinded to treatment. All mice were euthanized at the end of the PTZ protocol.
Human brain tissue
Hippocampi were collected directly from the surgical theater, frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80°C. A pathologist confirmed the presence or absence of sclerosis for each tissue sample obtained. Hippocampal sclerosis was defined as neuronal loss and gliosis primarily involving the CA1 and CA4/3 subfields with relative resistance of the CA2 region and sparing of the subiculum (if the latter were included in the resected specimen). NeuN immunostaining was employed to determine residual neuronal density and gliosis was determined using GFAP immunoreactivity. Autopsy control samples were sourced from the NIH NeuroBiobank, University of Maryland. Patient and control information is listed in Supplemental Table 1.
m6A array
RNA was isolated from both mouse and human hippocampal tissue samples as described in the Supplemental Methods. Between 1 and 5 μg of RNA from each sample was sent to Arraystar for single-nucleotide resolution microarray analysis. The array (specific for mouse or human) enables quantification of m6A abundance and stoichiometry at approximately 10,000 predefined m6A sites across the transcriptome. Briefly, the total RNA was divided into 2 fractions. One fraction was treated with the RNA endoribonuclease MazF to cleave unmodified m6A sites, while the other fraction was left untreated. MazF specifically cleaves RNA at unmethylated adenosine residues, allowing for the selective removal of unmodified RNA and preservation of m6A-modified sites. The treated and untreated RNA fractions were separately labelled with Cy5 (for MazF-digested RNA) and Cy3 (for the undigested RNA) as complementary RNAs (cRNA) using the Arraystar Super RNA Labelling Kit. These labelled cRNAs were then hybridized onto the Arraystar Human or Mouse m6A Single Nucleotide Array (8 × 15K, Arraystar). After hybridization, the arrays were washed and scanned in 2 color channels using an Agilent Scanner (G2505C).
The acquired array images were analyzed using Agilent Feature Extraction software (version 11.01.1). The raw intensity values for the Cy5-labelled (MazF digested) and Cy3-labelled (undigested) cRNAs were normalized using the average log2-scaled Spike-in RNA intensities. The Spike-in RNAs, which are synthetic control RNA sequences added at known concentrations, allow for normalization by accounting for technical variations in RNA labelling and hybridization. Log2 scaling was used to transform the intensity values into logarithmic scale to enable comparison of fold changes in signal intensities across samples. After Spike-in normalization, we filtered and retained probes with “Present” (P) or “marginal” (M) quality flags (which indicate the reliability of the probe signal compared to background) in at least 7 of the 24 human samples and 6 out of 8 mouse samples for further m6A site methylation abundance analysis. Differentially methylated sites between 2 comparison groups were compiled by fold change and statistical significance threshold (P < 0.05 [standard for this type of analysis]). For the human array, false discovery rate (FDR) was applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure and adjusted P values of less than 0.05 were set as meaningfully significant. Data visualization was performed in RStudio (version 4.3.0 and 4.3.1; https://cran.r-project.org/) (volcano plots [ggplot], chromosome plotting [Chromomap], Upset plots [UpsetR]) and GraphPad Prism (version 9.2.0). Stoichiometric data were plotted using GraphPad Prism. Differentially methylated transcripts were analyzed using Qiagen IPA to identify associated pathways. To analyze the effects of sex on the m6A profiles within and between human sample groups, a 3-column (factor) metadata table was created manually by merging a sample ID/condition metadata table, and a sample ID/sex metadata table. PCA was then performed on the processed quantification table and methylation quantification tables using the FactoMineR R library. The PCA plot was then generated using ggplot2, specifically labelling data points indicating condition and sex. ANOVA was then carried out to determine the effect of each factor and a permutational analysis of variance (PermANOVA) using the vegan R library was carried out to determine effects without the assumption of normality.
meRIP-qPCR
Total RNA was isolated as described in the Supplemental Methods using TRIzol (Invitrogen, 15596026) and quality and concentration assessed by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eighteen micrograms of RNA was separated based on Nanodrop quantification from each sample and subjected to fragmentation using an RNA fragmentation kit (Ambion, AM8740) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. This produced RNA fragments between 100 and 200 nucleotides in length (unfragmented RNA, i.e., leftover RNA not used for fragmentation, was kept as input comparison). The fragmented RNA was then incubated overnight at 4°C in IP buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, J62848.AK), 150 mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, 71386), and 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich, l8896) containing either anti-m6A antibody (Synaptic Systems, 202 003) or IgG (Abcam, ab171870) on a carousel. The antibody–RNA complexes were captured by incubation with washed Protein A/G magnetic Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 10015D) for 2 hours at 4°C with gentle rotation. After several washes to remove loosely bound complexes, m6A-tagged RNAs were separated from the beads by elution by competition, which involved incubating the beads with elution buffer (IP buffer, 20 mM m6A 5′-monophosphate sodium salt [Sigma-Aldrich, M2780], RNasin [Promega, N2611], nuclease-free water). This was repeated twice and the supernatants pooled and transferred to an RNeasy MiniElute Spin Column (Qiagen, 74204). The samples were then analyzed on a bioanalyzer using the RNA Pico Kit (Agilent, 5067-1511) according to the kit instructions. The purified RNA was then reverse transcribed and qPCR was performed using m6A-site-flanking primers (Supplemental Table 2). Input sample was run alongside the IP samples and used as comparison.
MS-based proteomics
Total protein was extracted as described above and then lysed into smaller peptide fragments using the iST Sample Preparation Kit (PreOmics, P.O.00001) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, lysis reagent was added to 1–100 μg of protein from each sample and heated on a dry block incubator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 15392185) to 95°C with rigorous mixing. Contaminating DNA in the samples was sheared by water bath sonication and samples were then transferred to cartridges and allowed to cool to room temperature (RT). The samples then underwent a digestion step using specific Digest buffer at 37°C for between 1 and 3 hours. The reaction was terminated using a kit-supplied stop solution and samples were then centrifuged at 3,800g for 3 minutes and the flow through was collected and discarded. The fraction of the sample bound to the cartridge were then washed twice and eluted with elution buffer twice using centrifugation. The samples were dried completely using a speed vac at 45°C. LC-Load buffer was added to each sample to obtain a 1 g/L concentration. The samples were finally sonicated at RT for 5 minutes and stored at –80°C until needed. Peptide samples were analyzed via liquid chromatography–tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) at the Conway Institute Proteomics core facility, UCD, on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated on a C18 home-made column (C18-AQ Dr Maisch Reprosil-Pur, 100 × 0.075 mm × 3 μm) over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min with a linear gradient of increasing acetonitrile from 1% to 27%. The MS was operated in data-independent mode; a high-resolution (70,000) MS scan (300–1600 m/z) was performed to select the 12 most intense ions and fragmented using high-energy C-trap dissociation for MS/MS analysis.
For proteomic analysis, raw data from the Q-Exactive were processed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0). To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched against the Homo sapiens database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640; downloaded 2022_01 containing 75,777 entries). Database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (CAM) as a fixed modification and acetylation (protein N-terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Data were then filtered in Perseus (version 1.16.5.0; https://maxquant.net/perseus/). All function calls/commands were carried out using the Perseus interface. Initially a matrix of label-free quantification (LFQ) intensity values were generated for each sample. Filters were then applied to remove values likely to be contaminants, proteins identified in reverse amino acid sequences, and proteins only identified by site. The LFQ values were then log transformed and histograms of the data were generated and checked for normality of data spread. The samples were then grouped by condition (control, Scl-TLE, and NS-TLE). Further filtering excluded proteins that were detected in less than 7 samples per group. Missing values were imputed using the “replace missing values from normal distribution” command. Pearson’s correlation was performed to scrutinize correlation between groups. Preliminary hierarchical clustering was performed to determine clustering and heatmaps were subsequently generated based on this clustering. Further processing and data visualization was carried out in RStudio using the limma R package for differential (protein) expression analysis, which incorporates FDR correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg method, ClusterProfile for enrichment analysis, and ggplot2 for graph generation. The resulting differentially expressed proteins were compared with various functional gene set databases in functional analysis/pathway enrichment analysis using IPA (Qiagen) or EnrichR. Sex differences were analyzed in the same way as described above (see m6A array).
ICC
hIPSC ICC.
Glass coverslips with cells were transferred to prewarmed DMEM/F-12 (Gibco, A4192101) in a new plate. The cells were then fixed by covering wells with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Merck, 1004968350) in PBS and left to be incubated for 20 minutes at RT. The coverslips were then washed 3 times with PBS, blocked with 1% BSA (Merck, A9647) in PBS, and then permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 (Merck) in 1% BSA for 30 minutes. Coverslips were then incubated with primary antibodies in 1% BSA overnight at 4°C. The next day they were washed and treated with secondary antibodies (488 nm and 568 nm) for 75 minutes in the dark at RT. After washing and staining with Hoechst, coverslips were mounted on slides.
For neural stem cell confirmation from hIPSCs, cultures were stained with antibodies against neural stem cell markers Nestin (Abcam, ab22035), Pax6 (BioLegend, 862001), and Sox2 (Abcam, ab97959). Neurons were stained with anti–βIII-tubulin (TUJ1) (Synaptic Systems, 302 306), anti-vGLUT2 (Proteintech, 25261-1-AP), anti–tyrosine hydroxylase (Sigma-Aldrich, ZRB2381), and anti-NeuN (Sigma-Aldrich, MAB377). Imaging was performed using a Leica DM400b epifluorescence microscope, capturing fluorescent signals in FITC, TRITC, and BFP channels. Images were processed with ImageJ version 2.14.0/1.54f (NIH).
Primary mouse neuron ICC.
Postsynaptic density was visualized using PSD95 as a marker. To visualize dendritic spines, anti–βIII-tubulin complemented with Alexa Fluor 568 phalloidin to enable visualization of small spines (Invitrogen, A12380) were used. Cultured neurons were first fixed with 4% PFA and permeabilized in blocking buffer (0.1% Triton X-100 in 2.5% BSA-PBS) for 1 hour at RT. Subsequently, neurons were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies against βIII-tubulin (BioLegend, 801201; 1:500), PSD95 (Abcam, ab18258; 1:200), and m6A (Synaptic Systems, 202 003; 1:200). After overnight incubation, neurons were washed in PBS to remove loosely bound antibody and then incubated in species-specific secondary antibodies at RT for 1 hour. Anti–mouse IgG-Cy5 (Invitrogen, A10524; 1:500) and anti–rabbit IgG-FITC (Invitrogen, F-2765; 1:500) were used to bind and visualize primary antibodies. Alexa Fluor 568 phalloidin (Invitrogen, A12380; 1 U/slide) was added to the blocking buffer along with secondary antibodies. Coverslips were mounted using mounting medium with DAPI (Abcam, ab228549) and imaged using a Zeiss LSM 800 confocal microscope.
For PSD95 and dendritic spine quantification, a total of at least 32 dendrites from 22 neurons per treatment group were included in the analysis across a total of 4 experiments. Multiple dendrites sampled from an individual neuron were averaged for statistical analysis to avoid pseudoreplication. Each experiment used embryos from an individual dam (4 in total), the average litter size was 7.75. All imaging and quantifications were performed manually, in a blinded manner with respect to the treatment groups. Images were calibrated for distance per pixel length, and the distance from the soma was measured and divided into 20-μm segments using ImageJ. A total dendritic length of 4440–4500 μm, derived from at least 32 dendrites per treatment group, was analyzed. Images were generated to show the entire neuron using a 40× objective lens. Dendrites, distinct from other dendrites and crossings and extending at least 100 μm from the soma, were captured at ×63 magnification. Utilizing a 2-way repeated-measures (RM) ANOVA, following Tukey’s post hoc multiple-comparison test, all treatment groups along the dendritic distance were analyzed. PSD95 and spine density was also quantified by branch order, using multiple t test analysis. A significance level of 0.05 was chosen, and data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0 software.
METTL3 overexpression
hIPSC-derived neurons were transduced with AAV vectors (VectorBuilder, custom-designed) to overexpress human METTL3. Three distinct AAV vectors were used: AAV9-SYN1-EGFP-hMETTL3, which encodes the human METTL3 gene; AAV9-SYN1-EGFP-Empty, a control vector containing only the GFP reporter driven by the SYN1 promoter; and a GFP-only virus without the SYN1 promoter (negative control). The SYN1 promoter was used to drive neuron-specific expression of both the transgene (hMETTL3) and the GFP reporter, ensuring that the transduction selectively targeted neuronal cells. The GFP reporter enabled the monitoring of successful transduction by providing a fluorescent signal visible under appropriate microscopy conditions.
For the transduction process, hIPSC-derived neurons were cultured as described above for 21 days. The AAV vectors were then added to the culture medium at a concentration of 1 × 104 genomic copies per cell and the neurons were incubated with the vectors for 48 hours, to allow efficient uptake and expression of the transgenes. After incubation, the cells were maintained in fresh culture medium for an additional period to ensure stable transgene expression.
To confirm successful overexpression of METTL3, Western blotting was performed as described above to detect the METTL3 protein in the transduced neurons. The expression of GFP was also evaluated to verify the success of the transduction using GFP immunofluorescence microscopy, as described above. This dual approach allowed for both qualitative and quantitative confirmation of transgene expression. Control cells were similarly transduced with either the empty vector (AAV9-SYN1-EGFP-Empty) or GFP-only vector, and the same analyses were performed to compare the level of GFP expression and METTL3 overexpression across conditions.
Reagents
All reagents were purchased from commercial sources that are listed throughout. Antibodies used in this study were all purchased from commercial sources. Full Western blot images are provided in supplemental material. Catalog numbers for all antibodies are provided along with vendor information. The detected bands in Western blot analyses correspond to the expected molecular weights of the target proteins, consistent with the manufacturer’s specifications and previous literature where available. Primers were designed in-house using UCSC Genome Browser alignments (mouse, mm39; human, hg38) and NCBI Primer Blast.
Statistics
Power analyses were performed during the experimental design stage. Effect size was determined depending on the type of downstream analysis based on previous studies along with a significance level of 0.05 and a 1 – β value of 0.8, with equal allocation ratios used throughout.
Unless otherwise stated in specific sections, statistical analyses were performed using appropriate parametric or nonparametric tests based on data distribution. Normality of the data was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test. For comparisons between 2 groups, unpaired t tests were used when both groups followed a normal distribution with equal variances, while Welch’s t test was applied when variances were unequal. If data were not normally distributed, the Mann-Whitney U test was used as a nonparametric alternative. For comparisons involving more than 2 groups, 1-way ANOVA was performed for normally distributed data, followed by Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple comparisons, while the Kruskal-Wallis test was used for nonparametric data, followed by Dunn’s test for pairwise comparisons. Statistical significance was set at P less than 0.05, and multiple comparisons were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR method where applicable. All analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism or RStudio.
Study approval
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the principles of the European Union Directive (2010/63/EU) and were reviewed and approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Royal College of Surgeons Ireland (REC842) under license from the Health Products Regulatory Authority (HPRA) (AE19127/IO84, AE19127/I152, AE19127/I089) and the UCD Animal Research Ethics Committee (AREC) under license from the HPRA (AE18982/P194). The systemic KA model in rats was performed at Monash University following approval by the Alfred Research Alliance Animal Ethics Committee (E/2058/2020/M). All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering and to use the minimum number of animals required for robust statistical analysis.
The human study was approved by the Ethics Committee at Beaumont Hospital, Dublin (05/18). Written, informed consent was obtained from all individuals participating in the study. All individuals were diagnosed with TLE and underwent surgical tissue resection as part of their treatment.
Data availability
RNA-seq and m6A array datasets are available from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession numbers GSE295244 (RNA-seq) and GEO GSE297566 (m6A array). The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD064519.
Values for all data points in graphs are reported in the Supporting Data Values file. All other datasets are available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.

RESULTS:
Results
Dysregulation of m6A-regulating enzymes in epilepsy.
We first examined the expression patterns of m6A-associated enzymes to gain broad insight into how epilepsy may alter the regulation of this pathway (Figure 1A). Initial quantification of m6A levels in total (Figure 1B) and polyA-RNA (Figure 1C) from the hippocampi of acute post-SE (24 hours after KA) and chronic mice (2 weeks after KA) revealed no detectable changes in gross m6A abundance at either disease stage. Using quantitative PCR (qPCR) and Western blotting, we next probed the expression of m6A writers (METTL3 and METTL14) (Supplemental Figure 1A and Figure 1, D and G; supplemental material available online with this article; https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.188612DS1), readers (YTHDF1 and YTHDF2) (Supplemental Figure 1B and Figure 1, E and H), and erasers (FTO and ALKBH5) (Supplemental Figure 1C and Figure 1, F and I) in acute or chronic mice versus time-matched controls. The abundance of most m6A-associated enzymes was relatively stable across both stages of the disease in mice. However, a small but significant increase in METTL3 protein levels was detected in the early acute post-SE time point (24 hours after SE) (Figure 1, D and G). We did not see any differences in mRNA levels for any m6A writer, reader, or eraser at any stage of the disease (Supplemental Figure 1, A–C). A second KA model in rats confirmed the findings in mice (Supplemental Figure 1D).
We next performed the same analyses using human TLE samples compared to autopsy control tissue. Quantification of m6A abundance in total RNA was unchanged in both nonsclerotic (NS-TLE) and sclerotic (Scl-TLE) hippocampal samples from patients with TLE compared to control samples (Figure 2, A and B). We then quantified the expression of the same m6A-associated enzymes examined previously in the human TLE samples and autopsy controls. Similarly to mice, we detected no significant changes in mRNA levels of any of the m6A-associated enzymes in epilepsy (Supplemental Figure 2, A–C). We did, however, detect significant changes at the protein level. These included a significant increase in METTL3 and METTL14 protein abundance in TLE compared with control tissue (Figure 2C) as well as elevated levels of both FTO and ALKBH5 (Figure 2E) in TLE samples. There were no overt differences in the reader proteins YTHDF1 and YTHDF2 in either group (Figure 2D). Overall, in both mouse and human epilepsy, there are changes in the abundance of enzymes regulating m6A (notably METTL3 in both mouse and human and FTO and ALKBH5 in human TLE), although no gross changes in m6A were detectable using colorimetric assays.
Temporal and dynamic m6A patterning occurs in the hippocampus following SE.
To examine m6A patterning in the hippocampal transcriptome in the IAKA model of TLE, we performed an m6A array on RNA isolated from mice at acute (24 hours) and chronic (2 weeks) time points after IAKA as well as time-matched control animals. We first measured gene expression irrespective of m6A status by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) and identified a large number of genes both up- and downregulated at both the acute and chronic time points (Figure 3A, green/yellow bars). As expected, and in line with previous studies, we observed changes in expression patterns of epilepsy-associated genes, including those involved in synaptic transmission, inflammation, and cell death (Supplemental Figure 3, A–D). Profiling of the m6A-ome using m6A arrays provides transcriptome-wide coverage with single-base resolution. Overall, we identified more extensive m6A dysregulation in the acute mice compared with time-matched controls, although dysregulation was also detected in chronic mice (Figure 3A, red/blue bars). There was little overlap in differential m6A patterns in acute mice compared to chronic mice, with only 5 hypermethylated transcripts retaining their hypermethylation status into the chronic phase of the disease (Figure 3B). Hypermethylation was more prominent than hypomethylation at both time points (Figure 3C). Overall, in acute mice there were 133 hypermethylated sites and only 31 hypomethylated sites compared with controls, while in chronic mice there were 67 hyper- and 11 hypomethylated sites compared with controls (Figure 3, D and E). Some transcripts contained multiple differentially methylated sites. The majority of differential methylation events were transient, with m6A status mostly returning to baseline levels in chronic mice, suggesting potential activity and disease-stage-dependent m6A patterning (Figure 3F).
Analysis of m6A stoichiometry on mRNA transcripts revealed asymmetric distribution of m6A across transcripts, with several-fold higher frequency in the coding sequence (CDS) followed by the 3′UTR than in the 5′UTR in control animals (Figure 4A). Acute (24 hours) and chronic (2 weeks) mice displayed a notable loss of m6A in the 5′UTR, with comparable methylation observed in the 3′UTR and CDS at each disease stage (Figure 4, B and C). To validate the array datasets, we performed methylated-RNA immunoprecipitation–qPCR (meRIP-qPCR) on several hyper- and hypomethylated transcripts. We quantified each transcript in the total RNA pool (input sample) and used this to normalize the corresponding m6A-modified transcript levels in the immunoprecipitated (IP) fraction, allowing us to assess the accuracy of the array. We observed almost complete concordance of the array data and meRIP-qPCR, which was performed from brain tissue originating from an independent cohort of animals (Figure 4, D and E). Analysis of genomic location of differentially methylated transcripts did not reveal any obvious methylation hotspots, although chromosomes 2 and 11 (Chr2 and -11) displayed more extensive differential methylation patterns (Figure 4F). Some chromosomes displayed only hypermethylation (Chr15), while others showed more extensive hypomethylation (Chr10), suggesting region-specific regulation. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) demonstrated that differentially methylated transcripts in acute mice (24 hours) were associated with pathways such as inflammation and inflammation-related cell death and autophagy (Figure 4G), while those in chronic mice (2 weeks) were associated with IL-6 signalling and cellular communication (Figure 4H).
Human TLE is defined by altered m6A patterns regardless of hippocampal sclerosis and sex.
Next, we profiled the m6A patterning in human TLE using surgically resected hippocampal tissue from individuals with drug-refractory TLE and compared it to age- and sex-matched autopsy control tissue (Supplemental Table 1). m6A array profiling revealed significant differential methylation across transcripts in TLE compared with autopsy control. We separated epilepsy samples into those with hippocampal sclerosis (Scl) and those without (NS) based on the neuropathology reports. Both epilepsy groups displayed significantly altered m6A patterns compared with controls (Figure 5, A and B) but we found minimal difference in m6A patterns between patients with Scl-TLE and those without (NS-TLE) (Figure 5C). Interestingly, m6A patterns were not influenced by sex (Supplemental Figure 4A). For both TLE sample types there were over 800 hyper- and more than 300 hypomethylated sites compared with controls. Hypermethylation by abundance was dominant in both the Scl and NS groups compared with control, with roughly 70% of all differential methylation events associated with an increase in m6A abundance (Figure 5D). There was significant overlap in the hypermethylated transcripts detected between the NS and Scl groups, suggesting differential m6A is a broadly conserved feature of TLE independent of pathology (Figure 5, E and F).
Analysis of m6A stoichiometry showed a shift in deposition patterning, with an increase in the number of genes with more than 20% occupancy (Figure 5, G–I). The distribution of m6A across transcripts (i.e., 3′UTR, CDS, or 5′UTR) did not change in epilepsy regardless of Scl status (Figure 5, G–I; insets). Genomic location of encoding genes did not reveal any chromosomal hotspots of targeted methylation or demethylation, although Chr17 (which shares evolutionary roots with mouse Chr11) and Chr19 contain regions of genes whose transcripts display enriched m6A activity (Figure 5J). IPA of differentially methylated transcripts from the combined epilepsy sample group highlighted autophagic pathways, mTOR signalling, and metabolism as pathways likely to be affected by disrupted methylation patterns in epilepsy (Figure 5K). The current results overall identify extensive m6A disruption in human TLE, which potentially affects several epilepsy-associated pathways.
Commonalities in m6A disturbances in experimental and human TLE.
We next determined whether m6A dysregulation seen in experimental TLE is similar to that seen in the human condition by comparing our experimental TLE and human TLE datasets. Our initial analysis investigated whether m6A sites profiled in mice possess human orthologs. Between 35% and 45% of the differentially methylated m6A sites in experimental mice are orthologous in humans (Figure 6A); however, of those, only a handful were also differentially methylated in human TLE (34 gene transcripts) (Figure 6B). While specific sites were not commonly differentially methylated in both mouse and human epilepsy, there was some overlap in the functionality of transcripts that displayed differential methylation patterns such as inflammatory signalling and cell death pathways (Figure 6, C and D).
Metabolic pathways are also perturbed at the proteomic level in human TLE.
m6A may impact RNA fate in a multitude of ways, including subcellular localization, stability, and/or translational efficiency. To determine whether pathways most likely impacted by differential m6A patterning in epilepsy are functionally altered, we performed mass spectrometry (MS) to analyze the human TLE proteome using the same tissue samples used in the m6A-profiling experiment. Hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis (PCA) showed good clustering of TLE samples; while control samples also clustered together, it was evident that samples did not separate by sex regardless of condition (Supplemental Figure 4B). A large number of differentially expressed proteins were detected in the TLE groups (NS and Scl) when compared with control tissue (Figure 7, A and B). However, similar to our findings in the m6A array, the proteomes of both the NS- and Scl-TLE samples were remarkably similar (Figure 7C). IPA of differentially expressed proteins in the combined epilepsy group (Figure 7D) revealed overall disruption of many metabolism (mitochondrial dysfunction, glucose metabolism) and autophagy-related pathways. We then integrated the human m6A data with the human proteomic dataset and found an inverse correlation between m6A levels and activation or repression of the corresponding pathways (Figure 7E). These results may suggest that elevation of m6A may be a molecular brake to silence pathways.
Bidirectional modulation of m6A alters neuronal metabolism, structure, and seizure susceptibility.
The metabolic phenotype common to both mouse and human TLE prompted us to explore the effect of elevated m6A on neuronal function. First, using matured human induced pluripotent stem cell–derived (hIPSC-derived) neurons (Figure 8, A–D), we overexpressed METTL3 by transducing cells with a METTL3-overexpressing adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector (Figure 8, E and F). RNA-seq and MS analyses of lysates from these cells detected only subtle changes in both transcription and protein profiles (Figure 8, G and H). However, the pathways most perturbed by METTL3 overexpression were associated with cellular metabolism (Figure 8I). Interestingly, in METTL3-overexpressing cells many downregulated transcripts were noncoding RNAs and pseudogenes (Supplemental Figure 5). Finally, Seahorse analysis demonstrated that human neurons overexpressing METTL3 had elevated rates of glycolysis compared with nontransduced or empty AAV–transduced neurons and this was corrected by pharmacological inhibition of METTL3 (Figure 8, J and K). Overall, our data demonstrate that overexpression of METTL3 elevates the basal metabolic capabilities of even healthy neurons, making them more glycolytically active.
Next, to assess the effect of m6A elevation on neuronal structure we first treated mouse primary hippocampal neurons with a commercially available METTL3 inhibitor (STM2457), and then assessed the effect of elevated m6A on dendritic spine density (Figure 9A). METTL3 inhibition led to a detectable increase in m6A levels for up to 24 hours in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 9, B and C). We first measured the effect of METTL3 inhibition on spine density as a function of distance from the soma. METTL3 inhibition increased the density of spines, with no clear effect on particular branch order (Figure 9, D and E, and Supplemental Figure 6, A–D). Immunocytochemistry (ICC) for the postsynaptic density protein PSD95 uncovered increased PSD95 immunoreactivity in cultures treated with the METTL3 inhibitor along dendrites (Figure 9, D and F). This increase was apparent in branch orders 1 and 4 (Figure 9F).
We next tested whether recreation of the hypermethylation phenotype seen following SE alters brain excitability. To do this, we treated naive mice with an FTO inhibitor, FB23-2, via intracerebroventricular (ICV) administration prior to a pentylenetetrazol-induced-seizure (PTZ-induced-seizure) challenge (Figure 9G). FB23-2 treatment reduced overall hippocampal FTO levels (Supplemental Figure 7, A and B) and elevated m6A levels compared with vehicle-treated animals (Supplemental Figure 7C and Supplemental Figure 8, A–C). A single high dose of PTZ was then administered to both groups of animals and resulting seizure dynamics were quantified using an adapted Racine scale (Supplemental Figure 8F). Overall, we found that FB23-2–treated animals were more likely to survive the PTZ challenge and recording period (Figure 9H). Although FB23-2 had no significant effect on latency to seizure onset (Supplemental Figure 8D), it did reduce the overall severity of seizures experienced by mice compared with vehicle-treated controls (Figure 9I) and the overall number of seizures mice experienced over the recording period (Figure 9J and Supplemental Figure 8E). Together, these in vitro and in vivo data demonstrate a mechanistic link between m6A levels and neuronal structure and function.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is the most common epilepsy syndrome in adults. Often caused by direct brain insults such as traumatic brain injury (TBI), stroke, central nervous system (CNS) infections, and status epilepticus (SE), it is associated with high rates of drug refractoriness and comorbid symptoms such as persistent learning and memory impairment, depression, and anxiety. Injurious brain insults trigger widespread and persistent changes in gene expression and gene expression regulation that govern cellular and network activity, representing an important mechanism of hyperexcitable network formation and maintenance. Indeed, to date, researchers have uncovered extensive dysregulation of the epigenome, the transcriptome, the miRnome, and the translatome in epilepsy. Identifying how gene readout and regulation are affected in epilepsy is critical, not only to improve our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that give rise to the disease but also to identify novel druggable targets to develop mechanism-based therapies that impact the underlying causes and progression of the disease. It is likely that additional, unexplored layers of gene regulation are also affected by epilepsy-provoking insults and contribute to the pathogenic gene expression changes that characterize and drive TLE development.
RNA is subject to substantial covalent modifications, many of which are highly abundant in brain tissues. These modifications increase functional diversity and the information-carrying capacity of RNA moieties. Methylation of adenosine residues at the N6 position (N6-methyladenosine, m6A) is the most abundant internal modification of messenger RNA (mRNA) and has been reported to regulate RNA subcellular localization, RNA stability, and translational efficiency. Originally described decades ago as a structural modification on ribosomal RNA (rRNA), it has recently gained much attention following technological advancements that allowed transcriptome-wide profiling of m6A in cells and tissues. Detection of m6A on mRNA and characterization of enzymes that regulate both the catalytic deposition (writers: METTL3, METTL14, WTAP) and removal (erasers: FTO, ALKBH5) of m6A uncovered a dynamic modification influenced by cellular needs and stimulus. A large group of proteins have now also been identified that recognize and process m6A-tagged RNA (readers: YTHDF1–3, ELAVL1, FXRP, and others). m6A is well conserved and abundant in brain tissue from both humans and mice. Although little is known about m6A in epilepsy, it has been extensively linked with brain function, having been shown to regulate neuronal development, learning and memory, and the stress response. Given its importance for normal brain function, it is therefore unsurprising that m6A regulation is seemingly altered in many neurological conditions, including Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and TBI.
Here, we performed what we believe to be the first comprehensive profiling of m6A in epilepsy, using both a preclinical mouse model of the disease — intra-amygdala kainic acid–induced (IAKA-induced) TLE, and hippocampal tissue samples from individuals with drug-refractory TLE. We identify pathways that display common m6A dysregulation in both mouse and human, suggesting conserved mechanisms in epilepsy. In addition, we explored the functional significance of m6A dysregulation by performing proteomic analyses using the same human tissue and then performing functional assays in vitro using METTL3-overexpressing neurons. Finally, we established a clear link between m6A and network excitability by pharmacologically elevating m6A levels and assessing seizure resilience in mice. Together, our data suggest that m6A is profoundly altered in TLE and directly changes network excitability, potentially via the regulation of metabolic and autophagic pathways.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Copyright: © 2025, Mathoux et al. This is an open access article published under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Reference information: JCI Insight. 2025;10(14):e188612.https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.188612.
07/22/2025
Electronic publication