PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Pancreatic cancer; Cpeb1; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Pancreatic cancer is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide. Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein 1 (CPEB1) is a fundamental translation regulatory factor regulating the polyadenylation process of messenger RNA. However, its biological functions in pancreatic cancer are poorly understood. Here the CPEB1 gene was knocked down or overexpressed in JF-305 cell line. To investigate the role of CPEB1 and new interacting proteins, proteomic analysis was performed using LC-MS/MS approach.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic analysis of JF-305 derivative CPEB1 knockdown/overexpression cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The cell pellets were lysed with 200 μL lysis buffer (1% Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC), 8M Urea, 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1x protease inhibitor). After reduction by 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylation by 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), the proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of enzyme: protein as 1: 50.

DATA PROCESSING:
The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach was applied to obtain protein quantitative information. Raw files were analyzed by DIA-NN version 1.8.1 against the human database downloaded from SwissProt (20211231, 20375 entries), and differential protein expression was analyzed with the DEP R package (1.20.0). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis were performed with Metascape and clusterProfiler package (4.4.4) in R programming.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Cell lines and cell culture
All human cancer cell lines were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) or European Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (ECACC) except JF-305, which was a gift from Prof. Jing Gao. The pancreatic cancer cell line PANC-1 was cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM) (Gibco, Cat# 11995-065) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Corning, Cat# 35-010-CV) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco, Cat #15140-122); while JF-305 and AsPC-1 were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The colorectal cancer cell line HCT116 was cultured in McCoy's 5A medium and HT29 in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS, as previously described. U-251MG human glioblastoma cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Gastric cancer cell lines MGC-803 and HGC-27 were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. All the cell lines were cultured in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C and 5% CO2.
Cell viability and proliferation assays
Cell viability following treatment with ferroptosis inducers was evaluated using the Cell Counting kit-8 (CCK-8, Beyotime, Cat# C0040), according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, cells were seeded in 96-well plates at a density of 1×104 cells/well. After culturing for 12 hours, cells were treated with erastin (MCE, Cat# HY-15763) or RSL3 (MCE, Cat# HY-100218A) for 72 hours. CCK-8 solution was then added to each well at a concentration of 10% and the cells were incubated at 37°C for 1-2 hours before measurement. The absorbance of each well was measured at 450 nm using a Synergy HTX microplate reader (Agilent, USA).
Cell proliferation was evaluated using a colony formation assay. Briefly, cells plated at a confluence of 70%-80% were treated with ferroptosis inducers for 24 hours, then seeded on 6-well plates at a density of 800 cells per well with fresh medium, growing for another 14 days to form colonies. The colonies were fixed with paraformaldehyde (4.0% v/v), stained with crystal violet (0.5% w/v), and counted manually. Student's t-test was performed to analyze the differences between the groups.
RNA extraction, reverse transcription and quantitative real-time PCR (RT-qPCR)
Total RNA from cells was isolated using an RNA extraction kit (Vazyme, Cat# RC112-01) following the manufacturer's instructions. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was reverse-transcribed from 1 μg of total RNA using a Reverse Transcriptase Kit (Vazyme, Cat# R312-02). Real-time quantitative PCR was performed on a QuantStudio 7 Flex system (Thermo fisher, USA) with a SYBR Green PCR Kit (TransGen, Cat#AQ132-21). Primer information for the target genes is shown Supplementary List 1. The expression level of B2M served as an internal control for the normalization of target gene expression. All RT-qPCR was performed three times independently, as shown with the representative results.
Protein extraction, immunoblots and immunoprecipitation assay
Total protein was extracted from cells using lysis buffer containing 1 mM DTT and 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), as previously described. Immunoblots was performed as described previously. In brief, proteins were separated on 8-12% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore, Cat# IPFL00010) or nitrocellulose (NC) membranes (Amershan protran, Cat# 10600002), which were incubated overnight with specific antibodies against target proteins at 4°C. Blots were probed with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (ZSGB-Bio company, Cat# ZB-2301, ZB-2305), followed by detection with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL, Advansta, Cat# K-12045-D50) by ChampChemi 610 Plus System (SAGE, China). For immunoprecipitation, cells were lysed in p300-lysis buffer as previously reported. The protein extracts were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma, Cat# A2220), or mouse IgG plus A/G agarose beads (Thermo Fisher, Cat# 20421) at 4°C for 4-6 hours. The immunoprecipitants were washed three times on ice with precooled lysis buffer and eluted with SDS loading buffer by boiling for 10 minutes before being analyzed by immunoblotting.
Polysome profiling assay
Polysome profiling assay was performed as previously described. PANC-1 derivative cells (Control or CPEB1-ko) were harvested and lysed on ice with Polysome lysis buffer (20 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NaCl, 100 μg/mL cycloheximide, 1% Triton X-100, 40 U/mL RNasin, and protease inhibitor cocktail), followed by centrifugation at 12000×g at 4°C. Clear supernatants from lysates were transferred into 10%-50% sucrose gradients (sucrose diluted in a buffer composed of 25 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, 5 mM MgCl2 and 100 mM NaCl) and centrifuged at 35,000 rpm (SW41Ti Beckman Rotor) for 3 hours at 4 °C. Absorbance at 260 nm was monitored to record the polysome profiling curve using a Piston Gradient Fractionator (Biocomp, USA). Polysomal RNA was extracted as described above, used for the RT-qPCR assay.
Ribonucleoprotein immunoprecipitation (RIP) assay
The RIP assay was performed as previously described. Briefly, Cells overexpressing FLAG-tagged CPEB1 were harvested and crosslinked with 1% (v/v) formaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature. Cells were then lysed on ice with IP buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.4 U/μl RNasin and protease inhibitor cocktail), followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads (Sigma, Cat# A2220) or mouse IgG plus A/G agarose beads (Thermo Fisher, Cat# 20421) at 4°C for 4 hours. The beads were washed three times and incubated with Proteinase K for decrosslinking. RNA was extracted from the samples using TRIzol (TransGen, Cat# ET111-01-V2).
Poly(A) tail length assay
The poly (A) tail length assay was performed using the extension Poly(A) Test (ePAT) method, as previously described. Briefly, total RNA extracted from cells was mixed with a PAT-anchor primer for annealing, incubated at 80°C for 5 min, and cooled to room temperature. The RNA with Poly(A) was tagged with an anchor sequence on its 3' terminus by using Klenow polymerase (NEB, Cat# M0210V) with the reaction buffer (5 mM DTT, 0.5 mM dNTPs, 40U RNase inhibitor (Vazyme, Cat# R301-02) and 1xSuperscript IV mixture (Life Technologies, Cat# 18090200)), and incubated at 25°C for 1 hour for the RNA extension reaction. The 3'-tagged adenylated RNA was then reverse-transcribed into cDNA for further PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing. The primer sequences are listed in Supplementary List 2.
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) assay, glutathione (GSH)/glutathione disulfide (GSSG) assay, malondialdehyde (MDA) assay and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay
The intracellular ROS level was detected using 2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) fluorescent probe (Beyotime, Cat# S0033S) following the manufacturer's protocol. GSH and GSSG were detected using a GSSG/GSH Quantification Kit (Dojindo, Cat# G263) following the manufacturer's protocol, and the results were normalized to the protein concentration measured using the BCA assay kit (Beyotime, Cat# P0012S). Similarly, intracellular MDA was detected using an MDA assay kit (TBA method; Dojindo, Cat# M496) following the manufacturer's protocol. The LDH in the cell culture medium was detected using an LDH Cytotoxicity Assay Kit (Beyotime, Cat# C0016) following the manufacturer's protocol. The cytotoxicity index was calculated using the formula: (test LDH release-spontaneous release)/maximal release.
Proteomic analysis
The cell pellets were lysed with 200 μL lysis buffer (1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma, Cat# D6750), 8 M urea, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma, Cat# T7408) and 1x protease inhibitor). After reduction with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma, Cat# D9779) and alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, Cat# I1149), proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Cat# V5111) at an enzyme: protein as 1:50.
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). A data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach was applied to obtain quantitative protein information. Raw files were analyzed using DIA-NN version 1.8.1 against the human database downloaded from SwissProt (20221212, 20401 entries), and differential protein expression was analyzed with the DEP R package (1.20.0). Pathway enrichment and functional analysis was performed using Metascape and the clusterProfiler package (4.4.4) in R programming (4.2.2).
Immunofluorescence (IF) assay
Cells cultured in chambered coverslip (Ibidi, Cat# 80826) were fixed in 4% (v/v) paraformaldehyde (30 minutes at room temperature), washed with PBS, and blocked with 5% (v/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 1 hour. Subsequently, the cells were incubated overnight at 4˚C with the anti-NRF2 antibody (1:400, Proteintech, Cat#16396-1-AP). After washing with PBS, the fluorescein coupled secondary antibody (1:400, Huabio, Cat# HA1121) was added and incubated for 1 hour at 37˚C in a humidity chamber. Finally, DAPI (4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) was utilized to stain the nuclei (100ng/ml, 10 minutes in room temperature). The samples were then scanned using a confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM980, SUSTech Core Research Facilities).
Compounds, plasmids and antibodies
All compounds, small-molecule inhibitors, antibodies, oligonucleotides and plasmids used in this study are summarized in Supplementary List 3-6. Cell lines with CPEB1 knockout were constructed using the pX459 vector (Addgene #62988) with two sgRNAs. All lentiviruses were packaged using 293FT cells (Invitrogen, Cat# R700-07), with a MOI value of 5.
Mouse xenografts and treatments
Eight-week-old female nude mice were obtained from, and maintained at, the SUSTech Laboratory Animal Center. All mice were randomly divided into four groups (Ctrl+Vehicle group, n=6; CPEB1-ko+Vehicle group, n=5; Ctrl+Erastin group, n=5; CPEB1-ko+Erastin group, n=6). Tumor implantation was performed with 2×106 pancreatic cancer cells injected into the subcutaneous layer on one side of the flank. Tumor size was measured twice a week, and tumor volume was calculated using the formula: length × width2× 0.5. Mice were euthanized when the long diameter exceeding 1.5 cm or the tumor volume reached 1500 mm3. Mice were intraperitoneally administered erastin (30 mg/kg) or vehicle control (corn oil) when the tumor volume reached 100 mm3. The treatment was administered three times per week for 2 weeks. The observation duration lasted for two months (60 days) since the first treatment, and all mice were euthanized at the end-point regardless of tumor size.
Patients, tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human pancreatic cancer and tumor-adjuvant tissue microarray slides (Cat# HPanA170Su04) were purchased from Outdo Biotech (Shanghai, China). The slide contained tissue samples from 90 individual cases obtained from and authorized by the National Human Genetic Resources Sharing Service Platform (Platform No: 2005DKA21300).
The expression levels of CPEB1, p62 and NRF2 were assessed by IHC staining of pancreatic cancer and tumor-adjacent tissues. The immunoreactive score (IRS) was calculated as previously reported. Protein expression was classified into “low-expression” and “high-expression” based on a cut-off score of 6, namely low-expression is defined as IRS<6, while high-expression is defined as IRS≥6, as previously reported. All slides were read by two senior pathologists who were blinded to clinical data. In the discrepant case, both pathologists reached a consensus before the final scores were determined.
Statistical analysis
All experiments were independently repeated at least three times. Quantitative data are presented as mean ± s.d., and were compared using Student's t-test if the data followed a normal distribution; otherwise, the data were compared using a nonparametric test. Categorical variables were analyzed using the chi-squared test. The relationship between variables was analyzed using Pearson correlation analysis. Survival was assessed using the Kaplan-Meier method with a log-rank test. Data were analyzed using SPSS software (version 19.0; SPSS Inc., USA). All tests were two-sided, and a P value less than 0.05 was deemed statistically significant.

RESULTS:
Results
CPEB1 deficiency increases cellular resistance to ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer
As CPEB1 is involved in cancer progression and therapeutic resistance, we wondered whether its expression level is altered in the majority of cancer types. By analyzing the expression level of CPEB1 among the 31 cancer types in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database, we found that there are 21 cancer types in which CPEB1 is remarkably less expressed than in the matched tumor-adjacent tissues (Figure S1A), which is consistent with previous reports that CPEB1 is hypermethylated and expressed at low levels in solid tumors. In pancreatic cancer, low-expression of CPEB1 is associated with later TNM stage (Figure S1B), and potentially worse survival (Figure S1C, S2). These data prompted us to further study the oncological significance of CPEB1 deficiency in pancreatic cancer.
To mimic CPEB1 deficiency in tumors, we constructed CPEB1-knockout (CPEB1-ko) pancreatic cancer cell lines derived from PANC-1 and JF-305 cells (Figure S3). These CPEB1-deficient cancer cells exhibited remarkably higher resistance to various ferroptosis inducers than their CPEB1-normal counterparts, as identified by CCK-8 and colony formation assays (Figure 1A-B). Complementarily, overexpression of CPEB1 sensitized cancer cells to ferroptosis inducers (Figure 1C-D). The biochemical markers of ferroptosis, including the production of lipid peroxidation (MDA) and ROS, the LDH reflecting membrane damage, and the ratio of GSH/GSSG as a representative marker of antioxidant capacity, were also measured as shown in Figure 1E-H, clearly supporting that CPEB1 deficiency increases ferroptosis resistance in pancreatic cancer.
CPEB1 deficiency enhances the NRF2 proteostasis in pancreatic cancer
So far, the only ferroptosis regulator reported to be under the control of CPEB1 is TWIST1, an inhibitor of ATF4. However, TWIST1 is hardly expressed in pancreatic cancer cells (Figure S4). Instead, we found that NRF2, another potent regulator of ferroptosis, mediates the ferroptosis downstream of CPEB1 in pancreatic cancer based on the following findings: First, we detected the protein abundance of NRF2 (a key transcription factor in response to oxidative stress) and BACH1 (a transcriptional repressor antagonistic to NRF2) in the CPEB1-ko and -normal cells by immunoblotting, and found that CPEB1 loss remarkably upregulated NRF2 without affecting BACH1 (Figure 2A), whereas overexpression of CPEB1 complementarily downregulated NRF2 (Figure 2B). Second, CPEB1-deficient PANC-1 cells showed enhanced NRF2 upregulation upon treatment with the ferroptosis inducer erastin compared to their CPEB1-normal counterparts (Figure 2C), in agreement with the scenario of ferroptosis resistance induced by CPEB1 loss. Third, CPEB1 loss-induced NRF2 upregulation was not associated with a higher level of NRF2 transcript (Figure S5A) and was rescued by the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Figure 2D). Furthermore, a protein stability assay revealed a retarded rate of NRF2 degradation in CPEB1-ko cells (Figure 2E), suggesting that CPEB1 loss improves the stability of NRF2. Finally, as a transcription factor that induces ferroptosis resistance, NRF2 promotes the transcription of numerous anti-ferroptosis genes, including GPX4, HMOX1, and SLC7A11, as validated by reverse transcription and RT-qPCR assays (Figure S5B). We then demonstrated that loss of CPEB1 in pancreatic cancer cells activated the expression of NRF2-target genes (Figure 2F-G); and that overexpression of CPEB1 complementarily downregulated the expression of these genes (Figure 2H-I). As the nuclear localization of NRF2 is crucial for its transcriptional activity, we conducted two independent experiments to determine the impact of CPEB1 on the subcellular localization of NRF2: neither the immunoblotting data with fractionalized protein (cytoplasmic and nuclear fraction) (Figure S5C) nor the immunofluorescence result (Figure S5D) supported CPEB1 inducing NRF2 translocation. All the data above suggest CPEB1-loss enhances the stability of NRF2 without affecting its expression or translocation, and thereby activates the transcription of anti-ferroptosis genes.
CPEB1 deficiency promotes p62 translation by facilitating mRNA polyadenylation
To gain further insight into the effect of CPEB1 loss on NRF2 proteostasis, we performed a proteomic analysis using JF-305 derivative cells with or without CPEB1 knockdown (Figure 3A). Among the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), we noticed that p62, which is involved in oxidative stress and proteostasis regulation, was significantly upregulated upon CPEB1 loss (Figure 3A-B). As previous reports have shown that p62 maintains NRF2 stability by sequestering the E3 ligase KEAP1 from NRF2, we hypothesized that p62 is a potential mediator of CPEB1 loss-induced NRF2 upregulation. We noted that the proteomic data from CPEB1-overexpressing cells also provided additional evidence that p62 was downregulated upon CPEB1 overexpression (Figure 3C). We then investigated the regulatory mechanism between CPEB1 and p62 by performing the following experiments: First, we confirmed by immunoblotting that knockout of CPEB1 resulted in a remarkable increase in p62 abundance without affecting KEAP1 (Figure 3D), whereas overexpression of CPEB1 complementarily induced a decrease in p62 abundance (Figure 3E), consistent with the proteomic data. Notably, this p62 up- or down-regulation induced by CPEB1 loss or overexpression was not associated with transcriptional regulation, determined by RT-qPCR assay (Figure S6). Since p62 abundance is highly associated with autophagy activity, we inhibited cellular autophagy using chloroquine, a commonly used lysosomal inhibitor, and found that it did not block the p62 upregulation induced by CPEB1 loss (Figure 3F), thus excluding autophagy-induced p62 alteration. Second, the polysome profiling assay revealed a significantly activated translation induced by CPEB1 loss (Figure 3G), and an improved proportion of p62 mRNA in the polysome fraction in CPEB1-deficient cells (Figure 3H), supporting the regulatory mechanism by which loss of CPEB1 promotes the translation of p62, whereas the polysomal RNA of NRF2 showed no change in the CPEB1-deficient cells (Figure 3H). Third, RIP assay showed that CPEB1 directly binds to the mRNA of p62 (Figure 3I). Finally, because CPEB1 regulates protein translation by promoting or inhibiting poly(A) elongation, we performed a poly(A) tail length assay followed by Sanger sequencing, which showed that CPEB1 attenuated poly(A) tail elongation at the 3'-UTR of p62 mRNA (Figure 3J). Taken together, these data suggest that CPEB1 loss promotes p62 translation by facilitating poly(A) elongation of its mRNA.
CPEB1-p62-KEAP1 axis controls NRF2 proteostasis and ferroptosis susceptibility in cancer
The upregulation of p62 and NRF2 in CPEB1 deficient cells led us to hypothesize that the CPEB1-p62-KEAP1 axis regulates NRF2 proteostasis and ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer. A number of complementary experiments were conducted to test this hypothesis. First, exogenous expression of p62 resulted in an increased abundance of NRF2 in JF-305 and PANC-1 cells (Figure 4A); conversely, knockdown of p62 induced a downregulation of NRF2 abundance and the transcriptional repression of NRF2-target genes (Figure 4B, Figure S7A), without affecting NRF2 transcription and KEAP1 abundance (Figure S7B, Figure 4B). Second, the decrease in NRF2 abundance induced by p62 knockdown was reversed by the proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Figure 4C). Third, the level of poly-ubiquitinated NRF2 was remarkably increased in response to p62 knockdown (Figure 4D). Fourth, the interaction between KEAP1 and NRF2 was significantly enhanced by p62 knockdown (Figure 4E) and attenuated by either p62 overexpression (Figure 4F) or CPEB1 deletion (Figure 4G). Finally, overexpression of exogenous p62 prevented CPEB1-induced NRF2 degradation (Figure 4H), supporting the critical role of p62 in mediating the CPEB1-controled regulation of NRF2 stability.
To validate the role of this axis in controlling ferroptosis susceptibility, we demonstrated that overexpression or knockdown of p62 remarkably improved or reduced cellular resistance to erastin, respectively, by CCK-8 assays (Figure 4I-J). The expected key role of NRF2 in mediating the cellular response to erastin in pancreatic cancer cells was also confirmed using NRF2 overexpressing or knockdown cell models (Figure 4K-L). All these results support the notion that the CPEB1-p62-KEAP1 axis functions as a critical regulatory pathway for controlling NRF2 homeostasis and susceptibility to ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer.
To further assess the ubiquity of the axis in cancer, we overexpressed CPEB1 in multiple cancer cell lines and confirmed that p62 and NRF2 were downregulated in pancreatic and colorectal cancer (Figure S8A-B), while no change was observed in gastric cancer (Figure S8C). Additionally, we demonstrated TWIST1 was the downstream ferroptosis-regulator of CPEB1 in gastric cancer as reported (Figure S8D).
CPEB1-deficient tumor is resistant to erastin therapy in vivo
Encouraged by the above in vitro results, to further evaluate the effect of CPEB1 loss on ferroptosis susceptibility in vivo, we performed subcutaneous xenograft tumor models derived from JF-305 cells without or with CPEB1 knockout in nude mice, and treated the mice with erastin or vehicle, as shown in Figure 5A. We demonstrated that CPEB1-deficient tumors conferred remarkable resistance to erastin treatment, with less inhibition of tumor growth (Figure 5B) and a shorter doubling time in tumor size (Figure 5C), compared to their CPEB1-normal counterparts.
To better understand the differential susceptibility to ferroptosis inducer caused by CPEB1 loss, we evaluated the histological response of xenograft tumors to erastin or vehicle treatment using pathological slides. In the vehicle-treated group, no morphological difference was observed between CPEB1-normal and -deficient tumors on hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) stained slides (Figure S9A); whereas in the erastin-treated group, massive cell death was observed in CPEB1-normal tumors (Figure 5D, left panels), characterized by cell swelling, membrane damage and relatively normal-sized nuclei without pyknosis or karyorrhexis, accompanied by a remarkable tumor shrinkage and surrounding granulomatous reaction at the tumor edge; in contrast, only sparsely small focal cell death was observed in CPEB1-deficient tumors, without tumor shrinkage and granulomatous reaction (Figure 5D, right panels). Consistent with in vitro results, a significantly higher expression of NRF2 was observed in CPEB1-deficient tumors than in CPEB1-normal tumors in both vehicle- and erastin-treated groups, as determined by IHC assay (Figure 5E), using CPEB1 as a positive control (Figure S9B). Similarly, CPEB1-deficient tumors displayed higher p62 expression (Figure S9C). We further examined the transcription of the NRF2-target anti-ferroptosis genes in the tumors after treatment with erastin or vehicle using RT-qPCR assay (Figure 5F), and confirmed that CPEB1-deficient tumors displayed a higher expression of SLC7A11 and FTH1 compared to CPEB1-normal tumors, consistent with the ferroptosis-resistant phenotype. All these results suggest that CPEB1-deficient tumors are ferroptosis-resistant, which led us to explore its clinical role.
The expression of CPEB1, p62 and NRF2 in pancreatic cancer and their prognostic significance
To evaluate the clinical significance of CPEB1, p62 and NRF2 in pancreatic cancer, we collected tissue samples and clinical information from 90 patients with confirmed pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma who underwent surgical resection. The basic characteristics of the included patients were summarized in Table S1. The expression of CPEB1, p62 and NRF2 in tumor and tumor-adjacent tissues was evaluated by IHC assay (Figure 6A). We found that the expression level of CPEB1 was significantly lower in the tumor tissues than in the adjacent tissues, whereas the expression levels of NRF2 and p62 were higher in the tumor tissues than in the adjacent tissues (Figure 6B). Within the tumor tissue, the expression of CPEB1, p62 and NRF2 was independent of pathological TNM stage (Figure 6C-E). The relationship between clinicopathological parameters and the expression of CPEB1, p62 and NRF2 is shown in Table 1. Low-expression of CPEB1 was associated with later T stage (P<0.05), but not with N and M stage and other clinical factors. Interestingly, the expression of CPEB1 was negatively correlated with the expression of p62 in the tumor (R=-0.241, P<0.05), but was not correlated with the expression of NRF2 (Table 2).
The 2-year overall survival (OS) rate for all patients was 23.3%, with a median survival time of 16.7 months after surgery. Patients with CPEB1 high-expression tumors had a significantly higher 2 year-OS rate than those with CPEB1 low-expression tumors (36.4% vs. 13.2%, P=0.034) (Figure 6F), whereas no significant difference in survival was observed between the p62 high- and low-expression groups (Figure 6G), nor between NRF2 high- and low-expression groups (Figure 6H).
To identify independent prognostic factors for survival, clinicopathological parameters including gender, age, tumor location, histological differentiation, pathological TNM stage, vascular invasion, neural invasion, serum CEA, CA199, and CPEB1 expression were analyzed using the Cox proportional hazards regression model. Multivariate analysis showed that CPEB1, pathological TNM stage and serum CEA level were independent prognostic factors for OS (Table 3). Hence, our results support the notion that CPEB1 is a potential prognosticator in pancreatic cancer.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Pancreatic cancer is a leading cause of cancer death worldwide, with a 5-year survival rate of approximately 10%. Over the past decade, advances in diagnosis, surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and immunotherapy have made relevant but only modest incremental improvements in the therapeutic outcomes of pancreatic cancer. Owing to the poor response to chemotherapy, surgery remains the only way to cure the disease at an early stage, while late-stage pancreatic cancer remains a formidable challenge for oncologists.
Ferroptosis, an iron-dependent form of regulated cell death driven by iron oxidation and lipid hydroperoxide accumulation, is increasingly being recognized as a promising strategy in cancer therapy. Both experimental reagents (such as erastin and RSL3) and FDA-approved drugs (such as sorafenib, sulfasalazine and statins) exhibit tumor-suppressive effects by inducing ferroptosis in cancer cells. However, susceptibility to ferroptosis is related to numerous biological processes. It is known that the metabolism of iron and polyunsaturated fatty acids, the biosynthesis of glutathione and other molecules in the oxidation-reduction reaction, and the breaking and repair of the cell membrane, together with autophagy, form a complicated network controlling ferroptosis susceptibility. Due to the complexity of ferroptosis, which cancer phenotype is sensitive to and can benefit from ferroptosis therapy remains an important clinical question to be answered.
During our study of ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer, we found that cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein 1 (CPEB1) plays a critical role in controlling susceptibility to ferroptosis and is closely associated with clinical therapeutic outcomes. CPEB1 is a sequence-specific mRNA-binding protein that controls the polyadenylation elongation process of mRNA. For the target mRNA with cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements (CPEs), CPEB1 exerts its translational regulatory function either by controlling the elongation of poly(A) with other translational regulators, such as poly(A) polymerases GLD-2 or GLD-4, or by regulating the splicing of the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of the mRNA in coordination with splicing factors, such as U2AF65, to accelerate or block protein translation. CPEB1 tends to play a tumor suppressive role in cancer: it is commonly low-expressed in solid tumors through DNA hypermethylation; moreover, it inhibits tumor growth and metastasis, and attenuates stemness in multiple cancer types including breast cancer, glioblastoma, gastric cancer, colorectal cancer and hepatic cancer. However, the involvement of CPEB1 in pancreatic cancer and its role in cancer therapy remains unclear.
In the present study, we explored the role and underlying mechanism of CPEB1 in the regulation of ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer. We revealed that CPEB1 deficiency enhances proteostasis of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (NRF2, coding gene: NFE2L2) by promoting the translation of p62 (coding gene: SQSTM1). We also identify CPEB1 as a potential prognosticator of ferroptosis therapy in pancreatic cancer.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material