PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cervical mucus; Cervical mucus
diseases: Infertility
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Protein Abundance Index - PAI
keywords: Cervix; Fluid; Cancer; Endometrioisis; Proteomics; Endometrium; Receptivity; Mucus; Biomarker

ABSTRACT:
Cervical mucus is a viscous fluid functioning as a uterine cervix plug. It is formed and produced by cervical glands located in the cervix. During ovulation, cervical mucus starts to become less viscous, which is a good window for non-invasive sampling. Our study focuses on the proteomic characterization of cervical mucus, which may thus act as a non-invasively acquired source of biomarkers for diseases and physiological conditions of the female genital tract. Our study aimed at two aims - the first is to optimize a proteomic workflow of cervical mucus processing. The second aim is to assess differences in the proteomic composition of cervical mucus in natural ovulatory cycles and IVF cycles with controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. The sampling was done in cooperation with women undergoing intrauterine insemination in a natural ovulatory cycle and women undergoing controlled ovarian hyperstimulation for IVF. The optimization of proteomic workflow including an analysis on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer was performed. The results revealed the protein composition and the differences of the cervical mucus between natural and stimulated uterus.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomics of cervical mucus in natural and stimulated cycle

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cervical mucus was obtained during stimulated IVF-ICSI-ET cycle via flexible catether. The mucus was dissolved using 100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM DTT, 4% SDS, pH 7.6 buffer and sonicated. The protein content was analyzed using Thermo Pierce 660 nm assay. The aliquot of 100 ug of proteins was processed by MED-FASP protocol. Peptice concetration was determined by BCA assay. The purification was done by STAGE tips. The LC-MS was performed using injection of 1 ug of peptides to liquid chromatograph Dionex UltiMate 3000 following mass analysis on Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument equipped with Proxeon Easy-Spray. HPLC separation consists of desalting on Acclaim PrepMap 100 column (100 μm x 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 A) pre-column and analytical separation on PepMap RSLC (75 μm x 25 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 A). Sample loading and desalting was performed using HPLC’s loading pump at flow 6 µl. min-1 and 1% acetonitrile with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Ten minutes after loading, the column valve was switched and separation was performed using nanopump at flow 300 nl.min-1 until 125th minute with gradient raising from 2% to 40% of mobile phase B. Mobile phases used for separation was 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). After minute 95, the column was cleaned for 10 minutes with 95% B and equilibrated with 2% B until minute 125, when the run ended. The Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 was set up to the TopSpeed method with MS acquisition in orbitrap with resolution 120 000 and mass range 350 – 1500. The fragmentation was performed in a orbitrap using HCD fragmentation and 3s time frame for fragmentation between MS scans.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data processing, including peak list generation and protein search, was performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.5. The peak list was recalibrated using Spectrum files re-calibration Uniprot human database downloaded 11. 3. 2019 with Trypsin (full) digestion and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine as a static modification. The peak list generation was done using Spectrum Selector feature with MS1 precursor selection with threshold 350 – 5000 Da and ITMS as a mass analyzer. The main search was done using SequestHT as a searching engine searching through UniProt human database downloaded 11. 3. 2019. There were allowed maximally 2 missed cleavages, minimal length of the peptide was set to 6 amino acids and maximal to 144 amino acids. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.3 Da. The oxidation of methionine, acetylation of N-terminus and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were selected as dynamic modifications. The validity of the search was checked by the Percolator. The chromatographic properties were extracted using Minora Feature detection. The consensus workflow started with the extraction of identified or quantified peptides from Msf Files. The Feature Mapper was used for retention time alignment with a maximum window shift of 10 minutes and a minimal signal to noise ratio of 5. Precursor Ion Quantifier was used to calculate label-free quantification from unique peptides, considering protein groups and using shared quantification results. Precursor quantification was based on ion intensity. Protein abundance was calculated based on the Top 3 Average method. The consensus workflow extracted Msf Files results in the second branch as well. This branch was focused on peptide and protein validation. The first node was PSM Grouper with Site Probability Threshold 95. The succeeding Peptide Validator used Automatic Validation Mode with a Strict Target FDR 0.01 and a Relaxed Target FDR 0.05 for both PSMs and peptides. The validated peptides were processed using Peptide and Protein Filter with Peptide Confidence At Least High, and minimum peptide length 6 amino acids. Keep Lower confidence PSMs and Remove Peptides without Protein Reference were set to False. Protein Filters were set to the minimum number of 2 peptide sequences, counting only rank 1 peptides. The following node was Protein Scorer, branching to Protein FDR validator set for Strict FDR 0.01 and relaxed FDR 0.05, and Protein Grouping using Apply strict parsimony function.

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
The workflow for proteomic analysis of cervical mucus is shown in Figure 4.
4.1. Patient Criteria
The design of the “Biomarkers of endometrial receptivity (BIOMER, NCT04619524)” trial was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky University, and University Hospital in Olomouc. Patients at the IVF Unit of University Hospital Olomouc were assessed for eligibility and were invited to enroll in the study. The inclusion criteria were signing informed consent, an infertility diagnosis of male factor or unexplained, and a conception plan based on either (a) the natural ovulation cycle with IUI or (b) a stimulated IVF cycle using recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone (r-FSH), follitropin-alpha (Gonal-F, Merck Europe B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in combination with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist (Diphereline, Ipsen Pharma, Boulogne-Billancourt, France) or antagonist (Cetrotide, Merck Europe B. V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands) as reported elsewhere.
4.2. Sample Aspiration
In the IUI group, patient ovarian cycles were monitored by ultrasound, and IUI was performed during the periovulatory period. Cervical mucus sampling was performed by aspiration immediately before the IUI procedure using a CP-01 neonatal umbilical cannula (Gama Group, catalog no. V646958-ND) connected to a syringe. Samples were then transferred to screw cap tubes (SSIbio, catalog no. 2320-00), immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until analyzed.
In the IVF group, all patients underwent controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) for IVF/ICSI/ET; 4 patients were stimulated using the GnRH agonist long protocol and 6 with the GnRH antagonist protocol. After the dominant follicle reached 20 mm in diameter, a single injection of 7500 IU of human chorionic gonadotropin (Ovitrelle, Merck Europe B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands) was administered, and ovum pick-up was performed 36 h later. Cervical mucus sampling was performed just before ovum pick-up using an identical procedure as in the IUI group.
Patient data were collected in the electronic case report forms (ClinData; “ (accessed on 22 November 2022)”.
4.3. Sample Dilution
The samples were dissolved in 100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM DTT, 4% SDS, pH 7.6 (referred to in the text as FASP buffer) and sonicated using a Sonopuls GM mini 20 (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany) needle sonicator for 1 min using a 1 s pulse/1 s pause sequence with an amplitude of 50% and an energy of 378 J per 1 mL. The protein content of the sonicated samples was then analyzed using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay (Thermo Fisher, Rockford, USA catalog no. 22660) with ionic detergent compatibility reagents (IDCR, Thermo Fisher, catalog no. 22663) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
4.4. Protein Digestion
Samples for proteomic analysis were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as described by Wisniewski. Briefly, each sample was diluted in FASP lysis buffer, transferred to a filter unit (Merck Millipore, Carrigtwohill, Ireland, catalog no. MRCF0R030), mixed with UA buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 8 M Urea), and centrifuged. Unless otherwise indicated, centrifugation was always performed for 15 min at 13,000× g and room temperature. The addition of UA buffer and the corresponding centrifugation step were repeated once. After washing, samples were alkylated with 0.05 M iodoacetamide by mixing for 1 min and then left to stand in darkness for 20 min. The samples were then centrifuged, the filtrate was removed, and the samples were washed twice with UA buffer and twice with 0.05 M ammonium bicarbonate (AmBiC). Digestion was performed using Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA, catalog nr. V5073) in 0.05 M AmBiC for 18 h at 37 °C in a water bath. After digestion, the digest was centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000× g and washed twice with 0.05 M AmBiC, with each wash being followed by centrifugation at 13,000× g for 10 min. Digestion enzymes were used in a 1:100 ratio relative to the protein load. Finally, the peptide concentration of each digest was determined using the BCA protein assay.
4.5. Peptide Purification
Ten micrograms of peptides was purified using a two-step protocol. First, 1 mL of ice-cold acetone was added to peptide sample, followed by 20 s vortexing, 10 min of incubation at room temperature, and 10 min of centrifugation at 7000× g. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed, and precipitated peptides were allowed to dry for 1 h. The dry sample was then dissolved in 0.05 M AmBiC and purified using STAGE Tips technology with Styrene Divinyl Benzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS) sorbent. The 200 µL tip was fitted with three layers of Sigma SDB-RPS solid-phase extraction disks (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA, catalog No. 66886-U), and the tip was pressed through the punctured cap of a 2 mL Eppendorf tube. The sorbent in the assembled set was activated with acetonitrile, and the samples were mixed with 1% TFA in water and then with 1% TFA in ethyl acetate. The sample mixture was then loaded into the tip and centrifuged for 3 min at 2000× g, after which the flow-through liquid was discarded. The tip with the sample was then washed with 1% TFA in ethyl acetate followed by 0.2% TFA in water, and the flow-through was discarded after each wash. Finally, after being transferred to a new tube, the peptides were eluted using 80% acetonitrile with 1% ammonia. The eluted samples were centrifuged at 2000× g for 3 min then vacuum dried and dissolved in 1% acetonitrile with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid prior to LC/MS analysis.
4.6. LC/MS Analysis
One microgram of peptide digest was injected and separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific, Germering, Germany) and then subjected to MS analysis on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with the Easy-Spray ion source (Thermo Scientific, Malakka, Malaysia). The HPLC separation protocol consisted of desalting on an Acclaim PrepMap 100 column (100 μm × 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, 100 A; Thermo Scientific, Vilnius, Lithuania) followed by pre-column and analytical separation on a PepMap RSLC column (75 μm × 25 cm, C18, 2 μm, 100 A; Thermo Scientific, Vilnius, Lithuania). Sample loading and desalting was performed using the HPLC’s loading pump at a flow rate of 6 µL/min 1% acetonitrile with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Ten minutes after loading, the column valve was switched, and separation was performed using a nanopump at a flow of 300 nl/min until the 95th minute with a gradient rising from 2% to 35% of mobile phase B. The mobile phases used for separation were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B). After minute 95, the column was cleaned for 10 min with 95% B and equilibrated with 2% B until minute 125, when the run ended.
The Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 was set to use the TopSpeed method with MS acquisition in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 resolution and a mass range of 400–1500. Fragmentation was performed in an orbitrap with a resolution of 15,000 using HCD fragmentation and a 2 s time frame for fragmentation between MS scans. To assure quality control, samples of bovine serum albumin digest were injected and analyzed before and after each batch of experimental samples and at intervals of ten samples during the analysis of the batch.
4.7. Protein Search
Raw data processing, including peak list generation and protein searches, was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peak lists from spectrum files were recalibrated against the Uniprot human database (; downloaded on 19 January 2021) with Trypsin (full) digestion and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification. Peak lists were generated using the Spectrum Selector feature with MS1 precursor selection in the 400–5000 Da range and an intensity threshold of 2000 and FTMS as a mass analyzer. The main search was conducted using SequestHT and the UniProt human database (downloaded on 19 January 2021). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed, and the minimum and maximum peptide lengths were set to 6 and 144 amino acids, respectively. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.3 Da, respectively. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and cysteine carbamidomethylation were selected as dynamic modifications. The validity of the search was verified using Percolator with the Concatenated target/decoy strategy based on q-values. The maximum delta Cn was set to 0.05 and target FDRs were 0.01 and 0.05 for strict and relaxed criteria, respectively. Chromatographic properties were extracted using Minora Feature detection.
The consensus workflow started with the extraction of identified or quantified peptides from MSF Files. Feature Mapper was used for retention time alignment with a maximum window shift of 10 min and a minimum signal-to-noise ratio of 5. Precursor Ion Quantifier was used to calculate label-free quantification from unique peptides, considering protein groups and using shared quantification results. Precursor quantification was based on ion intensity. Protein abundance was calculated based on the Top 3 Average method. Normalization was set up in the Precursor Ion Quantifier using the Total Peptide Amount method. The second branch of the consensus workflow extracted data from MSF files and focused on peptide and protein validation. The first node in this branch was PSM Grouper with a Site Probability Threshold of 95. The succeeding Peptide Validator used Automatic Validation Mode with a Strict Target FDR of 0.01 and a Relaxed Target FDR of 0.05 for both PSMs and peptides. The validated peptides were processed using Peptide and Protein Filter with Peptide Confidence set to At Least High and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids. Keep Lower confidence PSMs and Remove Peptides without Protein Reference were set to False. Protein Filters were set to the minimum number of 2 peptide sequences, counting only rank 1 peptides. The filtered proteins and peptides were then processed in three branches. The first branch led to Protein Scorer, branching to Protein FDR validator (set for Strict FDR 0.01 and relaxed FDR 0.05) and Protein Grouping using the Apply Strict Parsimony function. The second branch led to the Protein Annotation node, set to annotate Biological processes, Cellular Components and Molecular Functions using the same database as the protein search. The final branch led to the Protein Marker node.
All data generated in this work can be obtained via ProteomeXchange using the identifier PXD037654.
4.8. Quality Control Metrics
Quality control (QC) analyses of bovine serum albumin digests were processed using Skyline 21.2 (MacCoss Laboratories, Seattle, DC, USA; skyline.ms) using BSA sequences obtained from Uniprot (13. 6. 2022) and reviewed manually. Quality control reports containing the Best Retention time, Total Area MS1, Max Height, Max FWHM (full width–half maximum of peak), and Average Mass Error PPM were then generated for the control samples. The stability of the analytical system was evaluated using the doubly charged peptide YICDNQDTISSK. The criteria for quality acceptance was retention time variability, FWHM and Total Area MS1 relative standard deviation below 15% commonly accepted in LC-MS practice. For the Average Mass Error, we set a limit of 3 ppm internally.
4.9. Statistical Analysis
Initial statistical analyses were performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and Excel 2016 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmont, DC, USA). The list of identified proteins and peptides was exported to Excel, and identified peptides and proteins were extracted into a single data file containing only peptides identified with high confidence and proteins scored as Master. The counts of peptides and proteins were then averaged over files representing three technical replicates to obtain one value per biological sample. The resulting average values and standard deviations were recorded in a column graph. ProteomeDiscoverer 2.5 was used to perform principal component analysis (PCA) and to generate heatmaps based on normalized protein intensities. The parameters used for heatmap calculation were Scale before clustering, Squared Euclidean distances, and Complete linkage method.
For each sample and protein/peptide, abundance was calculated as the log2 value of the median of the values obtained (from Proteome Discoverer) for three technical replicates or as the median value of the non-missing values (in case of non-imputed abundances). A protein/peptide was considered to be detected in a sample if its abundance was quantified at least in one technical replicate of that sample.
Additional statistical analyses were performed using R, ver. 3.5.2 (Core Team, 2018). The statistical significance of differences in the abundances and detections of each protein/peptide between study groups was evaluated using Wilcoxon’s exact test and Fisher’s exact test, respectively. A p value below 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
4.10. Bioinformatics Analysis
The bioinformatics analysis consisted of multiple steps. The first step involved determining the biological process, cellular localization, and molecular function of identified proteins. Those protein annotations were performed using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.5 in the Protein annotation node in the Consensus workflow and were visualized using the same program.
Additional annotation of protein functions was performed using the Metascape web interface “metascape.org (accessed on 24 November 2022)”. Uniprot protein IDs exported from ProteomeDiscoverer were uploaded to Metascape together with the Enrichment heatmap and Protein–Protein interaction annotations. The protein-protein interaction was calculated using String web interface. Tissue expression profiles for proteins with Wilcoxon scores below 0.05 were obtained from the Human Protein Atlas database “ (accessed on 9 September 2022)”.

RESULTS:
2. Results
2.1. Patient Characteristics
The clinical characteristics of the participants in the study are summarized in Table 1.
2.2. Quality Control of the Dataset
The LC-MS analyses of all samples examined in this study were performed in a single batch. The stability of the analyses was evaluated retrospectively using the doubly charged peptide YICDNQDTISSK as a reference analyte. This peptide had a retention time of 29.22 ± 0.32 min (1% RSD), with a FWHM of 0.13 ± 0.007 min (5.5% RSD), a maximal peak height of 6.19 × 108 ± 4.11 × 107 (6.6% RSD), and an average mass error of 0.57 ± 0.57 ppm. All these values are below the 15% RSD cutoff commonly applied in LC-MS analyses, and the peptide’s mass error was below the 3 ppm cut-off used internally in our facility.
2.3. Proteomic Characterization of the Cervical Mucus
In the final search, a total of 4370 proteins (Table S1), 34,166 peptides, and 470,013 peptide spectrum matches were identified over all 19 samples collectively using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.5. The counts of identified peptides and proteins differed significantly between the IUI and IVF groups (Figure 1A,B). For the IUI group, the average number of proteins identified with high confidence was 97 ± 70 per sample (341 ± 260 peptides). However, there were two outlier samples (I2 and I5) in which 1538 proteins and 7668 peptides were identified. Conversely, the average number of proteins identified with high confidence in the IVF group was 1640 ± 428 per sample (8543 ± 2613 peptides). This group had a single outlier sample (F3) in which 60 proteins and 163 peptides were identified.
The protein quantification results were visualized using a PCA scores plot (Figure 1C) and a heatmap (Figure 1D). The PCA plot and the heatmap both revealed no clear trends in the composition of the cervical mucus; the first and second principal components of the PCA explained only 15.6% and 10.8% of the variance in the data, respectively. The heatmap had two main clusters, one containing only IUI samples only and one containing samples from both groups. This suggests that the effects of hormone stimulation on the composition of the cervical mucus are outweighed by variation due to other factors.
The Minora feature detector proved to be very useful in the quantitative analysis of the cervical mucus proteomic data. This ProteomeDiscoverer node performs peptide identification based on tandem mass spectra by linking peaks in the spectrum of one sample to the corresponding retention times and parent peptide masses in other samples, thus effectively reducing the number of missing values in the results. When applied to our dataset, it increased the number of quantified proteins in samples with insufficient identifications (i.e., only about 200 proteins identified with a high score). The numbers of proteins identified in the quantitative analysis exceeded those initially identified in the samples, as can be seen in the waterfall graph shown in Figure 1E. In addition, the normalized abundance of proteins in the IUI group was clearly higher than that in both the IVF group and the general proteome. Thus, although the IUI samples contained fewer different proteins than the IVF samples, the proteins that were present were more abundant. The low numbers of proteins in the IUI group could be for instance due to the expression of proteins with variable molecular weight and thus altered diffusion capacity into the cervical mucus of IUI versus IVF samples. To test this hypothesis, we focused on the 63 proteins that were quantified in all replicates of all samples and calculated the correlation between their MW and their measured abundance (Figure 1F). However, this revealed no significant differences between the IUI and IVF groups.
Upon applying common criteria for identifying enriched proteins (a log2 fold change of at least 1 and a p value below 0.05), we identified 199 and 422 proteins that were enriched in the IUI (Table S2) and IVF samples, respectively (Table S3). These numbers are higher than the average counts of identified proteins in the IUI samples. We therefore examined the non-imputed datasets of quantified proteins in the IUI- and IVF-enriched protein groups. The finding that fewer proteins were identified in the IUI samples was supported by the results for the IVF-enriched proteins, of which 214 were specific to the IVF group. Another 34 proteins were present only in the IVF group and the positive outlier samples I2 and I5 from the IUI group, while the remaining IVF-enriched proteins were identified in both groups. The intensities of the IUI-enriched proteins were distributed homogenously across the samples.
2.4. Protein Annotation of Identified Proteins
The protein annotation analysis was performed in ProteomeDiscoverer and Metascape (Figure 2). When considering the full set of proteins identified across all samples (representing the general cervical mucus proteome), the most frequent biological process annotations were other biological (18%) and other metabolic (13%) processes, followed by cell organization (8%), transport (7%), protein metabolism (6%) and signal transduction (6%). The most frequent cellular component annotations were other cellular components (15%), other membranes (13%), and cytosol (10%), followed by the nucleus (8%), plasma membrane (8%), non-structural extracellular (6%) and ER/Golgi (5%). The most frequent molecular function annotation was other molecular function (39%), followed by nucleic acid binding activity (6%), cytoskeletal activity (4%), enzyme regulator activity (4%), and signal transduction or receptor binding (4%). No GO annotations were obtained for around 20% of the proteins, which demonstrates a knowledge gap we have in understanding cervical molecular physiology.
The annotation distribution for the set of IUI-enriched proteins was similar to that for the general cervical mucus proteome in all three GO main branches. The biological process annotations exhibiting the most pronounced differences in frequency between the IUI-enriched and general protein sets were no known biological processes (+4.4% in the IUI-enriched set), other biological processes (+0.8%), signal transduction (+0.7%), cell adhesion (−1.4%), other metabolic processes (−1.3%) and protein metabolism (−2.31%). The frequencies of all other biological process annotations in the IUI-enriched set were comparable to those in the general set. The only cellular component annotation whose frequency in the IUI-enriched set differed markedly from that in the general set was no known cellular component (+8.3% in the IUI-enriched set); the frequencies of all other cellular component annotations differed by <2% between the two sets. The only molecular function annotation whose frequency in the IUI-enriched set differed markedly from that in the general set was no known molecular function (+3.2%); the frequencies of all other annotations differed by <2% between the two sets.
Cell process annotations whose frequencies in the IVF-enriched protein set differed substantially from those in the general set were no known biological process (+20% in the IVF-enriched set), cell organization (−4.5%), developmental processes (−1.5%), DNA metabolism (−0.7%), other biological processes (−2%), other metabolic processes (−4.5%), protein metabolism (−2%), RNA metabolism (−1.5%) and transport (−1%). Other cell process annotations (e.g., cell adhesion, cell cycle, cell–cell signaling, signal transduction, and stress response) had similar frequencies in the two sets. Similar results were obtained for cellular component annotations—the annotations exhibiting substantial differences in frequency were no known cellular component (+16% in the IVF-enriched set), cytoskeleton (−1%), cytosol (−2%), ER/Golgi (−1%), mitochondrion (−1%), nucleus (−4%), other cell components (−5%), other membranes (−1%), and translation (−1%). The remaining cell component annotations (plasma membrane, non-structural extracellular, other cytoplasmic organelles, and extracellular matrix) had similar frequencies in the two sets. The molecular function annotations whose frequencies differed markedly between the IVF and general sets were no known molecular function (+20% in the IVF set), cytoskeletal activity (−2.1%), nucleic acid binding activity (−4.2%), other molecular functions (−12.6%), signal transduction activity or receptor binding (−1.2%), and transporter activity (−0.8%). The other molecular function annotations (bone, tooth, or skin structural activity, enzyme regulator activity, extracellular structural activity, kinase activity, and translational activity) had similar frequencies in the two sets.
Because of the high number of “other” process annotations (which do not enable further analysis) in the ProteomeDiscoverer results, we used the Metascape software to acquire additional annotations. This algorithm combines functional enrichment, interactome analysis, gene annotation, and membership search to leverage over 40 independent knowledgebases within a single integrated portal and generates results that can be visualized in the form of enrichment heatmaps (see Figure 2). Annotations assigned to the general cervical mucus proteins in the Metascape analysis included neutrophil degranulation, cellular response to stress, hemostasis, vesicle-mediated transport, and signaling by Rho GTPases.
In accordance with the results for the general cervical mucus proteome, the most enriched annotation in the enrichment heatmap for the differentially expressed proteins in the IVF samples was neutrophil degranulation, and the third most enriched was hemostasis. However, the order of enrichment for the other annotations of the IVF set differed: the second most enriched annotation was formation of a cornified envelope, the fourth was regulation of endopeptidase activity, and the fifth was neutrophil extracellular trap formation. The high number of proteins without annotation can also be explained by the fact that 46% of all differentially regulated IVF proteins were immunoglobulins.
The enrichment heatmap also revealed differences between the annotation distributions of the IUI-enriched proteins and the complete cervical mucus proteome. The annotation exhibiting the greatest enrichment in the IUI set was the synthesis of phosphatidic acid, an essential precursor of phospholipids. The second most enriched annotation was negative regulation of response to external stimulus, followed by neutrophil degranulation processes, muscle contraction, and heart morphogenesis.
Unfortunately, no annotations were obtained for around 20% of the 4370 proteins identified in the full cervical mucus proteome. This was attributed to two factors. First, 1716 of these proteins lacked a gene symbol assigned by the Uniprot database. Second, 1178 of them were identified as immunoglobulins (mostly variable regions). Only 34 Ig proteins have a gene symbol, and to the best of our knowledge, there is currently no good tool for the biological interpretation of different immunoglobulin variants.
2.5. Proteins Discriminating IUI and IVF Groups
Separate from the biological interpretation of the proteomic data is the question of which proteins most effectively discriminate IUI from IVF and thus physiological versus hormone-stimulated ovarian cycle. To identify such discriminatory proteins, we used the Wilcoxon exact test and Fisher’s test. This revealed that 29 normalized and imputed source proteins were detected in at least two replicates of all analyzed samples (Table 2), of which 14 were enriched in IUI and 15 in IVF. Four proteins were tissue enhanced in FRT, while some others exhibited group-enriched tissue expression in tissue groups that included the uterine cervix.
Of the 29 proteins listed in Table 2, 23 were recognized by Metascape (Figure 3). Eight were annotated for negative regulation of endopeptidase activity (GO:0010951) with a log10 p value of −11.03, while seven were annotated for involvement in neutrophil degranulation (R-HSA-6798695; log10 p value −7.30). No other annotation was assigned to more than four proteins in this group. Four protein–protein interactions were identified among the 29 proteins in an analysis performed using the String platform. The first interaction involved KARS, PSMD1, EEF1G, and HSPA2, all of which are factors influencing protein synthesis and degradation. The second involved WFDC2, SLPI, GIG25 (SERPINA3), and PIGR, which are a group of secreted proteinase inhibitors and an immunoglobulin receptor expressed in mucosal epithelial cells; these proteins were enriched in the IVF group. The third involved MYLPF (MYL11), TLN1 and VCL, which are cytoskeletal proteins involved in cellular adhesion and muscle contraction. The final interaction involved the extracellular matrix proteins SFN and LAMC2.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Cervical mucus is a gel containing a plethora of glycoproteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and metabolites. Its biological function depends heavily upon macromolecular composition. The mucus plays a vital role in protecting the vaginal epithelium during sexual intercourse and in the innate protection of the uterine cavity, thereby helping to ensure fertility, sperm capacitation, and restricting sperm passage within the female reproductive tract (FRT) to the periovulatory period. However, its functions are not yet fully understood. Moreover, the biological and chemical–physical properties of cervical mucus change during the menstrual cycle: its content of glycoproteins (mucins) peaks near ovulation due to high secretion, but the abundance of other proteins is highest during the luteal phase. During the first half of the cycle, the mucus is scant, thick and viscous, forming a barrier or cervical plug that limits the access of sperm to the upper genital tract. Then, immediately before ovulation, when estrogens are produced in increasing amounts, its viscosity decreases while its volume increases 10- to 20-fold, thereby maximizing its permeability to spermatozoa. The composition of cervical mucus changes immediately after ovulation when the corpus luteum of the ovary begins synthesizing progesterone. Progesterone reduces the quantity and composition of cervical mucus, making it thicker and stickier. The biochemical processes underlying these changes are poorly understood, but it is known that changes in the number and types of polysaccharide chains (glycans) attached to proteins during post-translational modification can drastically increase the proteins’ molecular weights and thereby alter their solubility, solution viscosity, and biological function. 
The uterine cavity, which is directly connected to the cervix, is coated with endometrial tissue that undergoes physiological remodeling induced by ovarian hormones. The human uterine proteome during the menstrual cycle has been studied by analyzing both the endometrial epithelium and the uterine fluid. However, the variation of the proteome of the uterine fluid over the course of the cycle is unknown. In addition, because the uterine cavity releases substances into the uterine fluid that may influence the entire reproductive system, the cervical mucus’s proteome may reflect the functional status of the endometrial tissue and potentially also the fallopian tubes and ovaries. Thus, cervical mucus analysis could provide valuable information to support diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy of female tract disorders. Early detection of markers in cervical fluid proximal to diseased tissues may replace of complement venous blood and thus increase sensitivity of detection and in turn the range of therapeutic options available for individuals affected by diseases, enable more effective early treatment, and facilitate the identification of factors involved in pathogenesis.
However, only a few studies have investigated the protein composition of cervical mucus. Andersch-Björkman et al. reported comprehensive proteomic and glycomic LC-MS analyses of cervical mucus samples collected from 12 women at multiple stages of the menstrual cycle (before, during, and after ovulation), while Panicker et al. optimized a SELDI-TOF (surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization with time-of-flight mass analyzer) MS method for cervical mucus analysis. Additionally, Grande et al. confirmed that cervical mucus is a rich source of protein biomarkers, determined the protein composition of cervical mucus samples from five fertile women with term delivery during the year preceding the study, and characterized the changes in the cervical mucus proteome during the menstrual cycle. In another study, high-resolution mass spectrometric analysis of cervical mucus from ten infertile women with ovarian endometriotic cysts revealed that this chronic disease is characterized by inflammatory protein expression. Changes in expression levels of cytokines (IFN-gamma, CM-CSF, RANTES, and eotaxin) in cervical mucus were described by Otani et al. (2019) in a patient with cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer. Finally, Rocconi et al. (2021) recently analyzed the cervical mucus proteome for the purposes of ovarian cancer screening, and Finan et al. (2012) identified 10 cervical mucus proteins that can be used to confidently diagnose endometrial cancer. These findings clearly show that the cervical mucus proteome contains information that could be valuable in diagnosing diverse pathologies and abnormalities in humans.
Although several proteomic analyses of cervical mucus were reported previously, the studies usually suffer from a low number of enrolled patients, and several studies sampled mucus irrespectively of the menstrual cycle. The definition of the normal cervical mucus proteome is particularly complicated, as we know its composition is heavily dependent on the ovarian cycle and estrogen levels. In order to standardize the sampling of biological material, we performed non-invasive sampling of cervical mucus during the periovulation period in healthy women undergoing artificial insemination or in vitro fertilization (IVF) due to male factor infertility. Experiments have been conducted to determine whether removing cervical mucus during intra-uterine insemination (IUI) might increase pregnancy rates, and there is evidence that clomiphene citrate (a drug used for ovarian stimulation in IVF fertility treatment) can alter the quality of cervical mucus. IUI is based on women’s natural cycles and thus represents the normal biology of cervical mucus, whereas IVF-stimulated cycles represent a cervical mucus “model system” in which hormonal medication is administered with a standardized timing that allows for the timing of ovulation to be predicted very accurately, making it possible to sample the cervical mucus directly at the time of ovum pick-up.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: .
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD037654 and 10.6019/PXD037654.