PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Sweat
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Label free
keywords: Human; Eccrine sweat; Lc-ms/ms; Shotgun proteomics

ABSTRACT:
The potential of eccrine sweat as a bio-fluid of interest for diagnosis and personalized therapy has not yet been fully evaluated, due to the lack of in-depth sweat characterization studies. Thanks to recent developments in the field of omics together with the availability of accredited eccrine sweat collection methods, the analysis of human sweat may now be envisioned as a standardized, non-invasive test for individualized monitoring and personalized medicine. Here, we characterized individual sweat samples, collected from 28 healthy adult volunteers under the most standardized sampling methodology, by applying an optimized Shotgun proteomic analysis. This deep characterization of the sweat proteome allowed the identification of about 1000 unique proteins from which 347 were identified across all samples. Annotation-wise, the study of the sweat proteome unveiled the over-representation of newly addressed Actin dynamics, oxidative stress and proteasome-related functions, in addition to well-described proteolysis and anti-microbial immunity. The sweat proteome composition appeared to be correlated to the inter-individual variability of sweat secretion parameters (water and solute losses). Besides, both gender-exclusive proteins and gender-specific protein abundances were highlighted in spite of the high similarity between human female and male sweat proteomes.  In conclusion, standardized sample collection coupled to optimized shotgun proteomics significantly improved the depth of sweat proteome coverage, far beyond previous similar studies. The identified proteins were involved in many diverse biological processes and molecular functions indicating the potential of this bio-fluid as a valuable biological matrix for further studies. Addressing sweat variability, our results prove the proteomic profiling of sweat to be a promising bio-fluid for individualized, non-invasive monitoring and personalized medicine.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human eccrine sweat shotgun proteomics for personalized monitoring and therapy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sweat protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce Micro BCA™ Protein Assay kit (#23235, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Ten micrograms of proteins were precipitated by incubation in 90% acetonitrile for 30 min at 4 °C followed by centrifugation for 10 min, at 4 °C, at 10 000 g. The protein pellet was re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated in : i) 10 mM DTT for 40 min at 56 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf), to reduce disulfide bonds, ii) 20 mM iodoacetamide protected from light for 30 min, at room temperature, to alkylate/block cysteine residues, iii) 11 mM DTT protected from light for 10 min, at room temperature, to quench the residual iodoacetamide, iv) mass-spectrometry grade trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a 1: 50 enzyme: protein ratio (protein concentration = 0.25 µg.µL-1), for 18 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm, v) MS-grade trypsin in 80% acetonitrile, at a 1:100 enzyme: protein ratio, for 3 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm. Digestion was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-suspended at 3.75 µg / 20 µL in 0.1 % TFA. At this step, aliquots from each sample were collected and mixed in three 10-sample pools, considering three series of 10 individual samples and an average pooled sample per series. Individual samples and pooled samples were desalted with C18 Zip Tips according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, dried and re-suspended at 3 µg / 9 µL (injection volume) in 0.1 % TFA spiked with an equivalent of MassPREP Digestion Standard Mixture 1 (#186002865, Waters) corresponding to 50 fmol of ADH (Alcohol dehydrogenase 1 from S. cerevisiae) content per injection volume. The individual samples and pooled samples were randomly sorted into three series of ten samples plus one pooled mix and analyzed using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class liquid chromatography system (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Three acquisition rounds (1 per series) were performed to avoid any technical bias that might come from a single LC-MS acquisition series. The chromatographic separation consisted in a 3-minute long trapping step performed on a reversed-phase (RP) ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap Column (nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters) followed by a 177-min elution step on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Analytical Column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 C18 Analytical Column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters) using a gradient of mixed water and acetonitrile, both supplemented with 0.1 % formic acid, as eluents. The mass acquisition was operated in data-dependent positive ion mode. Source parameters were set at: i) 2.3 kV for spray voltage, ii) 270 °C for capillary temperature. For individual samples, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 1600 with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) of 3E+6, a maximum Injection Time (IT) of 200 ms and an internal lock mass calibration at m/z 445.12003. MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 200 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 10-second dynamic exclusion were enabled. For each pooled sample, the MS acquisition consisted in a two-step strategy of three injections each. During both steps, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 528.3, m/z 524.3 and m/z 662.8 or m/z 658.8 and m/z 1600, in three independent analyses respectively, with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an AGC of 3E+6, a maximum IT of 200 ms and internal lock mass calibrations at m/z 445.12003, m/z 536.16537 and m/z 684.20295, respectively. During the first acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 25 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 25) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 250 ms and a (N)CE at 28. For the second acquisition step, an exclusion list for all signals related to peptides identified at the first step with more than 4 PSM (peptide-spectrum matches) was uploaded to the methods. During the second acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 600 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 15-second dynamic exclusion were enabled for both steps.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw MS data were submitted to protein identification and label-free quantification by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0) using default settings when not specified otherwise. Identification consisted in a search against a custom-made reviewed Uniprot Homo sapiens database (August 2019, entries) with Carbamidomethyl (C) set as a fixed modification Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ) set as variable modifications and a minimum of two peptides (including one unique peptide) required. LFQ was enabled with a minimum LFQ ratio count of 1, no Fast LFQ and no requirement of MS/MS for LFQ comparison. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled and tuned to allow matches from the library (pooled aliquots considered as parameter group 1, ‘match from’) and between individual samples (parameter group 0, ‘match from and to’). A match time window of 2.5 minutes was used. MaxQuant output data (proteingroups.txt) were submitted to statistical analysis using the Perseus software (version 1.6.10.43). ‘Only identified by site’, ‘REVERSED’ and Contaminant data were filtered out. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and proteins with less than 50 % of valid values were filtered out. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed on Z-score-normalized LFQ intensities. Male versus female comparison was addressed by a two-sample Student’s t-test with a permutation-based FDR calculation. Proteins with a fold change above 2 and a FDR below 0.05 were considered significantly differently expressed between female and male groups. Heat-map representation and hierarchical clustering were generated using the average Euclidian distance calculation.

METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Sweat Collection
Sweat samples were collected from 30 healthy volunteers (HV, 15 female, 15 male) under the most standardized and spectroscopically pure conditions following the current recommendations for the Gibson and Cooke sweat test. In brief, the volar region of both forearms was chosen based on its high density of eccrine sweat glands together with its very low density of apocrine/apoeccrine sweat glands and its easy access. Sweat samples were collected from each forearm successively, from fasting and well-hydrated individuals. Before sweat sampling, the tested skin region was washed with 70% ethanol, rinsed with ultrapure water and dried using ashless filter paper. Eccrine sweat secretion was stimulated by pilocarpine iontophoresis using pilocarpine gel-padded (Pilogel® discs, ELITechGroup, Brussels, Belgium) electrodes: a 5 mA current (Webster Sweat Inducer, Model 3700, ELITechGroup, Brussels, Belgium) was applied for 5 min. After stimulation, the electrodes were removed and a Macroduct Sweat Collector (ELITechGroup, Brussels, Belgium) (blue dye removed with 70% ethanol and ashless filter paper) was attached in the place of the cathode to collect pure, non-diluted, pressure-driven eccrine sweat for 30 min. At the end of the collection time, the collector tubing was uncoiled, cut off and connected to a needle and syringe to transfer sweat to a 0.6 mL micro-tube.
2.2. Sample Preparation for Shotgun Proteomics
Pure, undiluted sweat samples were processed in three series of ten individual samples. Three sample preparation rounds (1 per series) were performed to avoid any technical bias that might come from a single sample preparation experiment
Sweat protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce Micro BCA™ Protein Assay kit (#23235, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Ten micrograms of proteins were precipitated by incubation in 90% acetonitrile for 30 min at 4 °C, followed by centrifugation for 10 min, at 4 °C, at 10,000× g. The protein pellet was re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated in: (i) 10 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) for 40 min at 56 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), to reduce disulfide bonds, (ii) 20 mM iodoacetamide protected from light for 30 min, at room temperature, to alkylate/block cysteine residues, (iii) 11 mM DTT protected from light for 10 min, at room temperature, to quench the residual iodoacetamide, (iv) mass-spectrometry-grade trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio (protein concentration = 0.25 µg.µL−1), for 18 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and (v) MS-grade trypsin, at a 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio and acetonitrile to a final concentration of 80% (v/v), for 3 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Digestion was stopped by adding TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-suspended at 3.75 µg/20 µL in 0.1% TFA. At this step, aliquots from each sample were collected and mixed in three 10-sample pools, considering three series of 10 individual samples and an average pooled sample per series. Individual samples and pooled samples were desalted with C18 Zip Tips (Pierce™ C18 Tips, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, dried and re-suspended at 3 µg/9 µL (injection volume) in 0.1% TFA spiked with an equivalent of MassPREP Digestion Standard Mixture 1 (MPDS Mix 1, #186002865, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) corresponding to 50 fmol of ADH (alcohol dehydrogenase 1 from Saccharomyces cerevisiae) content per injection volume.
2.3. Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Data Acquisition
The individual samples and pooled samples were sorted into three series of ten samples plus one pooled mix per series and analyzed using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class liquid chromatography system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled with a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Three acquisition rounds (1 per series) were performed to avoid any technical bias that might come from a single LC–MS acquisition series.
The chromatographic separation consisted of a 3 min-long trapping step performed on a reversed-phase (RP) ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap Column (nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) followed by a 177 min elution step on an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Analytical Column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 C18 Analytical Column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) using a gradient of mixed water and acetonitrile, both supplemented with 0.1% formic acid, as eluents.
The mass acquisition was operated in data-dependent positive ion mode. Source parameters were set at: (i) 2.3 kV for spray voltage, (ii) 270 °C for capillary temperature and (iii) S-lens RF level = 50.0.
For individual samples, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 1600 with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) of 3 × 106, a maximum Injection Time (IT) of 200 ms and an internal lock mass calibration at m/z 445.12003. MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1 × 105, a maximum IT of 200 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 10 s dynamic exclusion were enabled.
For each pooled sample, the MS acquisition consisted of a two-step strategy of three injections each. During both steps, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 528.3, m/z 524.3 and m/z 662.8 or m/z 658.8 and m/z 1600, in three independent analyses, respectively, with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an AGC of 3 × 106, a maximum IT of 200 ms and internal lock mass calibrations at m/z 445.12003, m/z 536.16537 and m/z 684.20295, respectively. During the first acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 25 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 25) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1 × 105, a maximum IT of 250 ms and a (N)CE at 28. For the second acquisition step, an exclusion list for all signals related to peptides identified at the first step with more than 4 PSM (peptide-spectrum matches) was uploaded to the methods. During the second acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1 × 105, a maximum IT of 600 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 15 s dynamic exclusion were enabled for both steps. 
2.4. Bioinformatic Analysis and Statistics
Raw MS data were submitted to protein identification and label-free quantification by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0) using default settings when not specified otherwise. Identification consisted of a search against a custom-made reviewed Uniprot Homo sapiens database (20443 Homo sapiens entries + 4 MPDS Mix 1 entries, release date 8 August 2019) with carbamidomethyl (C) set as a fixed modification, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) set as variable modifications and a minimum of two peptides (including one unique peptide) required. LFQ (label-free quantification) was enabled with a minimum LFQ ratio count of 1, no Fast LFQ and no requirement of MS/MS for LFQ comparison. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled and tuned to allow matches from the library (pooled aliquots considered as parameter group 1, ‘match from’) and between individual samples (parameter group 0, ‘match from and to’). A match time window of 2.5 min was used.
MaxQuant output data (proteinGroups.txt) were submitted to statistical analysis using the Perseus software (version 1.6.10.43). ‘Only identified by site’, ‘REVERSED’ and contaminant data were filtered out. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and proteins with less than 50% of valid values were filtered out. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on Z-score-normalized LFQ intensities. The male versus female comparison was addressed by a two-sample Student’s t-test with a permutation-based FDR calculation. Proteins with a fold change above 2 and an FDR below 0.05 were considered significantly differently expressed between female and male groups. Heat-map representation and hierarchical clustering were generated using the average Euclidian distance calculation.
PERMANOVA (PERmutational Multivariate ANalysis Of VAriance) tests were performed with the PAST software (version 4.04) using the hierarchical clustering distance matrix with the number of permutations set to 999.
The classification of identified proteins and over-representation/enrichment were conducted using the online search engine powered by the PANTHER Classification system. The PANTHER Overrepresentation test (release date 28 July 2020) parsed the PANTHER database (version 10.5281/zenodo.4081749, release date 9 September 2020) using the Homo sapiens reference list, the PANTHER-Gene Ontology-Slim and PANTHER Protein Class annotation datasets. Only p < 0.05 items were retained and considered significantly over-represented.
Visualization of proteome overlaps was achieved by submitting SwissProt accession numbers to the online Venn diagram generator Venny (version 2.1.0, , access date 10 November 2020).
Visualization of interaction networks was achieved by submitting SwissProt accession numbers to STRING (version 11.0, , access date 27 April 2021).
Due to the limited and variable sweat volume collected, together with the relatively low and variable sweat protein concentration plus the need to store sweat samples for further analyses, no technical replicate was performed. To account for technical variability, sweat samples were processed and analyzed in three series of ten individual samples.
2.5. Subject Inclusion and Study Approval
All 30 sweat samples were collected at steady-state conditions from volunteers with no known acute or chronic illness, no known drug use at the time of collection, no cosmetic uses or skin damage at the site of collection and no clinical sign of dehydration. Subjects were asked to fast and keep well hydrated over a minimum of 8 h before collection. Female volunteers were neither pregnant nor lactating. The study was approved by the ethics committee of Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc—Université Catholique de Louvain faculty hospital (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT03993600). All subjects signed an informed consent and were not enrolled in another clinical trial. A material transfer agreement was signed with Université de Liège for sample analysis.
After sweat collection, sweat chloride (coulometry, ChloroChek chloridometer, ELITechGroup, Brussels, Belgium), sodium and potassium concentrations (flame photometry, Flame Photometer Model 420, Sherwood Scientific, Cambridge, UK) were measured. All samples presented physiologically normal values.

RESULTS:
3. Results
3.1. The Proteome of Human Eccrine Sweat
Individual eccrine sweat samples were analyzed separately to gain insight into their individual proteome. To allow optimal protein identification, missing identifications (IDs) from individual analysis were completed with IDs transferred from the analysis of both other samples in the cohort and pooled aliquots thanks to the match between runs option of the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0) (Figure 1).
3.2. Protein Identification: Comparison to Previous Studies
Sweat samples from 30 healthy subjects—see Supplementary Table S1 for a complete clinical data summary—were analyzed by nanoLC–MS/MS. Based on chromatogram discrepancy, poor correlation with the other sample data and a low number of identified proteins, two samples were discarded (Supplementary Figure S1)—clinical data related to the 28 remaining samples are summed up in Table 1. Eventually, considering a minimum of two peptides—including one unique peptide—and a False Discovery Rate (FDR) below 0.01 for protein identification, a total of 986 proteins were identified, accounting for data filtering (Supplementary Table S2) and the standard protein mixture (MPDS Mix 1, Waters) for quality control. A total of 535 ± 22 proteins were peptide-spectrum matching hits, while 273 ± 9 proteins required matching between runs for identification for an average total of 808 ± 16 proteins identified for each sample (Figure 2a). A total of 347 proteins were consistently identified across all samples.
The optimization of sweat sample preparation and MS acquisition together with the strategy for thorough protein identification significantly improved the analysis depth, as shown by the comparison with earlier sweat proteomics reports (Figure 2b). In terms of proteome coverage, the overall number of identified proteins was significantly higher when compared to previous studies with similar workflows. In addition, the increase in protein identification was characterized by an extended overlap with previously reported proteomes. It is noteworthy that while those studies relied on the use of pooled sweat samples to account for the limited volume available, the current work focused on the analysis of individual samples, with similar or better performance in protein identification.
3.3. Protein Classification and Over-Representation
Identified sweat proteins were classified and tested for over-representation by the PANTHER Classification system and Gene Ontology Enrichment analysis, mapping protein IDs against PANTHER GO Slim annotation datasets (Supplementary Tables S3–S6). The sweat proteome was significantly enriched in: (i) proteins related to proteolytic activity, proteases and peptidases as well as their respective inhibitors, and (ii) protein effectors and regulators of the innate and adaptive immune systems. Moreover, (i) cytoskeletal proteins, i.e., protein components (actin and ABP) of the actin cytoskeleton and regulators of actin organization and dynamics, (ii) proteins of reactive oxygen species metabolism and oxidative stress, (iii) markers of UPR and ER stress, (iv) components and regulators of the proteasome or (v) proteins of all major metabolic pathways, were among the over-represented proteins mapped to annotation clusters. A rapid annotation of the interaction network of sweat core proteins highlighted interaction clusters related to the biological functions mentioned above (Figure 3).
3.4. Relative Contributions of Plasma and the Eccrine Gland to Sweat Protein Composition
When comparing the 20 most abundant proteins of sweat (from the current study, 2.8% of total sweat proteins) to the plasma proteome (Figure 4a), only 13 sweat proteins were retrieved in plasma and 7 were exclusive to sweat. Conversely, when comparing the 20 most abundant proteins of plasma to the sweat proteome, only 11 plasma proteins were retrieved in sweat, 9 being exclusive to plasma. Proteins exclusive to sweat, together with the absence of proteins shared between the top 20 proteins of plasma and sweat, highlighted the specificity of the sweat proteome. This observation excluded the filtration of plasma as the sole contributor to sweat protein composition. On a side note, the covered dynamic range of sweat was quite similar to that of plasma, spanning five orders of magnitude (Figure 4b).
The overlap of proteins between the current work and earlier plasma and eccrine gland proteomic reports was estimated so as to evaluate the different contributions to the sweat proteome at a larger scale (Figure 4c). Comparison to plasma and eccrine gland proteomes showed that 19.7% of sweat proteins were specific to sweat while 6.5% were shared between sweat and plasma, 44.8% were shared between sweat and the eccrine gland and 29% were shared between the three proteomes of interest.
Mapping proteins of different tissue origins to PANTHER-GO annotation clusters, the over-representation test determined that: (i) proteins exclusive to the current sweat proteome dataset were predominantly mapped to annotation clusters related to proteolytic activity and immune systems, (ii) proteins of plasma origin were mapped to annotation clusters related to proteolytic activity, immune systems, oxidative stress, proteasome and metabolic pathways, (iii) proteins originating from the eccrine gland were mapped to annotation clusters for proteolytic activity, actin organization and dynamics, proteasome and metabolic pathways and (iv) proteins of mixed origins were mapped to annotation clusters for proteolytic activity, actin dynamics, oxidative stress, UPR and ER stress, proteasome and metabolic pathways (Supplementary Tables S7–S22).
In conclusion, sweat is not a transudate of plasma, due in part to the active input of the eccrine gland in sweat protein composition.
3.5. Inter-Individual Variability of the Sweat Proteome
A total of 986 identified proteins were suitable for protein label-free quantification. For further statistical analysis of protein abundances across samples, only those identified and quantified in at least 50% of the samples (14 out of 28) were used, for a total of 873 proteins.
First, the combined biological and technical variability was estimated by calculating the coefficients of variation (CV) of protein abundances measured across the 28 remaining samples. The distribution of combined biological and technical CV was density-plotted against the median log10-transformed protein abundance, as shown in Figure 5a. The variability across sweat samples was higher than the variability across plasma samples and was on par with the variability across urine samples. A total of 639 proteins had a CV below 100%, of which 105 proteins had a CV below 50%.
Computation of Pearson’s correlation coefficients (PCC) and average Euclidian distance hierarchical clustering were used to classify samples according to profiles of pairwise correlation with other samples in the cohort. Samples were sorted into nine distinctive clusters of significant sample correlation, i.e., sweat proteome profiles according to the joint observation of the clustering tree structure and the “heat” of PCC (Figure 5b). Available clinical data (including age, gender, BMI plus collected sweat volumes, ion concentrations, ion amounts, protein concentration and protein mass) were tested for their correlation with the biological inter-individual variability of the sweat proteome.
First, numeric clinical data were color coded based on their relative position in the quartile-delimitated distribution (Supplementary Table S23) to estimate if hierarchical clustering had grouped samples with matching clinical parameters. Anthropometric parameters such as age, gender and BMI did not appear as likely contributors to the inter-individual variability of the sweat proteome, as clusters did not group samples with matching age, gender or BMI. However, specific sweat-related parameters such as collected sweat volume (water loss), ion molarities and ion amounts (ion loss) as well as protein concentration and protein mass (protein loss) likely reflected the variability of sweat proteome profiles, since hierarchical clustering grouped samples with matching levels of water, ion or protein loss. In other words, variations in such sweat-related parameters might translate to variations in sweat proteome profiles.
Then, anthropometric and sweat-related parameters were tested for the significance of their correlation with the clusters of sample correlation by PERMANOVA (Figure 5b, lower panel), which compared clinical data distribution to hierarchical clustering in an objective way. As expected, no significant correlations between anthropometric parameters (age, sex and BMI) and sweat proteome profiles were observed. Neither were significant correlations between sweat-related parameters (right and left arm collected volumes, Na+, Cl− and K+ concentrations, Cl− and K+ amounts and protein mass) and sweat proteome profiles. Only secreted Na+ distribution stood out as significantly correlated with sweat proteome profiles and was emphasized as a core byproduct of the inter-individual variability of the sweat proteome.
To sum up, only the local sweat-related parameter, secreted Na+, but not anthropometric parameters, was a significant marker of the biological inter-individual variability of sweat protein composition, at steady-state conditions upon pilocarpine iontophoresis.
3.6. Inter-Gender Variability of the Sweat Proteome
Assessing the inter-gender variability of sweat proteins, the differential composition of male and female sweat proteomes was first estimated: 99.4% of sweat proteins were shared between male and female volunteers. Of 986 identified proteins, only 4 proteins—catenin α-1 (2/13 female HV), glutathione S-transferase θ-2B (4/13 female HV), immunoglobulin κ variable 2–28 (2/13 female HV) and leucine-rich repeat-containing protein 15 (1/13 female HV)—were exclusive to female HV, and two proteins—prostate-specific antigen (4/15 male HV), V-set and transmembrane domain-containing protein 2A (8/15 male HV)—were exclusive to male HV (Figure 6a). Furthermore, while principal component analysis between female and male samples did not indicate any gender-related dispersion (Figure 6b), significant changes in protein abundance between male and female sweat were observed for 3 out of 986 proteins (Figure 6c). Kallikrein-11 (log2 LFQ (Male − Female) = −2.43, p = 5.64 × 10−7, p < 0.001***, 28/28 HV) was significantly more abundant in female sweat while prolactin-inducible peptide (log2 LFQ (M − F) = 1.97, p = 1.55 × 10−4, p < 0.001 ***, 28/28 HV) and signal peptide, CUB, EGF-like domain-containing protein 2 (log2 LFQ (M − F) = 2.48, p = 9.77 × 10−7, p < 0.001 ***, 26/28 HV) were significantly more abundant in male sweat (Figure 6d).

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Sweat is secreted by millions of eccrine glands ubiquitously distributed over the human skin surface and involved in body thermoregulation by evaporation and skin homeostasis (hydration and immunity). Eccrine glands secrete a hypotonic solution of water-soluble electrolytes, e.g., sodium, chloride, potassium, urea or lactate and non-electrolytes, i.e., proteins, anti-microbial peptides and metabolites. In clinical routine, investigations of sweat composition are limited to the determination of drug intake and the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis based on the measurement of sweat chloride concentration (Gibson and Cooke sweat test).
Eccrine sweat is a promising bio-fluid of interest in the field of personalized medicine thanks to its less invasive collection relative to its complex composition, representing a valuable source of information when compared to other routine bio-fluids such as bronchoalveolar, synovial or cerebrospinal fluids. In addition, the recent developments of high-resolution and high-sensitivity analytical techniques now allow working with small sweat volumes (10–20 µL) collected from standardized methods. Up to now, few proteomic studies have been conducted on eccrine sweat. Despite the lower protein concentration (0.1–1 mg/mL), reports highlighted sweat as a likely informative source of biomarkers for monitoring both physiological and pathophysiological conditions; for example, disease-specific profiles of sweat proteins were described in patients with schizophrenia or tuberculosis. However, all previous works were carried out on pooled sweat samples, thereby missing the inter-individual spectrum of sweat proteome variability.
In order to use sweat as a bio-fluid of interest, one must be able to characterize reference physiological profiles and inter-individual variations under steady-state conditions with standardized reproducible methods to discriminate between physiological responses to stimuli or disease-induced alterations. Eccrine sweat composition was described as complex and highly variable under normal physiological conditions, depending on multiple levels of stimulation and regulation, mechanisms of secretion and tissue contributions. This complexity reflects the diversity of sweat’s biological functions, but it is also a major source of intra- and inter-individual variability.
In the context of personalized medicine, in light of the potential of eccrine sweat as a relevant source of protein biomarkers for prognosis or diagnosis of disease conditions and clinical follow-up, the current work was designed to carry out an in-depth characterization of the eccrine sweat proteome of healthy subjects. To this end, we applied standardized reproducible sweat collection, sample preparation, LC–MS/MS (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) analysis and MS (mass spectrometry) data processing to the proteomic profiling of eccrine sweat. Nine hundred and eighty-three proteins were identified and quantified by a label-free approach across 28 individual samples, a significant improvement when compared to previous similar studies. Proteome annotation tackled newly described biological functions of sweat proteins and elaborated on the composition of sweat in terms of tissue contributions. In addition, the present study concluded on the effect of sweat rate on the inter-individual variability of sweat protein profiles and on the limited but significant influence of gender.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following are available online at .
Data Availability Statement
The MS proteomic data have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium () via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifiers PXD025899 and 10.6019/PXD025899.