PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Monocyte
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Thermal proteome profiling; N-terminal acetylation; N-terminome; Thermal stability difference; Terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates; Tails; Tpp; N-terminal proteoform

ABSTRACT:
Protein N-terminal proteoforms, which include both N-terminal modifications and sequence variation arising from processes such as proteolytic cleavage, are common in cells and have been reported to significantly impact protein stability. Systematically examining the correlation between these N-terminal proteoforms and protein stability is essential for understanding their biological roles. Recently, thermal stability analysis has been applied to study protein modifications. Here, we combined Thermal Proteome Profiling (TPP) with tandem mass tag (TMT)-Terminal Amine Isotopic Labeling of Substrates (TAILS) to globally investigate the thermal stability of N-terminal proteoforms in THP-1 cells. The thermal stability of more than 13,000 unique N-terminal peptides corresponding to approximately 4,700 proteins were quantified. Overall, N-terminal proteoforms exhibited higher thermal stability than proteins identified in whole proteome group. A series of factors such as hydrophobicity and secondary structure influenced the thermal stability differences of N-terminal proteoforms.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Developing a Novel and Integrative Method to Systematically Investigate the Stability of N-Terminal Proteoforms

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Each sample was heated by the thermal cycler within a defined temperature gradient (42.0–67.0 ℃) for 3 min followed by incubation at 4 ℃ for 3 min. Heated cell pellets were resuspended in 130 μl ice-cold lysis buffer (0.8% NP-40, 1.5 mM MgCl2, Complete mini EDTA free protease inhibitors (Roches), 50 U/ml benzonase (Thermo) in 50 mM HEPES buffer, pH = 7.4), and cells were lysed at 4 ℃ for 1 h. The lysates were centrifuged at 17000 g at 4 ℃ for 20 min. Then 130 μL of the cell lysate supernatant was transferred to a 0.45-μm 96-well filter plate (Millipore, prewashed with the lysis buffer). After centrifuge at 300 g for 3 min, aggregates were further removed, and the filtered lysate samples were collected in a 96-well collection plate. Protein concentration in the samples were measured by BCA assay. Proteins were then precipitated using the methanol-chloroform method. The protein pellets were redissolved in the protein solubilization buffer (6M guanidine hydrochloride, 200 mM HEPES, pH = 8.5). Then 5% of the samples were transferred to the new PCR tubes and diluted with 200 mM HEPES buffer until the final concentration of guanidine was less than 0.6M. Reduction, alkylation and digestion were performed overnight using 1 ug trypsin, 5 mM TCEP, and 5 mM iodoacetamide in 200 mM HEPES buffer, pH = 8.5. Subsequently, the peptides were labeled with the tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents following the manufacturer's instructions with minor modifications. Briefly, Peptides in each sample were labeled with each channel of the 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo) with addition of ACN to the final 30% ratio for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Ten labeled peptide samples were combined and lyophilized. Peptides were desalted using the tC18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters). The purified samples were then fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase HPLC (pH = 10). The sample was separated into 20 fractions using a 4.6 × 250 mm reversed-phase column packed with 5 μm particles (Waters) using a 40 min gradient of 5 to 50% ACN with 10 mM ammonium formate. Every fraction was further purified with StageTip before liquid chromatography (LC)-MS analysis. The enrichment was performed as reported previously with some modifications(27). Briefly, 95% of the samples were transferred to new microcentrifuge tubes, and TMT reagents in DMSO were added to each of samples to achieve 1:2 protein/TMT (w/w) ratio and 50% final DMSO concentration. Samples were incubated for 1.5 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Ten labeled protein samples were mixed and transferred to a new 15 mL centrifuge tube. Seven sample volumes of ice-cold acetone and one sample volume of ice-cold methanol were added to the tube to precipitate proteins. The samples were incubated at -80 ℃ for 4h. The protein pellet was collected by centrifuge and washed with ice-cold methanol. After brief air-dry, the pellet was resuspended in digestion buffer (1.6M urea, 200 mM NH4HCO3 and 50 mM HEPES, pH = 8).  Digestion was performed overnight at 37 ℃ with 1:100 trypsin/protein ratio (w/w). After desalting, peptides were dissolved in 100 mM PBS (pH = 6.3). Aldehyde-activated agarose beads (AminoLink™ Coupling Resin, Thermo) and 50 mM NaBH3CN were added to deplete peptides with free N-terminal amines (internal tryptic peptides), and the sample was incubated at 37 ℃ overnight. The supernatant was collected and desalted. The purified samples were then fractionated and using high-pH reversed-phase HPLC as mentioned above. The peptide samples were dissolved in a solvent containing 5% ACN and 4% FA, and 4 μL was loaded using a Dionex WPS-3000TPLRS autosampler (UltiMate 3000 thermostatted Rapid Separation Pulled Loop Wellplate Sampler) onto a microcapillary column packed with C18 beads (Magic C18AQ, 1.9 μm, 200 Å, 75 μm × 16 cm, Michrom Bioresources). Peptides were separated by a reverse-phase nano HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCNano system) using a 95 min gradient of 2–25% ACN with 0.125% FA. The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Themo). For the full scan, the mass resolution was set at 120,000. The maximal injection time was set as Auto, and the range of m/z was 350-1400. After each full scan, the data-dependent analysis (DDA) mode scan was applied for the most intense ions with charge 2-7 being chosen for dissociation by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD), and the tandem MS scans were recorded. The max cycle time for each full scan was 2 seconds. The following parameters were used for tandem MS scan: Resolution: 45,000; Isolation window (m/z): 0.7; HCD normalized energy: 38%; AGC target: Standard; Max injection time: 96 ms. The isolation purity was set at over 90% to minimize the coeluted peptides that may affect the TMT quantification accuracy. The selected ions were excluded for 45 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw files were converted to mzML files by msConvert(31). The files were searched against the Homo sapiens proteome database downloaded from UniProt (2023-11-06) using FragPipe (v20.0) with MSFragger (v3.8)(32).  For the search of peptides from the whole proteome samples, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set as 20 ppm. The enzyme specificity was set as fully tryptic and the maximum missed cleavages was set as 2. Peptide length was set as 7-50. The variable modifications were methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) and peptide N-terminal TMT modification (+229.1629 Da). The fixed modifications were TMT modification on lysine and cysteine alkylation (+57.02146 Da). PSM and protein identification were filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% through Philosopher module in FragPipe(33). The relative intensities of TMT reporter ions were used for protein-level quantification using TMT-integrator module. Normalization was not applied, and minimum purity was set as 0.9. Other parameters were kept as the default. The isotope purities of different TMT reporter ions were adjusted based on the isotope correction table provided by Thermo. For search of peptides from the N-terminal enrichment samples, following parameters were applied: Precursor mass tolerance: 20 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 20 ppm; Peptide length: 7-50 amino acid residues; Enzyme specificity: Semi N-term; Digestion rules: Trypsin; Missed cleavage: 3; Variable modifications: Methionine oxidation, peptide N-terminal acetylation and TMT modification; Fixed modifications: Cysteine alkylation and TMT modification on lysine. Other parameters were the same as mentioned above. After being processed by the TMT-integrator module, N-terminal peptides (with peptide N-terminal acetylation or N-terminal TMT modification) were manually extracted from the PSM file. The reporter intensities for different PSMs of the same peptide were summed and then subjected to purity correction for the final quantification use.