PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Kidney
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Nurture cohort; Laser-microdissection; Global proteomics; Minimal change; Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; Nephrotic syndrome

ABSTRACT:
Minimal change disease (MCD) and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) are patterns of kidney injury observed in the filtering units of the kidney known as glomeruli. From the NURTuRE cohort of individuals with nephrotic syndrome (NS), we performed laser microdissection and mass spectrometry analysis of kidney biopsy samples to identify proteomic patterns of disease. 56 individuals with idiopathic NS segregated by histological pattern (37 MCD and 19 FSGS) across three age groups: early childhood (0-6 years), late childhood (6-18 years) and adult (>18 years). We identified global differences in glomerular cell and extracellular matrix composition related to both histological pattern and age.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic profiling of kidney biopsies in nephrotic syndrome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
10-µm sections of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded kidney biopsy specimen were mounted on MMI (Molecular Machines & Industries) membrane slides and stored for up to 6 months prior to further processing. Slides were dewaxed using xylene and ethanol. The slides were placed onto the MMI CellCut Laser Microdissection microscope. Under 20x-magnification, the closed-shaped drawing tool was used to isolate up to 300,000µm2 of glomeruli (excluding Bowman’s capsules), and the circle tool with set diameter 195.44µm was used to select 300,000µm2 of tubulointerstitium (TI) per patient.  The dissected tissue samples were resuspended in SDS lysis buffer and transferred to Covaris MiniTubes before ultrasonication using the following settings: duration 400 seconds, peak power 400, duty factor 40%, cycles/burst 50, average power 160 (Covaris LE220-plus focused ultrasonicator). Samples were reduced using dithiothreitol, then alkylated with iodoacetamide, and acidified using aqueous phosphoric acid. Methanolic binding buffer was then added to each sample prior to centrifugation through an s-trap column, causing proteins to become trapped in the column matrix. Samples were washed with binding buffer before overnight trypsin digestion at 37°C. The next day proteins were eluted from the columns using TEAB digestion buffer, aqueous formic acid, and aqueous acetonitrile. Samples were then stored at 4°C for up to 2 days until all samples were eluted. Oligo R3 beads were added to 96-well filter plates and washed with acetic acid and aqueous formic acid. Samples were added to the wells and briefly incubated before centrifugation, causing peptides to bind to the R3 beads. Peptides were washed using aqueous formic acid, before elution into a fresh 96-well plate using aqueous formic acid and acetonitrile. Samples were then lyophilized by vacuum centrifugation and stored at 4°C until mass spectrometry analysis.   Peptides were analysed by liquid chromatography couple tandem MS (LC-MC/MS) using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (Thermo Fisher) couple to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, and the column used was a 75 µm X 250 mm, 1.7 µm CSH C18 analytical column (Waters). An injection volume of 4 µl was loaded into the loop and reverse flushed onto the analytical column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Sample separation was achieved using a multistage gradient over 85 minutes.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data were acquired in a data dependent manner in positive mode. Full MS data were acquired over a scan range of 300 to 1750 Th using an automatic gain control (ACG) target of 300% and a max fill time of 25 mS at a resolution of 120,000. Fragmentation data was obtained from obtained from signals with a charge state of +2 or +3 and an intensity over 5,000. Fragmentation spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 with a normalised collision energy of 30%, a normalised AGC target of 10%, first mass of 110 Th and a max fill time of 120 mS.  Raw data files were processed separately for glomerular and TI samples using MaxQuant software (v 1.6.10.43) (MaxQuant, RRID:SCR_014485). Spectra were searched against the Human proteome obtained from Uniprot (November 2021). Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Precursor tolerance was set at 20ppm and 4.5ppm, for first and main search respectively, with MS/MS tolerance set at 20ppm and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) of PSM and protein were set at 0.01 and “Match between runs” was enabled. All statistical analyses were performed in R (v4.1.0) using the MSqRob package (v0.7.7). Proteins were taken as significantly changing across conditions using a FDR threshold of 5%.