PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Hela cells; Complexome profiling; Usp39; Nucleus; Spliceosome

ABSTRACT:
RNA splicing and protein degradation systems allow the functional adaptation of the proteome in response to changing cellular contexts. However, the regulatory mechanisms connecting these processes remain poorly understood. Here, we show that impaired spliceosome assembly caused by USP39 deficiency leads to a pathogenic splicing profile characterized by the use of cryptic 5′ splice sites. To explore the interactions of USP39 and the effect of its depletion in HeLa cells, we performed complexome profiling of nuclear lysates. We observed most USP39 stably integrated into the tri-snRNP complex and there is almost no free nuclear protein. More importantly, the relative abundance of tri-snRNP spliceosome complex was impaired in USP39-depleted cells. As previous reports indicated, USP39 is a regulator of tri-snRNP stability and its depletion decreased the levels of assembled U4/U6.U5 complexes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Complexome profiling of nuclear lysates from control and USP39-depleted HeLa cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Control siRNA and USP39 siRNA HeLa cells were cultured and separated into two groups. The first group was cross-linked with UV light, while the second group was left untreated. The cells were harvested for nuclear isolation. Nuclear pellets were solubilized using 1% NP40 and 1% Triton X-100 and incubated with or without RNase (refer to the publication for specific details). After centrifugation to remove insoluble debris, the supernatants were collected, and protein concentration was determined. A total of 100 µg of each sample was loaded and separated by hrCNE. Following electrophoresis, the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue and scanned to create a template for cutting (refer to the publication for specific details). Each lane of the gel was cut into 48 equal fractions and collected in 96-well filter plates. The gel pieces were destained in 60% methanol, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Solutions were removed by centrifugation for 2 minutes at 600×g. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC for one hour at 56 °C, and alkylated for 45 minutes in 30 mM iodoacetamide, 50 mM ABC at room temperature. Samples were then digested for 16 hours with 5 ng/µl trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) in 50 mM ABC, 0.01% Protease Max (Promega), and 1 mM CaCl₂ at 37°C. Peptides were eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 3% formic acid, centrifuged into a fresh 96-well plate, speed-vac dried, and resuspended in 1% acetonitrile and 0.5% formic acid. Dissolved peptides were stored at -20°C until MS analysis. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 3 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from MSWil) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 25 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 35 min followed by additional gradients from 25% to 50% for 5 min and from 50% to 99% for 1 min. Column was washed with 99% acetonitrile for 5 min and then with 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for 14 min. All flow rates were set as 300 nl/min. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 65 ms. The 20 most abundant precursors were selected for MS2. Only charged ions >2 and <8 were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 65 ms. MS1 Data were acquired in profile mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS raw spectra files were analyzed in MaxQuant (v2.0.3.0). The human reference proteome database (UniProt, August 2023, including canonical sequences and isoforms) was used for identification with a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤1%. N-terminal acetylation, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were selected as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification. Specific settings changed: use only unmodified peptides for quantification: false. The MaxQuant list of contaminants was included for the search. All other parameters were kept as default. To quantify the protein abundances, label free-quantification (LFQ) values were calculated.