PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Lip-ms; Cetsa; Tmtpro; Lcmsms; Pisa

ABSTRACT:
Uncompetitive inhibition is an effective strategy for suppressing dysregulated enzymes and their substrates, but discovery of suitable ligands depends on often-unavailable structural knowledge and serendipity. Hence, despite surging interest in mass spectrometry-based target identification, proteomic studies of substrate-dependent target engagement remain sparse. Herein, we describe a strategy for proteome-wide discovery of substrate-dependent ligand binding. Using PISA and LiP-MS assays, we show that simple biochemical additives can facilitate detection of target engagement in native cell lysates. We apply our approach to rocaglates, a family of molecules that specifically clamp RNA to eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A (eIF4A), DEAD-box helicase 3X (DDX3X), and potentially other members of the DEAD-box (DDX) family of RNA helicases. To identify unexpected interactions, we used a target class-specific assay parameters and evaluated ATP analog and RNA probe dependencies for key rocaglate-DDX interactions. We report novel DDX targets of the rocaglate clamping spectrum, confirm that DDX3X is a common target of several widely studied analogs, and provide structural insights into divergent DDX3X affinities between synthetic rocaglates. We independently validate novel targets of high-profile rocaglates, including the clinical candidate Zotatifin (eFT226), using limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry and fluorescence polarization experiments. Taken together, our study provides a model for screening uncompetitive inhibitors using a systematic chemical-proteomics approach to uncover actionable DDX targets, clearing a path towards characterization of novel molecular clamps and associated RNA helicase targets.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Discovery of RNA-Protein Molecular Clamps Using Proteome-Wide Stability Assays

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Single-pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) was carried out with slight deviation to the previously described protocol. Samples were mixed with ~100 μg of Sera-Mag carboxylate-modified magnetic beads (1:1, hydrophilic:hydrophobic beads) and proteins were precipitated using a 4X volume of acetonitrile. Samples were incubated on a ThermoMixer (24 °C, 1000 RPM) for 20 min, then centrifuged for 1 minute at 500 RCF, and beads drawn to a magnet for 2 minutes. Beads were washed on-magnet three times with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile. Beads were air-dried, then resuspended in 50 μL of digestion buffer (100 mM HEPES pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2, 0.01 μg/μL Trypsin/Lys-C mix). Proteins were digested on-bead in a ThermoMixer set to 37 °C for 18 hours with shaking. After digestion, samples containing beads were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in LC-MS grade water, then reacted with ~65 μg of isobaric tandem mass tag (TMTpro; ThermoFisher) multiplexing reagents (final reaction volume 20 μL, 30% acetonitrile) for 1 h. Samples were quenched with hydroxylamine, pooled, and evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac. The pooled sample was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, acidified with formic acid, and desalted using a Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Column (ThermoFisher). The eluate was again evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac prior to high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation. A total of 96 fractions were collected, combined into 24 pooled fractions of which 12 were analyzed via RTS-SPS-MS3.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files from PISA experiments were searched against a complete human reference proteome (UP000005640) and processed in Proteome Discoverer 3.1 using the built-in RTS-SPS-MS3 processing and consensus workflows, which incorporate both the Comet and Sequest search engines. Raw files from LiP-MS experiments were searched and processed in Fragpipe v22.0 using the TMT16 workflow template with cleavage specificity set to semi-tryptic.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Uncompetitive inhibition is an effective strategy for suppressing dysregulated enzymes and their substrates, but discovery of suitable ligands depends on often-unavailable structural knowledge and serendipity. Hence, despite surging interest in mass spectrometry-based target identification, proteomic studies of substrate-dependent target engagement remain sparse. Herein, we describe a strategy for the discovery of substrate-dependent ligand binding. Using proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA) assays, we show that simple biochemical additives can enable detection of RNA-protein-small molecule complexes in native cell lysates. We apply our approach to rocaglates, molecules that specifically clamp RNA to eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A (eIF4A), DEAD-box helicase 3X (DDX3X), and potentially other members of the DEAD-box (DDX) helicase family. To identify unexpected interactions, we used a target class-specific thermal window and compared ATP analog and RNA base dependencies for key rocaglate-DDX interactions. We report novel DDX targets of high-profile rocaglates-including the clinical candidate Zotatifin-and validate our findings using limited proteolysis-mass spectrometry and fluorescence polarization (FP) experiments. We also provide structural insight into divergent DDX3X affinities between synthetic rocaglates. Taken together, our study provides a model for screening uncompetitive inhibitors using a chemical proteomics approach and uncovers actionable DDX clamping targets, clearing a path toward characterization of novel molecular clamps and associated RNA helicases.