PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Ovarian fibroblast
diseases: Ovary epithelial cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Protein Abundance Index - PAI
keywords: Ip-ms; Pi3k; P85beta; Immunoprecipitation-mass spectrometry

ABSTRACT:
p85beta is one of the regulatory subunits of the PI3K. Apart from its canonical role in binding to and regulating the p110 catalytic subunit, the protein may bind to other interacting proteins to perform other biological functions. In this study, the protein binding partners of p85beta were determined by immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry using samples of ovarian cancer cells OVCAR8.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification of p85beta protein interaction partners in ovarian cancer cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample processing and LC-MS/MS were performed at the Proteomics and Metabolomics Core Facility, LKS Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong. Cell lysates (5mg) of OVCAR8 cells overexpressing p85beta were subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-p85beta antibody or IgG control to pull down p85beta-bound proteins. The eluted proteins were loaded in 8% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie blue. Gel slices were subjected to reduction by 10 mM TCEP (Thermo Fisher Scientific), alkylation by 55 mM 2-chloroacetamide (Sigma) and protein digestion by trypsin (1 ng/µL; overnight at 37°C). Tryptic peptides were sequentially extracted from the gel with 50% Acetonitrile (ACN; J.T. Baker)/5% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 100% ACN and were desalted using C18 StageTips. Eluted peptides were analyzed with nanoelute UHPLC coupled to Bruker timsTOF pro mass spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.14.0 and were searched against the Human UniProt FASTA database (Apr 2020; 74,824 entries). Proteins with at least one unique peptide detected in sample immunoprecipitated with anti-HA antibody but were absent in sample immunoprecipitated with IgG control were considered as p85beta-interacting proteins.