PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Synovial tissue
diseases: Osteoarthritis
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Label free
keywords: Label-free; synovial fluid; proteominer; osteoarthritis; cell therapy

ABSTRACT:
The pathology of failure in currently used biological treatments (cell therapies and microfracture) for cartilage repair or early osteoarthritis (OA) is poorly understood. We aimed to identify a reliable panel of biological predictors, present in synovial fluid, which can be used in the preoperative setting to optimise patient selection and therapy efficacy. The-long term aim is to reduce the number of patients who progress to end-stage OA and require knee replacement by making earlier, less invasive treatments more effective. In this first stage, we have taken synovial fluid aspirates from patients undergoing autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI) at our centre in Oswestry, UK. Synovial fluids (SFs) were obtained from 14 ACI responders (mean Lysholm improvement of 33 (17-54)) and 13 non-responders (mean Lysholm decrease of 14 (4-46)) at the two stages of surgery (cartilage harvest and chondrocyte implantation). Dynamic range compression of synovial fluids coupled with label-free quantification mass spectrometry (MS), was used in an unbiased approach to identify predictive markers of ACI success or failure and to investigate the biological pathways involved in the clinical response to ACI.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic profiles of  synovial fluids derived from autologous chondrocyte implantation surgery

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Following local research ethical committee approval and with informed consent, SF was collected from patients’ knee joints at Stages I (harvest) and II (implantation of cells) of ACI, by injecting 20mL of saline and then extending and flexing the leg at least 20 times prior to intra-articular aspiration of as much SF as possible.  SF was centrifuged at 500g for 15 minutes to remove cellular debris and the supernatant was aliquoted and stored in liquid nitrogen.  Samples were processed batch-wise and had undergone no previous freeze-thaw cycles. Synovial fluids were thawed and centrifuged at 36,000 g for 10 mins. 1030 µl of SF supernatant was treated with 200 units of hyaluronidase and 1000 µl of the supernatant was centrifuged through a 0.22 mm cellulose acetate membrane (Costar Spin-X, Corning, Tokyo, Japan) tube filter (5,000 g/15 min) to remove insoluble material.  The protein concentration of each sample was then assessed using a PierceTM 660nm protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). Efficient SF digestion by hylauronidase was confirmed using Coomassie stained 1D-SDS PAGE gels before 5 mg of total protein was bound to ProteoMinerTM Small Capacity beads (BioRad, Hemel Hempstead, UK) to enable peptide-based dynamic range compression.  Bound proteins were treated with 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, Manchester, UK) in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) for 10 mins at 80°C. Samples were reduced in 3mM dithiothreitol at 60˚C for 10 mins and alkylated in the dark for 30 mins with 9mM Iodoacetamide (Sigma). In-situ protein digestion on the ProteoMiner™ beads was undertaken by incubating samples under continuous rotation at 37˚C in 2µg of sequencing grade trypsin for 2 hours. A trypsin top-up was added after 2 hours and the samples were incubated for a further 18 hours. Peptides were eluted into LoBind protein tubes (Eppendorf, Stevenage, UK) and then acidified using 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Samples then underwent two rounds of centrifugation to remove any precipitates and were transferred to new LoBind tubes. Tryptic peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS, analysed using a 2h gradient on a NanoAcquityTM ultraperformance LC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo-Fisher Scientific Hemel Hempstead, UK).

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw spectra were converted to mascot-generated files (mgf) (Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo, Hemel Hempstead, UK)). The mgf files were searched against the Homo sapiens database Unihuman Reviewed. Search parameters used were: peptide mass tolerances, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 Da; 2+ and 3+ ions; missed cleavages, 1; enzyme, trypsin; instrument type, ESI-FTICR. Modifications included were: fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable; oxidation of methionine, lysine, proline.

METHODS:
Methods
Synovial fluid collection and storage
Following local research ethical committee approval and with informed consent, SF was collected from the knee joints of patients at Stages I (harvest; 15 samples) and II (implantation of cells; 24 samples) of ACI by injecting 20 mL of saline and then extending and flexing the leg at least 20 times prior to intra-articular aspiration of as much SF as possible. SF was then centrifuged at 6000 g for 15 mins at 4 °C before being divided into aliquots and stored in –196 °C liquid nitrogen prior to analyses. Prior to selection of suitable patient samples for this study, the dilution factor of the SFs was assessed by measurement of urea concentrations in the SF and plasma (harvested at the same time). Based on evidence that the urea concentration of plasma and SF is equivalent, the dilution factor could then be calculated as described previously. Any samples with a dilution factor over 10 were excluded from the study.
As has previously been used, we defined responders as a minimal clinically important difference (MCID) at approximately 12 months post-treatment if they had an increase of 10 points in the Lysholm score (which ranges from 0–100, with 100 representing ‘perfect’ knee function). Fourteen SF donors were considered as responders, with a mean improvement of 33 points (range 17–54) and 13 SF donors were considered as non-responders with a mean decrease in Lysholm score of 14 points (range 4–46). Matched Stage I and II samples were included for seven responders and six non-responders; however, all of the proteomic data presented in this study are based on non-matched statistical comparisons to ensure the maximal number of patient samples could be included in each comparison. The demographic information and change in Lysholm score for these patients is shown in Table 1. None of the demographic parameters, other than difference in Lysholm score between baseline and 12 months post-ACI, were significantly different between responders and non-responders at Stage I or Stage II, or between Stage I and Stage II in responders or non-responders (p > 0.05; Mann-Whitney U test; Table 1). 
Sample preparation and analysis using label-free proteomics
All SF samples were maintained as separate samples throughout the protein equalisation, mass spectrometry, and label-free quantification steps, and no pooling of any samples was performed; hence, the abundance of proteins was quantified for each of the 39 samples and mean protein abundance across the experimental groups was calculated prior to analysis of protein changes.
SF preparation and protein equalisation using ProteoMiner™
The dynamic range of proteins in SF was compressed using ProteoMiner™ beads (BioRad, Hemel Hempstead, UK) as described previously. Briefly, SF was treated with hyaluronidase (1 mg/ml) and digestion was confirmed using a Coomassie stained 1D-SDS PAGE gel. Total protein was quantitated using a Pierce™ 660-nm protein assay (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) and 5 mg of total protein was exposed to ProteoMiner™ beads. After washing, bead-bound proteins were treated with 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, Manchester, UK) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min at 80 °C prior to reduction, alkylation, and in-situ protein digestion without removal of the beads, ensuring complete proteome access. The digestion was completed in LoBind protein tubes (Eppendorf, Stevenage, UK) followed by acidification of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). This treatment inactivates and precipitates the Rapigest detergent which can then be removed by centrifugation. The peptide-containing supernatant fractions were frozen at –20 °C prior to LC-MS/MS.
Mass spectrometry and label-free quantification
Tryptic peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS, analysed using a 2-h gradient on a NanoAcquity™ ultraperformance LC (Waters, Manchester, UK) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Thermo-Fisher Scientific Hemel Hempstead, UK) as described previously. For label-free quantification, the raw files of the acquired spectra were analysed by the ProgenesisQI™ software (Waters, Manchester, UK). Briefly, the top five spectra for each feature were exported from ProgenesisQI™ and utilised for peptide identification with a locally implemented Mascot server (Version 2.3.01), searching against the Unihuman reviewed database. Search parameters used were: peptide mass tolerances, 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 Da; 2+ and 3+ ions; missed cleavages, 1; enzyme, trypsin; instrument type, ESI-FTICR. Modifications included were: fixed carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, lysine, and proline. To maximise the number of quantifiable proteins but simultaneously use an acceptable false discovery rate (FDR), the peptide matches above an identify-threshold were adjusted to give an FDR of 1% before the protein identifications were re-imported into ProgenesisQI™ for the label-free relative quantification. Quantification was undertaken using unique peptides only. Statistical analysis was performed using ProgenesisQI™ software; briefly transformed normalised abundances were used for one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and all peptides (with p < 0.05) of an identified protein were included. For analysis of the proteins, the mean abundance of each protein across the experimental groups (e.g. Stage I samples from responders etc.) was calculated and those proteins with a ≥2.0-fold-change (FC) between the comparator groups were reported. For use in network and pathway analysis, however, a less stringent cut-off of ≥1.2-FC was used to allow for the study of systemic changes, as has been appropriate in similar studies using pathway and network approaches.
Pathway and network analysis of proteomic datasets
Proteins were analysed using the pathway enrichment and topological analysis tools in Ingenuity™ (Qiagen, US) to identify and visualise the canonical pathways which are differentially affected between Stages I and II of ACI. To allow for greater confidence in the pathway analysis, an independent platform, the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID), was used to analyse functional pathway based on the protein changes.
Validation of mass spectrometry using ELISA
Two proteins were selected to validate the MS findings because they: (1) had associated biological relevance to cartilage injury and repair; (2) showed consistent differential abundance between Stages I and II of ACI in non-responders versus responders; and (3) could be measured using available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). These proteins, matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) and S100 calcium binding protein A13 (S100-A13), were quantified using duo-set ELISAs (R&D systems, Wiesbardon, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were assessed in duplicate and mean optical density values were used to calculate the protein concentration. SF was diluted 1:2 and 1:100 for the assessment of MMP1 and S100-A13, respectively. The protein concentration of each protein was normalised to total protein concentration. Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism version 6.0.

RESULTS:
Results
Proteomic data has been deposited in the PRIDE ProteomeXchange and can be accessed using the identifier PXD005220.
Differential abundance of proteins in responders versus non-responders to ACI
Proteomic analysis identified that Ig kappa chain V-II region MIL demonstrated a +2.6-FC in non-responders versus responders to ACI in SF at Stage I (Fig. 1a). Nine proteins demonstrated differential abundance at Stage II between responders and non-responders (26S protease regulatory subunit 7, +2.3-FC; 26S proteasome non-ATPase regulatory subunit 13, +2.4-FC; ferritin light chain, +2.9-FC; platelet factor 4, +3.3-FC; thrombospondin-1, +3.4-FC; nucleosome assembly protein 1-like 1, +4.9-FC; cofilin-1, +7.1-FC; EH domain-containing protein 1, +7.3-FC; and T-complex protein 1 subunit eta, +8.4-FC) (Fig. 1a). 
Differential abundance of proteins after controlled cartilage injury (Stage I versus Stage II)
When comparing Stage I with Stage II, 116 proteins were >2.0-fold differentially abundant. Non-responders to ACI displayed a distinct and marked response to Stage I surgery, such that between Stages I and II, 33 proteins were upregulated and 59 downregulated, 12 of which demonstrated common expression change in clinical responders to ACI (Table 2; Fig. 1b). Fifteen proteins were upregulated and nine proteins were downregulated between Stage I and Stage II in responders to ACI (Table 3; Fig. 1b).  
Identification of canonical pathways and protein networks associated with protein changes between Stage I and II
Several canonical pathways were associated with the protein changes identified in both clinical responders and non-responders (Fig. 2). Figure 3, however, highlights the disparity in the proteome response to Stage I between clinical responders and non-responders, as a much greater number of functional/disease pathways were activated or inhibited in association with these differentially abundant proteins. Using Ingenuity software, canonical pathways that were most significantly connected with these protein changes in non-responders were Liver X Receptor/Retinoic X receptor (LXR/RXR) activation (p = 1.63 × 10–7), complement system (p = 9.33 × 10–7), and acute phase response signalling (p = 1.69 × 10–6) (Fig. 2). Independent pathway analysis of the proteins using DAVID also highlighted the complement system (p = 2.1 × 10–6) as highly associated with the protein changes seen between Stages I and II of ACI in non-responders.  
The Stage I versus Stage II responder network consisted predominantly of proteins associated with connective tissue disorders (p = 8.2 × 10–7). In non-responders to ACI, however, the top scoring network included several proteins associated with the inflammatory response (p = 2.75 × 10–5) (Fig. 4). Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFβ1) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta were predicated to be the most significant upstream regulators associated with the networks of protein changes identified between Stages I and II in non-responders and responders, respectively (Table 4). TGFβ was also predicted as an upstream regulator of the protein changes identified between Stages I and II in responders; therefore, it may be important in the regulation of protein response between Stages I and II, irrespective of outcome.  
Measurement of MMP1 and S100-A13 protein in SF by ELISA
MMP1 and S100-A13 protein abundance in SF from the same patient cohort was measured using ELISA. Biochemical assessment replicated the MS finding that SF MMP1 concentration is significantly increased at Stage II in non-responders (Stage I, 800 ± 889 pg/ml; Stage II, 7741 ± 8065 pg/ml (mean ± SD); p = 0.006; Mann-Whitney U test) (Fig. 5). However, measurement of MMP1 via ELISA also demonstrated a significant increase in concentration at Stage II compared to Stage I in responders to ACI (albeit to a lesser order of magnitude: Stage I, 655 ± 837 pg/ml; Stage II, 2672 ± 3576 pg/ml (mean ± SD); p = 0.039; Mann-Whitney U test) (Fig. 5). In this patient cohort, no correlation between Lysholm score and MMP1 could be demonstrated (r = 0.02; p = 0.94; Spearman’s correlation). 
Biochemical quantification identified a significant decrease in S100-A13 expression at Stage II (94 ± 31 pg/ml (mean ± SD)) compared to Stage I (245 ± 123 pg/ml (mean ± SD); p =0.02; Mann-Whitney U test) of the ACI process in clinical non-responders and no significant difference in responders (Stage I, 200 ± 118 (mean ± SD); Stage II, 138 ± 93 (mean ± SD); p = 0.2; Mann-Whitney U test) thus validating MS findings (Fig. 5). To assess whether the differential abundance of S100-A13 identified between Stages I and II was genuinely only a response of clinical non-responders, further statistical analysis including only the paired Stage I (n = 7) and II (n = 6) samples was completed. The paired analysis also confirmed the MS findings, with non-responders having lower SF S100-A13 concentration at Stage II compared to Stage I (Stage I, 270 ± 113 (mean ± SD); Stage II, 116 ± 112 (mean ± SD); p = 0.03; Wilcoxon-matched pairs) and no significant difference in S100-A13 concentration between Stages I and II demonstrated in clinical responders (Stage I, 204 ± 127 (mean ± SD); Stage II, 140 ± 53 (mean ± SD); p = 0.22; Wilcoxon-matched pairs). Again, Lysholm score and S100-A13 concentration did not correlate in this cohort (r = 0.0002; p = 0.99; Spearman’s correlation).

INTRODUCTION:
Background
Traumatic cartilage injury can lead to the development of osteoarthritis (OA). Autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI) has been adopted clinically to repair cartilage damage and is a procedure that involves two surgeries. The first is to harvest cartilage from a minor load-bearing region of the joint (Stage I), followed by a 3–4 week chondrocyte extraction and culture expansion phase, and the second procedure (Stage II) occurs when chondrocytes are implanted into the pathological cartilage defect. Within our centre, the procedure has a 19% failure rate, as defined by a lack of improvement in Lysholm score, which is comparable to other centres. Demographic- and injury-associated risk factors for failure have been identified; however, currently there is little understanding of the biological nature of ACI failure. We hypothesise that an individual’s probability of failure to respond to ACI can be predicted, and that the metrics required to make such a prediction will come from improved understanding of the pathology of the failure in the first instance. Further, we aim to address the need to identify putative biomarkers that can be used to predict patient long-term outcome prior to cartilage repair therapy. The importance of this has been highlighted by the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) who published guidelines highlighting the need “to determine whether biomarkers are useful in identifying those individuals most likely to receive clinically important benefits from an intervention; and to determine whether biomarkers are useful for identifying individuals at earlier stages of OA in order to institute treatment at a time more amenable to disease modification”. The synovial fluid (SF) surrounding the ACI repair site provides a biological fluid that can be assessed to profile the joint environment and to investigate the biological response and innate repair following a ‘controlled injury’, such as that which is sustained at Stage I of the ACI procedure. Despite strong evidence that unbiased proteomic approaches can identify novel biomarkers of OA progression (reviewed in De Ceuninck and Berberbaum and Hsueh et al.), relatively few studies have focused on the SF. The limited numbers of studies that have analysed human SF proteins in cartilage injury and repair have tested for markers of OA of known biological relevance to cartilage injury. Using a targeted approach to biomarker identification, our group has been able to demonstrate that the absence of detectable aggrecanase-1 activity in the SF can be used along with lower age and higher baseline knee function as a predictive marker of ACI success, indicating that SF biomarkers have the potential for the stratification of patients to appropriate cartilage repair therapies. We are unaware of any published work that has used an untargeted approach to investigate the SF proteome before, during, or after an intervention to treat cartilage injury. There is therefore a requirement to complete an unbiased assessment to identify putative predictive biomarkers that may allow for ACI patient stratification.
The broad dynamic range of proteins in SF means that abundant proteins can make it difficult to interrogate low abundance proteins by suppressing their detectability. The deepest examination of the SF proteome to date (equine SF) used hexapeptide libraries to capture low abundance proteins. In this publication, we have profiled the SF proteome from patients undergoing ACI treatment at both stages of the procedure using dynamic range compression with hexapeptide libraries and label-free quantification proteomics by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).