PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Skeletal muscle
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: acetylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: iTRAQ; TMT
keywords: Cd47 blocking antibody; Ampk; Skeletal muscle; Mitochondrial energetic

ABSTRACT:
Our study investigated the impact of CD47 gene deletion on protein acetylation and its regulatory effects on mitochondrial metabolism and function in the skeletal muscle of mice.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
CD47 blocking antibody confers metabolic protective effects by promoting AMPK activation in skeletal muscle

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
1. Sample preparation 1.1 Protein extraction and digestion Protein extraction : SDT (4%SDS，100mM Tris-HCl，1mM DTT，pH7.6) buffer was used for sample lysis and protein extraction. The amount of protein was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA).  SDS-PAGE: 20 µg of protein for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Digestion: Protein digestion by trypsin was performed according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure described by Matthias Mann. The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  1.2  Labeling 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using TMT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or iTRAQ (Applied Biosystems) reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 1.3  Acetylated peptides enrichment The samples were reconstituted in 1.4 mL of precooled IAP Buffer, added pretreated Anti-Ac-K antibody beads (PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif (Ac-K) Kit，Cell Signaling Technology), then incubated at 4 ⁰C for 1.5 h，centrifuged at 2,000 ×g for 30s, then discarded the supernatant. Anti-Ac-K antibody beads were washed with 1mL precooled IAP Buffer for 3 times，than washed with precooled water for 3 times. Forty μL 0.15% TFA was added to the washed beads, incubated for 10 min at room temperature, then added 0.15% TFA again, centrifuged at 2,000 ×g for 30s, the supernatant was desalted by C18 STAGE Tips. 1.4 Fractionation High pH reversed-phase method Pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo scientific) was used to fractionate labeled digest samples into 6 fractions by an increasing acetonitrile step-gradient elution according to instructions. 2. LC-MS/MS 2.1 LC-MS/MS analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 or 90 min. The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. 2.2 Identification and quantitation of Phosphorylated proteins MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.4 . The following parameters were set. Item Value Enzyme Trypsin Max Missed Cleavages 2 Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ4/8 plex (N-term), iTRAQ 4/8 plex (K) or TMT 6/10/16 plex (N-term), iTRAQ6/10/16 plex (K) Variable modifications Oxidation (M)  Acetyl（K） Peptide Mass Tolerance ± 20 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.1Da Database See the project report Database pattern Decoy Peptide FDR ≤0.01 Protein FDR ≤0.01

DATA PROCESSING:
3. Bioinformatic analysis 3.1 Cluster analysis of phosphorylated peptides Cluster 3.0 (http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm) and Java Treeview software (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net) were used to performing hierarchical clustering analysis. Euclidean distance algorithm for similarity measure and average linkage clustering algorithm (clustering uses the centroids of the observations) for clustering were selected when performing hierarchical clustering. A heat map was often presented as a visual aid in addition to the dendrogram. 3.2 Motif analysis The motifs were analyzed by MeMe (http://meme-suite.org/index.htm). We extracted the amino acid sequences contain the modified site and six upstream/downstream amino acids from the modified site (13 amino acid sites in total). These sequences were used to predicted motifs in this study (parameters: width：13, occurrences:20, background: species). 3.3 Subcellular localization CELLO (http://cello.life.nctu.edu.tw/) which is a multi-class SVM classification system, was used to predict protein subcellular localization.  3.4 Domain annotation Protein sequences are searched using the InterProScan software to identify protein domain signatures from the InterPro member database Pfam.  3.5 GO annotation The protein sequences of the selected differentially expressed proteins were locally searched using the NCBI BLAST+ client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) and InterProScan to find homologue sequences, then gene ontology (GO) terms were mapped and sequences were annotated using the software program Blast2GO. The GO annotation results were plotted by R scripts. 3.6 KEGG annotation Following annotation steps, the studied proteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KEGG orthology identifications and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG. 3.7 Enrichment analysis  Enrichment analysis were applied based on the Fisher’ exact test, considering the whole quantified proteins as background dataset. Benjamini- Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived p-values. And only functional categories and pathways with p-values under a threshold of 0.05 were considered as significant. 3.8 Protein-protein interaction analysis The protein–protein interaction (PPI) information of the studied proteins was retrieved from IntAct molecular interaction database [11] (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/) by their gene symbols or STRING software (http://string-db.org/). The results were downloaded in the XGMML format and imported into Cytoscape software (http://www.cytoscape.org/, version 3.2.1) to visualize and further analyze functional protein-protein interaction networks. Furthermore, the degree of each protein was calculated to evaluate the importance of the protein in the PPI network.