PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Hnrnpa1; Hcc; Lta4h

ABSTRACT:
To explore potential proteins binding with LTA4H, co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed using Hepa1-6 cells overexpressing Flag-LTA4H. Anti-Flag and anti-IgG antibodies were used for immunoprecipitation to identify the interacting proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Hepa1-6 cell line overexpressing Flag-LTA4H LC-MS/MS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For in-gel tryptic digestion, gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ in 50% acetonitrile (v/v) until clear. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 μl of 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, the liquid removed, and the gel pieces rehydrated in 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 60 min. Gel pieces were again dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, liquid was removed and gel pieces were rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were incubated at room temperature, in the dark for 45 min. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 10 ng/μl trypsin resuspended in 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ on ice for 1 h. Excess liquid was removed and gel pieces were digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, followed by 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried to completion and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

DATA PROCESSING:
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Mus_musculus_10090_SP_20230103.fasta database. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

METHODS:
STAR★Methods
Key resources table
Experimental model and study participant details
Tissue microarray and patients
The HCC tissue microarray cohort (TMA HCC cohort), which included 133 pairs of HCC tumor tissues and matched adjacent liver tissues (118 males and 15 females; age range, 45–75 years), was collected from Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital (Shanghai, China) between January 2010 and February 2017. Follow-up data were summarized at Match 2018. The primary endpoints of the study were time to recurrence and overall survival. The time to recurrence was defined as the duration from the date of resection to the date of diagnosis of tumor recurrence. Overall survival was calculated from the date of resection to the date of death or the last follow-up. HCC TMA chips were used for IHC staining of LTA4H. In addition, clinical HCC samples included 10 pairs of fresh HCC tissues and adjacent liver tissues (10 males; age range, 48–73 years), which were collected after surgical resection and were subjected to western blot (WB) analysis, real-time quantitative PCR and ELISA assay. 13 formalin-fixed HCC sections from patients with ICIs (10 males and three females; age range, 32–72 years) were collected from Wuhan Union Hospital and were subjected to multiplex immunohistochemistry. All samples were randomly collected. To ensure a balanced distribution between the responder (n = 6) and non-responder (n = 7) groups in the ICI-treated patients, the randomization was stratified by response status.
All patient samples were obtained with the approval of the hospital’s Research Ethics Committee, and written informed consent was provided by all participants.
Mice and HCC mouse model
The animal experiments were performed following institutional guidelines and approved by the Ethics Committee of Fudan University. The mice used in this study (LTA4Hflox/flox, Alb-Cre, CAG-Cre, and C57BL/6 mice) were obtained from GemPharmatech and maintained in specific pathogen-free housing. C57L/J mice were acquired from the Jackson Laboratory. BLT1 knockout (BLT1KO) mice were a gift from Prof. Rui He’s lab in the Fudan University Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, China. LTA4HKO mice were obtained via the breeding of LTA4Hflox/flox and Cag-Cre transgenic mice. We also generated mice with liver-specific KO (ΔHEP) of LTA4H by crossing Alb-Cre transgenic mice with homozygous floxed LTA4H mice. The primers used for genotyping can be found in Table S8.
LTA4HΔhep and littermate LTA4Hf/f male mice and LTA4HKO male mice were injected i.p. with a single dose of N-nitrosodiethylamine (DEN, 25 mg/kg) on postnatal day 14 to induce HCC model. For the DEN combined with CCL4-induced HCC model, the above male mice were also administered with DEN (i.p. injection of 25 mg/kg at 14 days of age), followed by CCL4 treatment (starting at 6 weeks of age; 2 mL/kg, 25% dissolved in olive oil, once per week via i.p. injection) for 22 continuous weeks.
Male C57L/J mice aged 6–8 weeks were used for orthotopic implantation. 2×106 Hepa1-6 cells that were transfected with the indicated lentivirus were resuspended in 50ul of a mixture of PBS and Matrigel mixture (1:1) and then injected into the left lobe of the liver under isoflurane anesthesia. For macrophages depletion, mice were injected intraperitoneally with clodronate-containing liposomes or control liposomes (200μL of suspension/10g of mouse weight) 5 days before orthotopic implantation, and on day 1, day 5 and day 10 during experiment. For drug intervention, 5 days after model construction, mice with scramble and LTA4H KO tumors were randomly divided into 4 groups (5 mice per group). After the first bioluminescent imaging, mice were injected intraperitoneally with 100 μg of anti-PD-1 antibody (BioXcell, BE0146), 100μg of anti-TGF-β antibody (BioXcell, BE0057) or combination or IgG control every three days for a total of three injections. The live imaging experiments were performed three times during this experiment. Liver samples were harvested at the experimental endpoint (day 14).
Isolation and treatment of primary hepatocytes
Primary mouse hepatocytes were isolated by Liberase perfusion. Livers from LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO male mice aged 6–8 weeks were first perfused with HBSS supplemented with 25 mM HEPES and 0.5 mM EDTA, followed by Liberase digestion (Merck, 05401020001). Isolated hepatocytes were washed with low glucose DMEM and collected by centrifugation at 50 × g. A total of 4×105 cells were plated on 6-well plates in low-glucose DMEM containing 10% fetal calf serum and a combination of penicillin and streptomycin. The maintenance medium (Williams E medium supplemented with 2 mM glutamine and a combination of penicillin and streptomycin) was changed after 4 h. The cells were cultured in a 5% CO2 cell culture incubator at 37 °C. The next day, the cells were treated with DEN (25 ng/mL), LTB4 (100 nM, Cayman, 20110) and inhibitors including JNK-IN-8 (2.5 μM, Aladdin, J125321), LY255283 (5 μM, MCE, HY-15744) and U-75302 (200 nM, Cayman, 70705), as indicated in the figures. Cells were harvested at the indicated time points, and protein and RNA were isolated.
Isolation of bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) and coculture with conditioned medium
BMDMs were prepared by methods described previously. Briefly, bone marrow cells were obtained by flushing the femurs and tibias of 6 to 8-week-old wild-type C57BL/6 male mice or LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO male mice. Red blood cells were lysed with ACK lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A1049201). Then, the cells were cultured in BMDM culture medium (complete 1640 medium supplemented with macrophage colony stimulating factor [M-CSF, 10 ng/mL, Novoprotein, CB34]). On day 6, the nonadherent cells were removed and fresh BMDM culture medium was added. On day 7, M2 macrophages were stimulated with IL-4 (10 ng/mL, Novoprotein, CK74) for 2 days, and M1 macrophages were stimulated with LPS (10 ng/mL, Beyotime, S1732) and IFN-γ (5 ng/mL, Novoprotein, C746) for 2 days. The cells were cultured in a 5% CO2 cell culture incubator at 37 °C.
For coculture with Hepa1-6 conditioned medium, the culture medium of Hepa1-6 cells was treated with hydrochloric acid (HCl) to activate latent TGF-β, and then HCL was neutralized with sodium hydroxide (NaOH) to obtain the available conditioned medium. Then, the medium of the BMDMs was changed to conditioned medium on day 6. IL-4 or LPS and IFN-γ and anti-TGF-β were used on day 7. Following qPCR or immunofluorescence experiments were performed after 2 days.
Cell lines culture and treatment
Hepa1-6 and HepG2 cell lines were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and a combination of penicillin and streptomycin. The cell lines were authenticated by STR profiling and regularly tested for mycoplasma infection. The mouse LTA4H coding sequence were cloned into the GV492 plasmid, and the synthesized plasmids were then transfected into 293T cells for LTA4H lentivirus production. Hepa1-6 cells stably overexpressing LTA4H were generated with LTA4H lentivirus, selected with puromycin (1 mg/mL, ST551) and confirmed by western blotting. The shRNAs targeting mouse Hnrnpa1 and Ltbp1 were cloned into the GV116 plasmid (Target sequences seen in Key Resources Table), and the synthesized plasmids were then transfected into 293T cells for lentivirus production. Lentiviruses with each shRNA were transduced into Hepa1-6 scramble and LTA4H KO cells, which were selected with Hygromycin B (GeneChem, REVG1009). The cells were treated with LTB4 (100 nM, Cayman, 20110) and inhibitors including LY255283 (5 μM, MCE, HY-15744) and U-75302 (200 nM, Cayman, 70705), as indicated in the figures. The cells were cultured in a 5% CO2 cell culture incubator at 37 °C.
Method details
Mass cytometry and analyses
Single-cell suspensions from mouse liver tumors were prepared as previously described. The cells were immunostained with specific antibodies against surface markers to identify various cell types listed in Key Resources Table. Antibodies were purchased from Fluidigm. Barcoding and staining were then performed according to Fluidigm’s instructions as described below. Briefly, the collected cells were washed with MaxPar PBS Buffer and stained with 0.5 μM cisplatin (Fluidigm, 201064) for 2 min at room temperature. Fix I buffer (Fluidigm, 201065) was used to fix the cells at room temperature for 10 min, followed by washing the fixed cells with Barcode Perm buffer (Fluidigm, 201067) and centrifugation at 800 × g for 5 min to pellet the cells. A Cell-ID 20-Plex Pd Barcoding Kit (Fluidigm, 201060) was used to barcode the above fixed cells, as directed by the manufacturer. Ten barcoded samples were pooled for antibody cocktail staining for 30 min at room temperature. After staining, the cells were incubated in Cell-ID Intercalator-Ir (Fluidigm, 201192A) solution overnight at 4°C. The samples were then washed twice with ddH2O, and filtered into 30 μm strained cap tubes and diluted in ddH2O containing 10% EQ Four Element Calibration Beads (Fluidigm, 201078). CyTOF data were acquired and analyzed as previously described. The Helios instrument was checked and calibrated prior to each analysis as per the manufacturer’s guidelines. Following Fluidigm’s recommendation, FCS files were randomized and normalized using EQ beads signal. After that, the files were concatenated, debarcoded, and randomized as instructed by Fluidigm. The gating of live lymphocytes was carried out in Cytobank. Clustering analysis was done with t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) and PhenoGraph algorithms in R package Cytofkit with default settings (seed = 42, t-SNE perplexity = 30, t-SNE max iterations = 1000, nearest neighbors K = 30, Euclidean distance). Diffusion maps were generated from Cytofkit ShinyApp interactive interface. The other visualizations were displayed by R package. For the definition of major cell populations, briefly, CD45 was used to define lymphocytes, CD3e for T cells, CD45R and CD19 for B cells, GR-1 and LY-6G for neutrophils, I-A/I-E and CD11c for dendritic cells, NK1.1 for NK cells, and F4/80 along with CD11b for macrophages.
H&E and immunohistochemistry
H&E and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were performed as previously described. Briefly, H&E and IHC were performed using 4-μm-thick formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections. After baking at 60°C for an hour, the tissue sections were deparaffinized with xylene and rehydrated with graded ethanol. For H&E staining, hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed after deparaffinization. For IHC staining, inactivation of endogenous peroxidases was carried out using 3% hydrogen peroxide for 20 min, followed by washing with double-distilled water (ddH2O). Antigen retrieval was performed using 0.01 mol/L citrate buffer solution (pH 6.0) in a pressure cooker. Blocking was performed with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) solution at 37°C for 30 min. Then the sections were incubated with primary antibodies at 4°C for overnight, followed by incubation with secondary peroxidase-conjugated antibodies for 30 min at room temperature. Staining was visualized with a DAB peroxidase substrate kit (Beyotime, P0203). Then, the H&E and IHC stained sections were dehydrated and covered with a coverslip. TUNEL staining was carried out utilizing a TUNEL apoptosis kit (Beyotime, C1098) following the manufacturer’s specifications. Images were obtained with a Leica Aperio AT2 instrument.
LTA4H (antibody: Abcam, ab133512) staining of the TMA was scored according to intensity (0–3) and positive rate (1–4). Briefly, staining intensity was categorized by a pathologist in a double-blind manner as follows: no staining (0), weak staining (1), moderate staining (2), and strong staining (3). The positive rate of staining was assessed by the percentage of positive cells, with scores assigned as follows: ≤25% (1), 26–50% (2), 51–75% (3), and 76–100% (4). The overall score was calculated by multiplying the intensity score by the positive rate score, resulting in a combined IHC score. For quantification of PCNA (antibody: A12427, Abclonal) or TUNEL-positive cells, three fields were counted per mouse to ensure a representative assessment of the staining. TUNEL+ and PCNA+ cells were counted using the positive cell detection function in QuPath. The parameters were set to a minimum nuclear area of 60 px2 and a minimum circularity of 0.8 to exclude stromal and immune cells. Default parameters were used for other settings. The positive staining score was then calculated as the percentage of positive cells relative to the total (positive + negative) cells in each field. The primary antibodies used can be found in Key Resources Table.
Co-IP and LC-MS/MS proteomic assays
Cells were lysed with WB and IP lysis buffer (Yeasen, 20118ES60) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Yeasen, 20124ES03) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Yeasen, 20109ES05). The lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min with occasional mixing. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatants were incubated with an FLAG tag antibody (R&D Systems, MAB8529), LTA4H antibody (Origene, CF500665) or an HNRNPA1 antibody (Abcam, ab5832) overnight. The Protein A + G beads (MCE, HY-K0202) were added to precipitate the target protein complex with the appropriate antibody. Then, the immunoprecipitants were washed five times with lysis buffer. Finally, the bound proteins were eluted at 95°C for 5 min in 40μL of 1×SDS-PAGE sample loading buffer. For RNase treatment, the samples were treated with 1:1000 RNase A/T1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, EN0551) for 15 min at 37°C. After co-IP, the samples were subjected to LC-MS or western blotting using the following antibodies: LTA4H antibody (Abcam, ab133512), HNRNPA1 antibody (Abcam, ab5832) and pan-ser/thr phosphorylation antibody (Abmart, T91067). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with the support of Jingjie PTM Biolabs (Hangzhou, China) Co., Ltd.
Western blot
The lysates were fractionated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. Nonspecific binding sites were blocked with 5% BSA in TBST solution for 1 h at room temperature. The NC membranes were incubated with specific antibodies overnight at 4°C followed by washing with TBST three times. Several wash steps after 1 h incubation with secondary rabbit antibody (IRDye 680RD, LI-COR, 926–68071) and mouse antibody (IRDye 800CW, LI-COR, 926–32210) were executed. Odyssey scanner was used for visualization. Quantification of protein expression levels was performed using β-actin protein level as a reference using the ImageJ software. Quantification of JNK and c-jun phosphorylation levels was performed using total JNK/c-jun protein level as a reference. Quantification of co-immunoprecipitated protein was performed using immunoprecipitated protein level as a reference. The primary antibodies used can be found in Key Resources Table.
Generation of LTA4H KO Hepa1-6 cell lines using CRISPR/Cas9
The sgRNAs were designed with a web tool, as described previously. The Cas9 coding sequence were cloned into the GV396 plasmid, and the synthesized plasmids were then transfected into 293T cells for lentivirus production. Cas9-expressing Hepa1-6 cells were generated using Cas9 lentivirus and selected with puromycin. The sgRNAs were modified manually to add Bbsl restriction sites. The sgRNAs targeting mouse Lta4h were cloned into the GV807 plasmid, and the synthesized plasmids were then transfected into 293T cells for lentivirus production. Lentiviruses with each sgRNA were transduced into Cas9-expressing Hepa1-6 cells. The cells were then selected with G418 (Beyotime, ST081) for 2 days, divided and placed in 96-well plates; 10 days later, single clones were picked up. The effect of the knockout was determined by immunoblotting. The following control sgRNA and sgRNA targeting Lta4h were used: control sgRNA (5′-CGCTTCCGCGGCCCGTTCAA-3′), sgRNA-1 (5′-CTCATGAGTGCCATCCGTGA-3′), sgRNA-2 (5′-CTCACTCCTGAACAGACGTC-3′) and sgRNA-3 (5′-AGGTTACAAAGGGTCACCGA-3′).
Multiplex immunohistochemistry (mIHC)
The mIHC assay was performed as previously reported. Mouse liver tumor sections were stained with Opal520 dye (CD206), Opal570 dye (F4/80), Opal620 dye (CD11c), Opal690 dye (PD-L1) and DAPI with an Opal 6-Plex Manual Detection Kit (Akoya Biosciences, NEL811001KT) and scanned using a Vectra 3.0 Pathology Imaging System Microscope. The clinical HCC samples were stained with Opal520 dye (LTA4H), Opal570 dye (CD206), Opal690 dye (CD68) and DAPI. Information of the antibodies used in this section can be found in Key Resources Table. After serial dewaxing and rehydration, the slides were fixed with 10% neutral buffered formaldehyde for 20 min. Heat-induced antigen retrieval was performed using citrate antigen retrieval solution in a microwave oven for 30 min. The slides were washed once with double-distilled water and TBST, blocked with blocking buffer, and stained with antibodies according to the manufacturer’s manual. DAPI was used as a nuclear counterstain. The digital images were then analyzed with QuPath. For quantification of mIHC data, we employed a double-blind method using QuPath to select three equal-sized regions from each sample. We then performed cell segmentation using cell detection function in QuPath. For quantification of LTA4H intensity in tumor cells, the analysis was restricted to cells with a nuclear area >30 μm2 and nuclear circularity >0.8 and CD68 intensity <20. The thresholds were determined based on the average values of parameters (nuclear area, nuclear circularity and CD68 intensity) obtained from 50 randomly selected, clearly identifiable tumor cells. The LTA4H expression data from the tumor cells were averaged to determine the LTA4H expression level in tumor cells for each mouse. To quantify CD206+ macrophages, CD40+ macrophages, CD8+ T cells, PD-1+CD8+ T cells, GZMB+CD8+ T cells, thresholds for each marker were set based on the average values derived from clearly identifiable cell populations. Cells with marker expression exceeding the threshold were defined as positive.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)
Total RNA was extracted from cells and tissues using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 15596026) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. The extracted RNA was used to synthesize complementary DNA using a reverse transcription kit (Yeasen, 11149ES). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using SYBR Green (Roche, 04707516001) and LightCycler 480 real-time PCR systems following the manufacturer’s protocol. The expression of the indicated genes was normalized to that of Actb by 2−ΔΔCt. The RNA immunoprecipitated by HNRNPA1 antibody was normalized to the input fraction. Chromatin-immunoprecipitated DNA using H3K27ac antibody was normalized by dividing the amount of the corresponding target in the input fraction. The primers used are shown in Table S8.
ELISA of total TGF-β and active TGF-β
The levels of total TGF-β and active TGF-β were determined using a mouse TGF-β ELISA kit (R&D Systems, DB100C) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For total TGF-β detection, hydrochloric acid (HCl) was used to activate the latent TGF-β in the cell culture supernatant and mouse serum, and then HCL was neutralized with sodium hydroxide (NaOH) to obtain the available samples. For active TGF-β detection, no acid treatment of the sample was needed. Notably, the cell culture medium used for TGF-β detection should be replaced with medium without serum. The absorbance was measured with a spectrophotometer at 450 nm.
AST and ALT assays
AST and ALT levels in serum from DEN-induced mouse HCC model after sacrifice, which are generally associated with hepatic damage, were assayed using ALT (Nanjing Jiancheng, C009-2-1) and AST (Nanjing Jiancheng, C010-2-1) activity assay kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions with appropriate calibration controls. The absorbance at 510 nm was obtained with a Tecan multifunctional microplate reader.
RNA sequencing and analysis
RNA-seq library preparation was carried out using the VAHTS Total RNA-seq (H/M/R) Library Prep Kit for Illumina (Vazyme, NR603), followed by sequencing on a Nova6000 sequencer (Illumina, USA) with the PE150 strategy. Raw FASTQ files were processed using FastQC v0.11.5. RNA sequencing reads were mapped to the GRCm38 mouse genome assembly using STAR version 2.5.3a with Ensembl annotations. DESeq2 v1.16.1 was used for sample normalization and differential expression analysis. Differentially expressed genes were subjected to Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis with the ClusterProfiler R package.
Nucleocytoplasmic separation
Nucleocytoplasmic separation was carried out with a nuclear and cytoplasmic extract kit (Yeasen, 20126ES). Following the methods described in this kit, Hepa1-6 cells subjected to different treatments were harvested for extraction of the cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins. LTA4H was detected by western blot analysis, and histone H3 and GAPDH were used as the internal controls.
Immunofluorescence
For immunofluorescence, hepatocytes or Hepa1-6 cells were seeded into 12-well plates with cell climbing slices at a density of 3×105 cells/well. BMDMs were seeded into 24-well plates at a density of 8×105 cells/well. The cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA), permeated with 0.5% Triton-100 for 30 min and blocked with 5% BSA for 1 h. Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking solution and incubated with the cells at 4°C overnight. Then, the wells were washed three times with PBS and incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Finally, the cell nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 (Sigma-Aldrich, B2883). All operations, starting with incubation with secondary antibodies, were performed in the dark. Images of hepatocytes were acquired using a single-photon epifluorescence microscope. Images of BMDMs were acquired using an inverted fluorescence microscope. The antibodies used for immunofluorescence were against LTA4H (Abcam, ab133512, 1:100) and CD206 (Abcam, 1:200).
RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP)
RIP experiments were performed using the RIP RNA-Binding Protein Immunoprecipitation Kit (FITGENE, FI8707). Approximately 1 × 107 cells were then subjected to an equal pellet volume and resuspended in 100 μL of RIP Lysis Buffer combined with protease inhibitors cocktail and RNase inhibitors. The cell lysates were incubated with 2 μg of an antibody against HNRNPA1 (Abcam, ab5832) or IgG and rotated at 4°C overnight. After treatment with proteinase K buffer, the immunoprecipitated RNA was extracted with TRIzol reagent. The expression levels of Ltbp1 were determined by RT-qPCR.
RNA stability assay
The RNA stability assay was performed as previously described. Briefly, cells were treated with 5 μg/mL actinomycin D (Sigma-Aldrich, A9415) to inhibit global mRNA transcription. Samples were collected at the indicated time points. Total RNA was extracted for reverse transcription, and the levels of genes of interest were analyzed by qPCR.
Transient knockdown using siRNA
Hepa1-6 cells were seeded in 6-well plates. Cells were transfected with siRNA pools (10 μM) and jetPRIME in vitro DNA & siRNA transfection reagent kit (Polyplus, 101000027) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cells were replenished with fresh complete media the next day and harvested 48 h later for RNA and Western blot analyses. The sequences used for siRNAs targeting Hnrnpa1 were siHnrnpa1-1 (5′-UGACAGAGGCAGUGGGAAATT-3′), siHnrnpa1-2 (5′-UGGGAAGAUUGAAGUGAUATT-3′) and siHnrnpa1-3 (5′- GGAUGGAAGAGUUGUGGAATT-3′). For siRNAs targeting Hdac1, the sequences used were as follows: siHdac1-1 (5′-GAAAGAUCCUGAAGAGAAATT-3′), siHdac1-2 (5′-GCAAGCAGAUGCAGAGAUUTT-3′) and siHdac1-3 (5′-CCAAAGUAAUGGAGAUGUUTT-3′). For siRNAs targeting Hdac2, the sequences were siHdac2-1 (5′-GGACAAUAGUGGUGAGAAATT-3′), siHdac2-2 (5′-UGUCAAAGGUCAUGCUAAATT-3′) and siHdac2-3 (5′-GCAAGAAGAAAGUGUGCUATT-3′). The sequence of negative control siRNA was 5′-UUCUCCGAACGUGUCACGUTT-3’.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation
Chromatin was isolated from hepa1-6 or HepG2 cells using Chromatin Extraction Kit (Abcam, ab117152) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. CHIP assays were performed using CHIP Kit Magnetic- One Step (Abcam, ab156907) following the Abcam ChIP protocol. Immunoprecipitations were performed with H3K27ac antibody (2μg, Abcam, ab4729) or Rabbit IgG (2μg, Abcam, ab171870) and Protein A/G Magnetic beads (MCE, HY-K0202). Input DNA and immunoprecipitated DNA samples were purified by PCR purification Kit (Beyotime, D0033). Eluted DNA samples were used for either ChIP-qPCR or ChIP-seq.
CHIP-seq analysis
Sequencing libraries for immunoprecipitated chromatin DNA were prepared using the NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (NEB, USA; Cat. E7645L). End-repair reactions were performed with End Repair Reaction Buffer (10X) and End Prep Enzyme Mix under the following conditions: 20°C for 30 min followed by 65°C for 30 min. NEBNext Adaptor and Blunt/TA Ligase Master Mix were used for adaptor ligation at 20°C for 15 min, followed by USER Enzyme treatment at 37°C for 5 min to remove uracil bases from the adaptor. After bead purification, libraries were amplified via PCR (initial denaturation at 98°C for 10 s, followed by cycles of 98°C for 10 s, 65°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s). Library size selection and purification were performed with AMPure XP Beads, and libraries were quantified with Qubit and assessed for insert size using a High-Sensitivity DNA Chip. Sequencing was carried out on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform to produce 150 bp paired-end reads. Raw reads in FASTQ format were processed using fastp (v0.20.1) to remove adapter sequences, poly-N reads, and low-quality reads, resulting in clean reads for downstream analysis. These clean reads were aligned to the reference genome using Bowtie2 (v2.4.2), and peaks were called using MACS2 (v2.2.7.1). Visualizations of the called peaks were generated using IGV software.
Quantification and statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism and R software were used for all statistical analyses in this study. Statistical details of experiments and analyses can be found in the figure legends. The statistical tests were performed as two-sided. Results of cell culture experiments were collected from at least 3 independent biological replicates. In the animal experiments, n represents number of animals. The differences within two groups were compared by unpaired Student’s t test, paired Student’s t test or nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test as indicated. For comparisons of multiple groups, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison analysis was performed. The Pearson correlation test was used to examine the significant correlation between quantitative variables. Kaplan-Meier curves (log rank test) were used for survival analysis. Bar plots represent mean ± SD. The line and box of boxplot represent median and upper and lower quartiles, respectively. For the differential gene expression analysis in GEPIA website, the p-values were calculated using the linear model and empirical Bayes method in the R package limma, with adjustments using the Benjamini and Hochberg method. An asterisk (∗) indicates that the p-value is less than 0.05. p value less than 0.05 (p < 0.05) was accepted as significant.

RESULTS:
Results
Downregulation of LTA4H was associated with poor prognosis in patients with HCC
To evaluate the clinical significance of LTA4H in HCC, we first analyzed the expression of LTA4H in human HCC tissue and paired adjacent tissues. IHC analysis of HCC sections and the tissue microarray (TMA) HCC cohort demonstrated that LTA4H expression was significantly downregulated in HCC (Figures 1A–1C). Similar to the IHC results, the protein and mRNA levels of LTA4H were lower in HCC tissues compared to matched adjacent tissues (Figures 1D–1F). We further examined the expression of LTA4H in a mouse HCC model induced by diethylnitrosamine (DEN). Consistent with our findings in clinical HCC samples, the transcript and protein levels of LTA4H were reduced in mouse HCC (Figures 1G–1J). LTB4, a key mediator of LTA4H function, was significantly downregulated in both mouse and human HCC (Figures 1K and 1L). Moreover, LTB4 levels showed a positive correlation with mRNA and protein level of LTA4H in clinical HCC samples (Figure 1M). We further assessed the relationship between LTA4H expression and survival. Patient characteristics are listed in Table S1. Both overall survival and recurrence-free survival were significantly shorter in patients with low LTA4H expression (Figures 1N–1P). Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses identified LTA4H expression as an independent risk factor for predicting overall survival and recurrence-free survival (Tables S1 and S2). To validate these findings, we performed the same analysis of HCC samples from the published Chinese HCC patients with HBV infection (CHCC-HBV) cohort. Linear regression analysis revealed that LTA4H protein and transcript levels were decreased and positively correlated in the CHCC-HBV cohort (Figures 1Q–1S). Low LTA4H protein expression was also associated with poor prognosis in the CHCC-HBV cohort (Figure 1T). Together, these results indicated a repressive role for LTA4H in human HCC development.
Hepatocyte-specific LTA4H ablation promotes hepatocarcinogenesis
We constructed hepatocyte-specific LTA4H knockout (LTA4HΔhep) and LTA4H knockout (LTA4HKO) mice to study the role of LTA4H in a DEN-induced HCC model of LTA4Hf/f, LTA4HΔhep, and LTA4HKO mice. LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice were generated by deleting the second exon of LTA4H (Figure S1A). 40 weeks after DEN injection, the absence of LTA4H expression correlated with increased liver-to-body weight ratios and tumor numbers in LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice. Unexpectedly, LTA4HKO mice developed significantly fewer tumors than LTA4HΔhep mice (Figures 2A–2D). Hepatocytic damage can be directly measured by alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels in the serum. Compared with LTA4Hf/f mice, LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice have higher plasma ALT and AST levels. However, no significant differences in plasma ALT or AST levels were observed between LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice (Figures 2E and 2F). When mice were administered DEN followed by weekly injections of carbon tetrachloride (CCL4), similar results were observed, consistent with the DEN-induced HCC model (Figures S1B–S1G). Based on these findings, we hypothesized that hepatocyte-specific LTA4H deficiency contributes to liver injury induced by DEN, while LTA4H derived from some stromal cells may influence tumor cell proliferation. To test this hypothesis, IHC of TUNEL and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) was performed to quantify damaged and proliferative cells in the liver (Figure 2G). The percentage of TUNEL+ hepatocytes and PCNA+ tumor cells was higher in LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice than in LTA4Hf/f mice. However, LTA4HKO mice displayed more TUNEL+ hepatocytes but fewer PCNA+ tumor cells compared to LTA4HΔhep mice (Figures 2H and 2I). These findings suggest that LTA4H deficiency exacerbates DEN-induced hepatocytic damage, while LTA4H in some non-parenchymal cells may enhance tumor progression in HCC.
LTA4H ablation mediates hepatocytic damage via reducing JNK signal activation
To investigate the possible role of LTA4H in hepatocytic damage, we isolated primary hepatocytes from LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO mice without treatment. Bulk RNA was extracted from hepatocytes after 12 h in culture and subjected to RNA sequencing (Figure 3A; Table S3). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis showed that genes downregulated in LTA4HKO hepatocytes were enriched in the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway and erb-b2 receptor tyrosine kinase (ErbB) signaling pathway compared with those in LTA4Hf/f hepatocytes (Figure 3B). Cross-activation and feedback mechanism between the MAPK and ErbB signaling pathways have been reported. We first assessed the alterations in the MAPK signaling pathway (JNK, extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK), P38) and found that LTA4H knockout (KO) decreased JNK phosphorylation levels but not ERK and P38 phosphorylation levels (Figure 3D). Differentially expressed genes in the ErbB signaling pathway (Figure 3C) were validated by qPCR. epidermal growth factor (Egf), epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr), and Nras were reduced in LTA4HKO hepatocytes (Figures 3E–3G). These findings underscore basal differences in JNK phosphorylation and gene expression between LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO hepatocytes. Furthermore, Egf and Egfr expression levels were also downregulated in the adjacent liver tissues of LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice in the DEN-induced HCC model (Figures 3H–3J).
LTB4, a known promoter of JNK phosphorylation via BLT1 or BLT2 receptors, was significantly reduced in both serum and liver tissues of LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice compared to LTA4Hf/f mice in the DEN-induced HCC model (Figures S2E and S2F). Interestingly, no substantial differences in LTB4 levels were observed between LTA4HKO and LTA4HΔhep mice, suggesting that hepatocytes are the primary source of LTB4 in our model. To elucidate the underlying signal mechanism, hepatocytes were treated with DEN, LTB4, JNK inhibitor (JNK-IN-8), BLT1 inhibitor (U-75302), and BLT2 inhibitor (LY255283). Western blot analyses revealed that LTB4 induced JNK and c-Jun phosphorylation in both LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO hepatocytes. Inhibition of JNK, BLT1, or BLT2 individually significantly reduced JNK and c-Jun phosphorylation (Figure 3K). Next, hepatocytic damage was evaluated using cell viability (CCK8) assays and the expression of damage-associated molecular pattern molecules (Il6, Il1b, and Tnfa). LTA4HKO hepatocytes exhibited more severe damage than LTA4Hf/f hepatocytes. LTB4 treatment reversed the DEN-induced hepatocytic damage, which was partially mitigated by the JNK, BLT1, or BLT2 inhibitors individually (Figures 3L, 3M, S2A, and S2B). We further analyzed Egf and Egfr levels and found that LTB4 induced their expression in both LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO hepatocytes, which was prevented by the inhibition of JNK, BLT1, and BLT2 (Figures S2C and S2D). In a DEN-induced HCC model in BLT1KO mice, results were consistent with those observed in LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice (Figures S2G–S2I). BLT1KO hepatocytes also exhibited greater severe hepatocytic damage than wild-type hepatocytes (Figures S2J and S2K). In previous studies, we found that EGF/EGFR could promote JNK phosphorylation, which suggested a potential positive feedback pathway between JNK activation and the EGF/EGFR signaling pathway. In summary, our findings demonstrate a protective role of LTA4H in mitigating hepatocytic damage via JNK activation.
LTA4H deficiency shifts the TME toward high infiltration of M2-like macrophages
The role of LTA4H, a gene that regulates inflammation, in shaping the TME of HCC remains unclear. Tumor samples from LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO DEN-induced mouse HCC models were analyzed using mass cytometry (CyTOF) to assess the percentage and functional status of immune cells (Figures 4A, 4B, and S3A–S3D; Table S4). Analysis of 29 markers revealed 20 distinct cell clusters, showing increased infiltration of CD206+ macrophages (C14, C16, and C20) and neutrophils (C6), alongside decreased infiltration of CD40+ macrophages (positive CD86 expression, C2 and C11) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1+) dendritic cells (C9) in LTA4H-deficient tumors. The proportions of other immune cell clusters were comparable between LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO HCC tumors (Figures 4C–4E). The frequency of CD86+ macrophages lacking CD40 expression (C10 and C17) remained unchanged between the groups. CD40 has been reported to stimulate antitumorigenic macrophage functions by regulating fatty acid and glutamine metabolism. CD40+ macrophages exhibited opposing differentiation trajectories compared to CD206+ macrophages, as revealed by a diffusion map analysis (Figure 4F). Differential expression of CD206 and PD-L1 suggested that CD206+ macrophages were immunosuppressive M2-like macrophages, whereas CD40+ macrophages (C2 and C11) were M1-like macrophages (Figures 4G, 4H, and S3B). The ratio of CD206+ macrophages to CD40+ macrophages significantly increased in LTA4HKO tumors (Figure 4I). PD-L1+ dendritic cells exhibited increased expression of CD11b and PD-L1 with decreased CD24 levels, suggesting an immunosuppressive phenotype (Figure S3C).
We confirmed these findings in tumor sections from LTA4Hf/f, LTA4HΔhep, and LTA4HKO mice using multiplex IHC (mIHC). While there were no significant differences in PD-L1+ dendritic cells among the groups, neutrophil infiltration was elevated only in LTA4HKO tumors, indicating a contribution from non-parenchymal LTA4H deficiency to neutrophil infiltration (Figure S3E). CD206+ macrophages and the ratio of CD206+ macrophages to CD40+ macrophages were higher in LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO mice compared to LTA4Hf/f mice. Consistent with the tumor burden variations, LTA4HKO mice showed lower levels of CD206+ macrophages and a reduced ratio of CD206+ macrophages to CD40+ macrophages compared to LTA4HΔhep mice (Figures 4J, 4K, and S3F), suggesting that macrophage phenotypic changes play a critical role in LTA4H-ablation-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.
To elucidate LTA4H expression in human HCC, the analysis of published single-cell RNA sequencing data revealed that myeloid cells were the primary non-parenchymal cells expressing LTA4H (Figures S4A–S4D). Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) from LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO mice were polarized to M1 and M2 phenotypes using lipopolysaccharide + interferon-gamma or interleukin-4, respectively. LTA4H deficiency impaired both M1 (Cxcl9 and Cxcl10) and M2 polarization (Arg1 and Mrc1) (Figures S4E–S4H), indicating that LTA4H expression in macrophages is essential for their polarization.
Overall, hepatocyte-specific LTA4H ablation increases the frequency of M2-like macrophages in a mouse HCC model, highlighting its critical role in promoting HCC progression and shaping an immunosuppressive TME.
Hepatocyte-specific LTA4H deficiency promotes M2-like macrophage polarization by upregulating LTBP1 expression and TGF-β secretion
To explore how LTA4H deficiency promotes M2-like macrophage polarization, we examined differentially expressed secretory genes between LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO hepatocytes (Figure 3A). Nine secreted genes were significantly upregulated in LTA4HKO hepatocytes (Figure 5A), including Apob, Apoe, Mmp8, Lcn2, and Ltbp1, which have been implicated in M2 macrophage polarization. Validation experiments in primary hepatocytes confirmed the upregulation of Ltbp1 and Lcn2 in LTA4HKO hepatocytes (Figures 5B and S5A–S5D). Further, Ltbp1 was upregulated in LTA4H KO liver tissues and Hepa1-6 cells but downregulated in LTA4H-overexpressing Hepa1-6 cells (Figures 5C–5E and S5E–S5G). Protein and mRNA analysis confirmed that LTBP1 was negatively regulated by LTA4H (Figures 5F and 5G). High LTBP1 expression correlated with poor prognosis in patients from the TGCA-LIHC cohort (Figure S5H).
LTBP1, a member of the latent TGF-β binding protein family, contributes to latent TGF-β secretion and activation. TGF-β plays a pivotal role in HCC progression by promoting M2 macrophage differentiation, which suppresses CD8+ T cells, natural killer cells, and dendritic cell activity and enhances CD4+ regulatory T cell activity. We detected total TGF-β secretion levels in Hepa1-6 cells and found that TGF-β secretion significantly decreased with overexpressing LTA4H and increased with LTA4H KO (Figures 5H and 5I). Both total TGF-β and active TGF-β were elevated in the serum of the LTA4HΔhep and LTA4HKO DEN-induced HCC model (Figures 5J and 5K). Notably, Tgfb expression remained unchanged between LTA4H-manipulated and control Hepa1-6 cells (Figures S5I and S5J), indicating that LTA4H primarily modulates the secretion and activation of TGF-β.
To test whether LTA4H affects M2-like macrophages via TGF-β, we cocultured BMDMs with conditioned media (CM) from Hepa1-6 cells with or without LTA4H KO. Latent TGF-β in the CM was activated using hydrochloric acid and neutralized with sodium hydroxide (Figure 5L). LTA4HKO CM promoted M2 polarization, which was abolished by TGF-β blockade (Figures 5M–5P). Using mIHC in the TMA HCC cohort, we observed a significant negative correlation between LTA4H and both LTBP1 and CD206+CD68+ macrophages (Figures 5Q and 5R). LTBP1 expression was elevated in HCC tumors and correlated with poor prognosis (Figures S5K–S5M). Macrophage depletion using clodronate-containing liposomes inhibited tumor progression in the scramble group and abolished tumor enhancement in LTA4H KO tumors (Figures 5S and 5T). Additionally, mIHC revealed that macrophage depletion reversed CD8+ T cell exhaustion and increased the proportion of GZMB+CD8+ T cells (Figures S6A–S6D). These findings also supported the direct role of M2-like macrophages in mediating the pro-tumorigenic effects of LTA4H deficiency.
Collectively, LTA4H ablation promotes M2-like macrophage polarization through enhancing TGF-β secretion and activation, mediated by LTBP1 upregulation.
LTA4H negatively regulates LTBP1 expression by inhibiting Ltbp1 mRNA maturation and processing mediated by HNRNPA1
We investigated the molecular mechanism by which LTA4H regulates LTBP1 expression. First, we explored the role of the LTA4H/LTB4/LTB4R pathway in hepatocytes. LTB4 treatment reduced Ltbp1 levels in both LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO hepatocytes, which were restored by inhibition of BLT1 or BLT2. Notably, inhibiting BLT1 in LTA4HKO hepatocytes caused a sharper Ltbp1 increase, suggesting an intrinsic inhibitory mechanism of LTA4H (Figure S7A). Next, we assessed Ltbp1 mRNA stability and pre-mRNA levels in LTA4Hf/f and LTA4HKO hepatocytes, as well as in Hepa1-6 cells with LTA4H overexpression or KO. Results showed no significant differences, indicating that LTA4H might regulate Ltbp1 expression via mRNA processing rather than transcription and stability (Figures S7B–S7E). Interestingly, nuclear enrichment of LTA4H was observed in human and mouse HCC-adjacent tissues (Figures S7F and S7G). We hypothesized that nuclear enrichment of LTA4H might directly participate in the regulation of mRNA processing and maturation of LTBP1.
Anti-Flag-LTA4H co-immunoprecipitation (coIP) with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) identified 46 specific proteins (Figure 6A; Table S5). Enrichment analysis revealed that most of the proteins mainly involved in pathways related to protein-RNA binding and RNA processing and splicing (Figure 6B). Furthermore, Tubulin Alpha 4a (TUBA4A) and HNRNPA1 were identified as potential interactors of LTA4H (Figure 6C). HNRNPA1, also known as heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1, is mainly found in the cell nucleus and is involved in multiple cellular processes, including RNA processing, transport, and localization. Interestingly, LTBP1 was identified in a dataset of HNRNPA1 splicing targets. Intriguingly, knockdown of HNRNPA1 decreased LTBP1 protein and mRNA levels in Hepa1-6 cells (Figures 6D and 6E). Next, coIP assays confirmed the interaction between LTA4H and HNRNPA1, which was RNA independent (Figures 6F–6K).
RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP)-qPCR revealed that LTA4H overexpression reduced HNRNPA1 binding to Ltbp1 mRNA (Figure S7H). Because decreased Ltbp1 levels after LTB4 treatment were observed in LTA4HKO hepatocytes (Figure S7A), we conjectured that LTB4-induced HNRNPA1 phosphorylation might also inhibit HNRNPA1-mediated regulation of Ltbp1 mRNA processing and maturation. We examined the phosphorylation level of HNRNPA1 in LTA4H KO Hepa1-6 cells treated with LTB4 for various durations. The phosphorylation of HNRNPA1 increased significantly with time in LTA4H KO Hepa1-6 cells (Figure 6L). Moreover, LTB4 treatment prevented the binding of HNRNPA1 and Ltbp1 mRNA in LTA4H KO Hepa1-6 cells, which suggested that phosphorylation of HNRNPA1 affected its interaction with Ltbp1 mRNA (Figure 6L). In addition, LTA4H KO Hepa1-6 cells showed greater interaction between HNRNPA1 and Ltbp1 mRNA than did scramble Hepa1-6 cells in the presence or absence of LTB4, which suggested that the absence of an interaction between LTA4H and HNRNPA1 promoted the binding of HNRNPA1 and Ltbp1 mRNA (Figure 6L). Furthermore, a decrease in the interaction between HNRNPA1 and Ltbp1 mRNA also exhibited a time-dependent gradient response to LTB4 treatment in normal Hepa1-6 cells (Figures 6N and 6O). Collectively, these data verified that LTA4H inhibited LTBP1 expression via phosphorylation of HNRNPA1 through LTB4 or direct interaction.
Unexpectedly, LTB4 treatment increased HNRNPA1-LTA4H binding, implying that phosphorylation of HNRNPA1 enhanced their interaction (Figure 6N). Given the lack of a nuclear localization sequence in LTA4H, these findings suggested that upregulated LTA4H might promote HNRNPA1 binding through phosphorylation by LTB4, thereby facilitating its nuclear localization. Indeed, silencing HNRNPA1 prevented LTB4-induced nuclear translocation of LTA4H (Figures S7I and S7J). BLT1 inhibition, but not BLT2, prevented LTB4-induced nuclear localization of LTA4H (Figures 6P, S7K, and S7L). Additionally, Hnrnpa1 knockdown reversed LTA4H ablation- or BLT1 inhibition-induced LTBP1 upregulation (Figures S7M and 6Q). In the orthotopic HCC mouse model, Hnrnpa1 or Ltbp1 knockdown significantly hindered tumor progression induced by LTA4H deficiency (Figures 6R and S7N–S7P). The mIHC showed that Hnrnpa1 or Ltbp1 knockdown inhibited CD206+F4/80+ macrophage polarization, promoted CD8+ T cell infiltration, decreased the proportion of PD-1+CD8+ T cells (PD-1: programmed cell death protein 1), and increased the proportion of GZMB+CD8+ T cells in LTA4H KO tumors (Figures S8A–S8E).
In summary, LTA4H inhibits HNRNPA1-mediated LTBP1 by facilitating HNRNPA1 phosphorylation through LTB4 or direct interaction. Moreover, LTA4H promotes its own nuclear localization through HNRNPA1.
TGF-β blockade potentiates the efficacy of anti-PD-1 therapy in LTA4H KO tumor-bearing mice
The aforementioned findings drove us to investigate whether disrupting the immunosuppressive crosstalk between tumor cells and macrophages by blocking TGF-β improves anti-PD-1 therapy efficacy in HCC. We constructed an orthotopic HCC mouse model using Hepa1-6 scramble or LTA4H KO cells and treated the mice with anti-PD-1, anti-TGF-β, or a combination of both on day 5 post transplantation. Significant tumor reduction was observed in Hepa1-6 scramble tumors treated with anti-PD-1 therapy or combination therapy, but LTA4H KO tumors showed resistance to anti-PD-1 monotherapy. Combination therapy significantly restricted tumor growth in LTA4H KO tumors compared to IgG or monotherapies (Figures 7A–7F). The mIHC analysis showed that anti-PD-1 monotherapy failed to induce GZMB+CD8+ T cells and CD8+ T cell infiltration in LTA4H KO tumors, likely due to abundance of CD206+ macrophages. Anti-TGF-β reduced CD206+ macrophages, but only combination therapy simultaneously and effectively decreased the proportion of PD-1+CD8+ T cells, increased the proportion of GZMB+CD8+ T cells, and promoted CD8+ T cell infiltration in LTA4H KO tumors (Figures 7G–7K. This explains the limited efficacy of anti-TGF-β monotherapy in LTA4H KO models, likely due to the pre-existing immunosuppressive microenvironment driving CD8+ T cell exhaustion prior to treatments.
In addition, to investigate whether this finding can be extrapolated to clinical HCC, we analyzed the correlation between the LTA4H level in tumor cells and treatment response in patients with HCC receiving ICIs (ICI cohort, Table S6). Responders exhibited significantly higher LTA4H levels and fewer CD206+ macrophages than non-responders (Figures 7L–7N). These findings suggest LTA4H as a potential biomarker for guiding HCC ICI treatment. Collectively, LTA4H deficiency exacerbated DEN-induced liver damage, while M2-like macrophages driven by TGF-β accumulation from LTA4H-deficient hepatocytes or tumor cells promoted HCC progression. Our study highlights the regulatory role of LTA4H in the TME of HCC through the LTA4H/HNRNPA1/LTBP1/TGF-β axis. Anti-TGF-β may serve as an effective strategy to sensitize LTA4H-deficient patients with HCC to ICIs.
Decreased acetyl-CoA and increased HDAC1 were the main causes of reduced LTA4H expression in HCC
To explore the molecular mechanism of LTA4H downregulation in HCC, we analyzed the CHCC-HBV cohort to identify proteins correlated with LTA4H expression and conducted pathway enrichment analyses (Table S7). Proteins positively correlated with LTA4H were notably enriched in histone deacetylases (HDACs) and acetyltransferase-related pathways (Figure S9A). Histone deacetylation, which increases chromatin compaction, typically suppresses gene transcription. Given the reported decrease in acetyl-CoA synthesis in HCC, we speculated that LTA4H downregulation is linked to histone deacetylation dysfunction. Trichostatin-A (TSA) and nicotinamide treatment enhanced the expression of Lta4h mRNA, with acetyl-CoA replenishing reagent (AAR) further augmenting this effect (Figure S9B). Notably, TSA treatment alone significantly induced LTA4H expression, implicating HDACs as key regulators. The combination of AAR and TSA further boosted LTA4H expression compared to TSA alone (Figures S9C and S9D). Analysis of the The Cancer Genome Atlas-Liver Hepatocellular Carcinoma (TCGA-LIHC) database and the CHCC-HBV cohort revealed elevated HDAC1 and HDAC2 expression in HCC, correlating with poor prognosis (Figures S9E–S9H and S10A–S10D). LTA4H negatively correlated with HDAC1 and HDAC2 in the CHCC-HBV cohort (Figures S10H and S10I). Knockdown experiments in Hepa1-6 cells showed that silencing HDAC1, but not HDAC2, significantly increased LTA4H transcript and protein levels (Figures S9I–S9K and S10E–S10G). Analysis of our clinical HCC samples and TMA HCC cohort corroborated these findings (Figures S9P–S9T, S10J, and S10K). Using regulatory potential score from CistromeDB, we identified a strong association between H3K27ac modification and LTA4H expression (Figures S10L and S10M). Given HDAC1’s role in deacetylating H3K27ac, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis confirmed that HDAC1 silencing promoted H3K27ac accumulation at the LTA4H promoter (Figures S9U and S9V), a result further validated by ChIP-qPCR (Figures S9W and S9X). These findings suggest that reduced acetyl-CoA levels and elevated HDAC1 expression suppress LTA4H expression by inhibiting H3K27ac modification at its promoter in HCC.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary liver cancer, ranking as the sixth most prevalent cancer and the third leading cause of cancer-related death globally. Many patients are diagnosed at advanced stages, limiting curative treatment options and contributing to poor prognosis, characterized by low 5-year survival rates and frequent recurrence after surgery. The inherent heterogeneity of HCC further complicates treatment strategies. Chronic liver injury and inflammation, driven by factors such as viral hepatitis, alcohol-related liver disease, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, underlie HCC pathogenesis. Inflammatory mediators critically influence the tumor microenvironment (TME) and drive HCC progression.
Understanding immune evasion mechanisms within the TME is key to improving immunotherapy outcomes in HCC. Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), which often adopt an M2-like phenotype, are abundant in HCC and serve as potential therapeutic targets. Chemokines such as transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) and CCL2 are central to TAM recruitment and functional remodeling. Reprogramming TAMs via chemokine signaling may synergize with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), though further research is needed to refine combinations and identify predictive biomarkers for patient stratification. Effective predictive biomarkers are essential to address the heterogeneous response of patients with HCC. Promising evidence suggests that RNA sequencing data can identify predictive signatures of therapeutic response from the TME. However, translating these features into parameters measurable by immunohistochemistry (IHC) remains challenging but necessary for advancing clinical applications.
Leukotriene A4 hydrolase (LTA4H) is a multifunctional zinc metalloenzyme with epoxide hydrolase and aminopeptidase activities. It catalyzes the conversion of leukotriene A4 (LTA4) to leukotriene B4 (LTB4), a potent inflammatory mediator acting through leukotriene B4 receptor 1 (BLT1) and leukotriene B4 receptor 2 (BLT2) receptors. LTA4H is highly expressed in several malignancies, including esophageal, skin, ovarian, and colorectal cancer, where it promotes tumor progression by enhancing cell proliferation. However, its role in liver cancer, particularly in modulating the TME, remains poorly understood.
In this study, we found that LTA4H deficiency promoted HCC occurrence and progression, correlating with poor prognosis. LTA4H-deficient models exhibited increased hepatocyte damage and M2-like macrophage infiltration as key drivers of HCC progression. Mechanistically, we showed that LTA4H regulates hepatocyte damage through c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) activation and remodels the TME via the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 (HNRNPA1)-latent-transforming growth factor beta-binding protein 1 (LTBP1)-TGF-β signaling axis. We uncovered a previously undescribed role of nuclear LTA4H in mRNA processing and maturation, reprogramming macrophages to evade immune surveillance in HCC. Importantly, our findings support TGF-β blockade as an adjunct therapy to enhance ICI efficacy in patients with HCC with low LTA4H expression.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Resource availability
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Lei Chen (chenlei@smmu.edu.cn).
Materials availability
All materials used in this study are available from the lead contact without restriction.
Data and code availability
Raw transcriptome sequencing data (in fastq format) are available on NGDC_SRA with accession number CRA022579 (NGDC: CRA022579). Raw data (.fcs) of mass cytometry were deposited in FlowRepository (FlowRepository: FR-FCM-Z7W7, http://flowrepository.org/id/RvFrwdQZoBHMmZfhB4OY9X5wuLKDYIOF2ILVOSyjSoFd2XrTNexN54buIKjFlvwm). Raw LC-MS/MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD060326 (ProteomeXchange: PXD060326). Raw ChIP-seq data are available on NGDC (NGDC: CRA021482). This paper does not report original code. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.
Supplemental information
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102000.