PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Proteomics; Elongation bottleneck; Nutrient stress response; Mass spectrometry; Nih3t3 cells; Ribosome profiling; Amino acid starvation; Translation regulation; Trna charging; Codon-specific stalling

ABSTRACT:
This study investigates the immediate effects of single, double, and triple branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) deprivation on translational dynamics in NIH3T3 cells. Using a multi-omics approach combining RNA-seq, ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq), quantitative proteomics, and tRNA charging assays, we systematically assessed global translational output and codon-specific ribosome dwell times. Our findings reveal that BCAA starvation induces diverse and non-additive translational control patterns, reflecting a complex interplay between mTORC1 and GCN2 pathway activation, tRNA isoacceptor availability, and transcript codon usage. Notably, we identified a positional effect where the enrichment of valine codons at the 5' end of transcripts creates an elongation bottleneck under valine and triple BCAA starvation, impacting downstream ribosome occupancy and overall protein output. This study uncovers a previously underappreciated layer of complexity in BCAA-specific translational regulation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Codon-specific ribosome stalling reshapes translational dynamics during branched-chain amino acid starvation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell culture and amino acid starvation. NIH3T3 mouse fibroblast cells were cultured in DMEM (high glucose, pyruvate; Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS (qualified, USDA-approved regions; Gibco), and 100 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco). Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO₂. Amino acid starvation experiments were conducted using custom DMEM/F-12 media (Gibco; SKU11320 modified) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Gibco) and lacking specific BCAAs — leucine, isoleucine, and valine. TMT-Based quantitative proteomics. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates one day prior to treatment. The medium was replaced with 2 ml of deprivation medium, and cells were incubated for 6 hours. After incubation, cells were trypsinized, centrifuged, and washed once with PBS. The cell pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of lysis buffer containing 2% SDS, 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0), protease, and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were boiled for 5 minutes and passed through a 26G needle 10 times for homogenization, followed by centrifugation at maximum speed for 5 minutes to remove debris. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. Equal amounts of protein from each sample were processed for TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis at the EPFL Proteomics Core Facility. Samples were digested by FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) following the standard procedure with minor modifications 51. Protein samples containing 20 µg were prepared in 2% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and deposited on conditioned filter devices (30K). Devices were centrifuged at 10’000 x g for 30 min. until complete dryness and then washed twice with 200 µL of Urea solution (8M Urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). Reduction was performed on top of the filters with 100 µL of 10mM TCEP in 8 M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 at 37°C for 60 minutes with gentle shaking. Reduction solution was removed by extended centrifugation followed by two extra washing steps. Alkylation was then performed on top of the filters with 100 µL of 40mM chloroacetamide in 8 M urea, 100mM Tris-HCL pH 8.0 at 37°C for 45 minutes light protected with gentle shaking. After removal of alkylation solution and two additional washing steps with 200 µL of Urea solution, the filters were further washed twice with 200 µL of 5mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0. Samples were then digested overnight on top of filters at 37°C with 100 µL of proteolytic solution at 1/50 w/w enzyme-to-protein ratio using a combination of mass spectrometry grade trypsin and LysC supplemented with 10mM CaCl2. Elution from filters of resulting peptides was achieved by extended centrifugation and two extra elutions were performed with 50 µL of 4% TFA. Samples were then desalted on SDB-RPS Empore StageTips using the standard protocol52 and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were reconstituted in 10 µL 100mM HEPES pH 8 and then, 5 µL of TMT solution (25 µg/µL in pure acetonitrile) was directly added. Labeling was achieved with the TMTproTM 18plex isobaric Mass Tagging Kit for 90 minutes at room temperature and reactions were then quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) for 15 min.. In order to avoid final extra normalization, a minor fraction of TMT labeled samples were pooled at 1:1 ratio across all samples and a single LC-MS2 run was performed to ensure correct peptide mixing. Corrected mixing quantities of each TMT-labeled sample were calculated based on the control run and final combined samples were desalted using a 100 mg Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge according to provider recommendations and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Pooled samples were fractionated into 12 fractions by Agilent OFF-Gel 3100 system following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting fractions were desalted again using SDB-RPS Empore StageTips and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Each fraction was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid and nano-flow separations were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system online connected with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were first trapped on a capillary pre-column (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 3 µm-100 Å, 2 cm × 75 µm ID), followed by an analytical separation at 250 nl/min over a 150 min. biphasic gradients through a 50 cm long in-house packed capillary column (75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm silica beads, Dr. Maisch). The data was acquired through a Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using three seconds cycle time. First MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), with the most intense parent ions selected and fragmented by High Energy collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 35% using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ions scans were acquired with a resolution of 50,000 (at 200 m/z) and selected ions were then excluded for the following 60 seconds.

DATA PROCESSING:
Resulting Raw files were searched using multiple Database search engines (Sequest HT, Mascot, MS Amanda and MSFragger) in Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.5) against the Uniprot_Mouse_55286Sequences_LR2022_05 supplemented with classical MaxQuant contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. A 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C), TMTpro tags (K and Peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications while oxidation (M) was set as a variable one. Resulting text files were processed through in-house written R scripts (version 4.1.2). A first normalisation step was applied based to the Sample Loading normalisation 53. Assuming that the total protein abundances were equal across the TMT channels, the reporter ion intensities of all spectra were summed and each channel was scaled according to this sum, so that the sum of reporter ion signals per channel equals the average of the signals across samples. A second normalization was applied using TMM (trimmed mean of M-values), and dispersion estimates were obtained using a generalized linear model (GLM) framework. Log2 fold changes and p-values were calculated using quasi-likelihood F-tests, with multiple testing correction applied using the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method. The final dataset includes log2FC values and adjusted p-values for each condition compared to the control. All conditions were analyzed in triplicates, except for the Double condition, which was analyzed in duplicates.