PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion; Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Proteomics; Validation; Medulloblastoma

ABSTRACT:
Medulloblastomas (MBs) are malignant pediatric brain tumors that are molecularly and clinically very heterogenous. To unravel phenotypically relevant MB subtypes, we compiled a harmonized proteome dataset of 167 MBs and integrated findings with DNA methylation and N-glycome data. Six proteome MB subtypes emerged, that could be assigned to two main molecular programs: transcription/translation (pSHHt, pWNT and pGroup3-Myc), and synapses/immunological processes (pSHHs, pGroup3 and pGroup4). Multiomic analysis revealed different conservation levels of proteome features across MB subtypes at the DNA-methylation level. Aggressive pGroup3-Myc MBs and favorable pWNT MBs were most similar in cluster hierarchies concerning overall proteome patterns but showed different protein abundances of the vincristine resistance associated multiprotein complex TriC/CCT and of N-glycan turnover associated factors. The N-glycome reflected proteome subtypes and complex-bisecting N-glycans characterized pGroup3-Myc tumors. Our results shed light on new targetable alterations in MB and set a foundation for potential immunotherapies targeting glycan structures. This dataset includes samples which were used for technical and biological validation of previously acquired results.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Multiomic profiling of medulloblastoma reveals subtype-specific targetable alterations at the proteome and N-glycan level - Technical and Biological Validation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
FFPE medulloblastoma tissue sections were deparaffinized with N-heptane for 10 minutes and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 14,000 g. The supernatant was discarded. Proteins were extracted in 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) with 1% sodium deoxycholate. (SDC) at 99 °C for 1 hour. Sonification was performed for 10 pulses at 30% power, to degrade DNA, using a PowerPac HC High-Current power supply (Biorad Laboratories, Hercules, USA)) probe sonicator.  Sonification was performed for 6 pulses. The protein concentration of denatured proteins was determined by the Pierce BCA Protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, USA), following the manufacturer's instructions. 20 µg of protein for each tissue lysate were used for tryptic digestion and diluted to a concentration of 70% ACN. 2 µg carboxylate modified magnetic beads (GE Healthcare Sera-Mag™, Chicago, USA) at 1:1 (hydrophilic/hydrophobic) in methanol were added following the SP3-protocol workflow (Hughes et al, 2019). Samples were shaken at 1,400 rpm for 18 min at room temperature and placed on a magnetic rack. The supernatant was removed, and magnetic beads were washed two times with 100% ACN and two times with 70% Ethanol. After resuspension in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, disulfide bonds were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min, alkylated in the presence of 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) at 1:100 (enzyme:protein) at 37 °C overnight while shaking at 1400 rpm. Beads were dissolved to 95% ACN and shaken at 1,400 rpm for 10 min at room temperature to bind tryptic peptides to the beads. On the magnetic rack, the supernatant was removed, and the beads were washed two times with 100% ACN. Elution was performed with 2% DMSO in 1% formic acid. The supernatant was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and subjected to high pH liquid chromatography coupled mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS measurements were processed with the Sequest HT Algorithm, implemented in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, USA, Version 3.0) and searched against a reviewed human database (downloaded from Uniprot December 2022, 20, 365 entries). The Carboxymethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation and the conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamate were set as variable modifications. Peptides with a minimum length of 6 amino acids and a maximum mass of 6,000 Da were considered. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. The maximum number of allowed missed cleavages in tryptic digestion was two. A false discovery rate (FDR) value threshold <0.01, using a reverted decoy peptide databases approach, was set for peptide identification.