PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Saos-2; Dnp73β; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
The human osteosarcoma cell line SaOs2 was transduced with adenoviral vectors expressing DNp73β. Subsequent Co-IP/MS analysis characterised the p73 isoform-specific interactome. The raw data include identified cofactors and provide a basis for further research into p73-associated complexes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Characterization of DNp73β protein interaction partners

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Bait protein and protein interaction partners were eluted from Sepharose beads with 2% SDS, 10 mM DTT, 50 mM TRIS pH7.5. samples were centrifuged for 2 min at 12.000 x g to remove Sepharose residues and transferred in a new reaction tube. Proteins were reduced  (DTT 2.5 mM, 30 min, 37oC) and alkylated (IAA 10 mM, 15 min, 37oC in the dark) before bound to SP3 beads (Blankenburg et al. 2019)  and digested with 80 ng trypsin overnight at 37oC. To remove remaining low molecular weight contaminants, tryptic peptides were precipitated on SP3 beads by addition of acetonitrile (final concentration 70 %). Peptides were eluted in DMSO (2%) and mixed with 0.1 % acetic acid, 2% acetonitrile (1:1 v/v). Peptides were separated by LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) before data-dependent acquisition of MS data on a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron).

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data were analysed via the SequestHT algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 using Uniprot database (v.2017-01) limited to Homo sapiens. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as static modification and oxidation at methionine as variable modifications, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Proteins were only considered for further analyses, if unique+razor peptides were identified and quantified at FDR <0.01.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Metastasis is the leading cause of death in patients with malignant melanoma, yet the molecular and transcriptional mechanisms remain elusive. This study reveals a crucial role of the p53 homolog, TAp73α, in promoting melanoma metastasis. Using multi-omics approaches combining transcriptomics, proteomics, cistromics and 3D modeling, we discovered a paradigm-shifting mechanism by which TAp73α binds directly to HDAC2, disassembles the HDAC2/REST repressor complex and aberrantly triggers activation of the neuronal receptor GABBR2 in cancer cells. TAp73α-induced derepression of GABBR2 expression leads to upregulation of EMT markers, promotes cancer cell invasiveness and proliferation, and correlates with poor survival outcomes. Our findings redefine the function of p73 in cancer pathogenesis and identify the TAp73α-HDAC2/REST-GABBR2 axis as a novel driver of melanoma progression. These insights could guide future strategies on melanoma treatment.