PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240; Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Molecular mechanism; Probiotics; Adipocyte; Multiomics; Antiobesity

ABSTRACT:
Probiotics have shown promise in positively altering gut microbiota and can potentially improve the gut flora of individuals with obesity. Recently, the development of probiotics with “Pharmabiotic” properties, which can reduce body fat and inhibit lipid accumulation, has emerged as a notable approach for effectively combating obesity. Nevertheless, owing to the lack of a universal methodology for elucidating the molecular mechanisms of probiotics, their antiobesity effects remain largely unknown. Herein, we developed an advanced multiomics-based strategy to decipher the mechanisms by which probiotics and their derivatives curtail adipocyte lipid production to affirm their antiobesity potential. Our initial investigation assessed the impact of probiotics and their derivatives on adipocyte differentiation and lipid generation at defined differentiation stages. Leveraging these insights, we performed comprehensive multiomics analyses at selected intervals to deepen our understanding regarding the suppression mechanisms of lipid formation. This framework confirmed the antiobesity efficacy of Lactobacillus reuteri lysate, targeting early differentiation to impede branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) catabolism and reduce adipocyte lipid accumulation. Specifically, L. reuteri lysate suppressed Krüppel-like factor 5 expression in early adipocyte differentiation phases, downregulating peroxisome proliferator–activated receptor gamma expression and reducing BCAA catabolism. Concurrently, L. reuteri lysate enhanced hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha expression, consequently downregulating lipin-1 expression in initial adipocyte differentiation stages, thus inhibiting adipogenesis. This study underscores the efficacy of our strategy in elucidating the intricate causal dynamics between host and microbiome, advancing therapeutic development and target exploration of probiotics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Development of an advanced multiomics strategy for 2 identifying and assessing antiobesity effects of probiotics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Detailed protocols about sample preparation for bottom-up proteomics and LC-MS/MS analysis are provided in the associated manuscript.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectra were processed using MaxQuant. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript. The intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) and MaxLFQ algorithm was used for quantification of protein groups.