PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; N-acetylaminohexosylated residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human; Ogt; Foxk2; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a crucial role in lipid peroxidation and the initiation of ferroptosis, significantly affecting chemotherapeutic drug resistance. However, the mechanisms by which ROS function and are sensed remain poorly understood. In this study, we identified O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), a key enzyme in protein O-GlcNAcylation, as a sensor for ROS induced by ferroptosis. The ROS-induced oxidation of OGT at C845 in its catalytic domain activates the enzyme. Once activated, OGT O-GlcNAcylates FOXK2, enhancing its interaction with importin α, which facilitates FOXK2's nuclear translocation and binding to the SLC7A11 promoter region. This, in turn, boosts SLC7A11 transcription, thereby inhibiting ferroptosis. The elevated OGT-FOXK2-SLC7A11 axis contributes to tumorigenesis and resistance to chemoradiotherapy in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Our findings elucidate a ROS-induced oxidation-O-GlcNAcylation cascade that integrates ROS signaling, O-GlcNAcylation, FOXK2-mediated SLC7A11 transcription, and resistance to both ferroptosis and chemoradiotherapy.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A ROS-mediated Oxidation-O-GlcNAcylation cascade governs  ferroptosis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For FOXK2, IP beads were eluted by a buffer containing 5% SDS, 50 mM TEAB, and 20 mM DTT at 50 °C for 15 min. Then the eluates were combined and processed with the suspension trapping (S-TRAP) method as described previously with minor modifications 66 . Briefly, the proteins were alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher) in dark for 30 min, acidified by ~1% phosphoric acid, and diluted by the S-TRAP buffer (90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB, pH7.5). Then, 1 µg of trypsin/Lys C in 50 mM TEAB was added onto the column and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides were eluted by 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid, and 50% acetonitrile sequentially. The eluates were combined and dried down with a lyophilizer.  OGT samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by Commassie blue staining. The gel bands were cut and washed by 50% and then 100% acetonitrile. Subsequently, 300 ng of trypsin in 200 µL of 50 mM TEAB was added and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The peptides were extracted by 200 µL 60% acetonitrile in 5% formic acid twice. The supernatants were combined, cleaned up by a C8 Ziptip, and dried down with a lyophilizer.  Digests of FOXK2 and OGT were analyzed with a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled with Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) as described previously 67 , with minor modifications. In brief, samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a C18 Trap column at 10 μL/min for 4 min. At a flow rate of 400 nL/min, the peptides were separated on an analytical column at 45 °C. HCD-product-dependent-EThcD was used for MS/MS acquisition. Supplemental activation (SA) collision energy of EThcD was set as 30%. Regarding the analysis of OGT digests, a 60-min gradient was applied for separation. The mass spectrometric settings were similar to that for FOXK2 digest, except that HCD was used for fragmentation.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer platform (version 2.4, Thermo Scientific) and Sequest HT algorithm. MS/MS data was searched against the customized protein database of human FOXK2 or OGT.