PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cerebrospinal fluid
diseases: Alzheimer's disease
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Human; Ad; Csf; Hdl

ABSTRACT:
Apolipoprotein (Apo) E4 is a key genetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In the central nervous system, ApoE-containing high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-like particles transport glial cholesterol to neurons, playing a crucial role in neuronal membrane remodeling and maintenance of the myelin sheath. Despite this, the impact of HDL-like cholesterol trafficking on AD pathogenesis is not yet fully understood.The objective was to examine cholesterol transport via HDL-like particles in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of AD patients compared to control individuals. Additionally, we explored the ability of ApoE4-containing HDL to regulate the cholesterol efflux pathway in astrocytoma cells and facilitate cholesterol delivery to neurons.Mass spectrometry (MS) was used for a detailed analysis of the HDL-like proteome in AD patients and controls.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human Cerebrospinal Fluid HDL-like proteome from Alzheimer Disease patients

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
CSF samples were size-separated electrophoretically on 4–15% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Bio-Rad).HDL-like lipoprotein bands which positively revealed for ApoE in Blotting analyses were excised and digested with trypsin.Protein denaturation was performed with 10mM DL-Dithiothreitol and alkylation with 54mM iodoacetamide.Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was conducted using Evosep One HPLC (Evosep) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Evotip C18 (Evosep) as trapping matrix and Endurance Evosep (EV1106) column (15 cm x 150 μm ID) coupled to a stainless emitter of 30 μm ID and interfaced with the Mass Spectrometer using Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Samples were analysed using a data independent acquisition strategy.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files were analysed in DIANN (version 1.8.1) using an in silico predicted spectral library derived from Homo sapiens proteome Uniprot Database (2022 version, containing 20.958 entries). N-terminal excision of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The enzyme/cleavage rule was set to Trypsin/P, the digestion type was specific, and a maximum of one missed cleavage per peptide was allowed. Normalization was turned off, and quantification was conducted using Robust LC. Quantitative information obtained from precursor intensities, as reported by DIANN, was integrated from the precursor level to the peptide level, and then to the protein level, using the WSPP model and Generic Integration Algorithm implemented through the iSanXot program.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Human samples
CSF samples were retrospectively selected from the SPIN cohort (Sant Pau Initiative on Neurodegeneration), a multimodal research cohort for biomarker discovery and validation that includes participants with different neurodegenerative dementias, mild cognitive impairment, and cognitively normal controls. All participants underwent an extensive neurological and neuropsychological evaluation and had blood extraction and lumbar puncture for CSF AD biomarker analysis as part of their diagnostic work-up. All participants provided written consent to participate in our biomarker program. Further information on the SPIN cohort can be found at https://santpaumemoryunit.com/our-research/spin-cohort.
A total of 20 CSF from control individuals (n = 10) and patients with AD dementia (n = 10) were included. CSF samples were obtained by lumbar puncture under standardized conditions. All participants in both the healthy control and disease groups were White and of Caucasian descent. To minimize potential blood contamination, the first 1–2 ml of CSF was discarded during collection, and all samples were visually inspected to ensure clarity and absence of red blood cells or turbidity. Samples were then centrifuged at 2,000 g for 10 min, and only the supernatant was used for analysis. To further exclude plasma contamination, APOB levels were measured in pooled CSF samples using an immunoturbidimetric assay on the COBAS 6000/501 platform; APOB was consistently undetectable, confirming the absence of plasma-derived lipoproteins.
All participants from the SPIN cohort provided written informed consent for the acquisition, analysis, and storage of biological samples. They were explicitly informed about the potential use of anonymized data and/or biological samples for research purposes. The study was approved by the Sant Pau Ethics Committee (Protocol code: EC/22/202/6880) following the standards for medical research in humans recommended by the Declaration of Helsinki.
CSF AD biomarker analysis
APOE genotype, defined by two single nucleotide polymorphisms, the rs429358 and the rs7412 was performed by Sanger sequencing as previously reported. Brain amyloidosis biomarkers (CSF Aβ1-40, CSF Aβ1-42, and CSF Aβ42/Aβ40 ratio), tau pathology biomarkers (CSF phosphorylated-Tau181 (p-Tau)) and neurodegeneration biomarkers (CSF total-Tau (t-Tau)) were determined by chemiluminescent immunoassay on a LUMIPULSE G600II automated platform analyzer (Fujirebio®).
CSF lipid-related parameters measurement
Total CSF cholesterol and free cholesterol were measured by Amplex Red Cholesterol Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). APOE, APOJ, and APOA1 concentrations were measured by Human ELISA Kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific). PCSK9 concentrations were determined using the Quantikine® ELISA kit (R&D Systems). The kits were designed for plasma samples quantification; therefore, CSF samples dilutions were adapted to the cholesterol, APOs, or PCSK9 concentrations in the CSF.
Cell culture
Human glioblastoma cells A172 (ATCC® CRL-1620™) were maintained in DMEM high glucose with L-glutamine and with sodium pyruvate (Corning) supplemented with 10% FBS (Pan Biotech) and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Dominique Dutscher). Human neuroblastoma cells SH-SY5Y (ATCC® CRL-2266™) were maintained in DMEM high glucose with L-glutamine (Corning) and Ham's Nutrient Mixture F12 with L-glutamine (Cytiva) 1:1 v/v supplemented with 10% FBS (Pan Biotech) and 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin (Dominique Dutscher). Cells were seeded and grown in 75 cm2 cell culture flasks and incubated in a humidified incubator (5% CO2, 37°C). The medium was renewed every 48 h, and cells were trypsinized once they reached confluence.
Previous to any experiment, human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells were differentiated into functional neurons by replacing maintenance medium with differentiation culture medium for 7 days and refreshment every 72 h. Differentiation culture medium consisted of DMEM high glucose with L-glutamine (Corning) and Ham's Nutrient Mixture F12 with L-glutamine (Cytiva) 1:1 v/v supplemented with 1% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and 10 μM retinoic acid (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck).
Cholesterol efflux assay
A172 and SH-SY5Y cells were seeded at densities of 50,000 and 100,000 cells per well, respectively, in 24-well plates using their corresponding maintenance culture medium. SH-SY5Y cells were differentiated by incubating them in differentiation culture medium containing retinoic acid, as previously described. Twenty-four hours after plating or reaching differentiation, cells were loaded with 0.5 μCi/well of radiolabeled cholesterol ([1α,2α(n)-3H] cholesterol, Revvity) added to 5% FBS-supplemented medium. Cells were allowed to capture radiolabeled cholesterol for 48 h and extensively washed with PBS before performing cholesterol efflux assays. Subsequently, the cells were equilibrated overnight in serum-free medium containing 0.2% free fatty acid BSA (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck), either with or without the addition of the ABCA1/G1 activator T0901317 (Cayman Chemical) at a concentration of 2 μM. Following this, cells were washed and serum-free medium containing either CSF (30% v/v), lipid-free APOA1 (20 μg/ml), lipid-free APOE (20 μg/ml), or rHDL (5 μg of APOE/ml) was added to the cells. After 4 h, the medium was collected and 0.1 M NaOH (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck) was added to the cells. The medium fraction was centrifuged for 5 min at 250 g to remove floating cells. The cellular fraction was incubated at 4°C with gentle shaking for 48 h, after which it was collected and sonicated for at least 1 h. Radiolabeled cholesterol in both medium and cellular fraction was quantified by liquid scintillation counting, and the percentage of cholesterol efflux was calculated by dividing radiolabeled cholesterol in the medium by the sum of radiolabeled cholesterol in the medium and cellular fractions.
Cholesterol uptake assay
CSF samples or synthetic rHDL nanoparticles were radiolabeled with evaporated [1α,2α(n)-3H] cholesterol (0.1 mCi/ml and 0.2 mCi/ml respectively) by incubating them overnight at 37°C. The incorporation of radiolabeled cholesterol into lipoproteins of CSF was verified by isolating lipoprotein particles at a density range of 1.063–1.210 g/ml using density gradient ultracentrifugation. A172 and SH-SY5Y cells were seeded at a density of 100,000 cells per well in 24-well plates. Twenty-four hours after plating or reaching differentiation, serum-free medium containing radiolabeled CSF (10% v/v) or rHDL (5 μg of APOE/ml) was added to the cells. Part of the experiments was conducted in the presence of Human Tau-441/2N4R Protein (ACROBiosystems) or Aβ Protein Fragment 1-42 (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck), which were added to the medium at varying concentrations. After 4 h, the medium was collected and 0.1 M NaOH (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck) was added to the cells. The medium fraction was centrifuged for 5 min at 250g to remove floating cells. The cellular fraction was incubated at 4°C with gentle shaking for 48 h. Afterward, it was collected and sonicated for at least 1 h. Radiolabeled cholesterol in both the medium and cellular fraction was quantified by liquid scintillation counting, and the percentage of cholesterol uptake was calculated by dividing radiolabeled cholesterol in the cellular fraction by the sum of radiolabeled cholesterol in the medium and the cellular fraction. Values were normalized to the cellular protein content, determined using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Quantitative Real Time-PCR
For quantitative Real Time-PCR analyses, A172 and SH-SY5Y cells were seeded at a density of 150,000 cells per well in 12-well plates and cholesterol efflux steps were mimicked. Afterward, RNA was isolated using the EZ-10 DNAaway RNA Miniprep kit (Bio Basic) and quantified by NanoDrop-2000 spectrophotometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Complementary DNA was generated using EasyScript First-Strand cDNA Synthesis SuperMix (Transgen Biotech) and quantitative Real-Time PCR amplification was performed using the GoTaq(R) Probe qPCR Master Mix (Promega). Specific TaqMan probes (Applied Biosystems) were used for ABCA1 (Hs01059118_m1), ABCG1 (Hs00245154_m1), and GAPDH (Hs02758991_g1), the latter used as internal control gene. Reactions were run on a CFX96TM Real-Time System (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Thermal cycling conditions included 10 min at 95°C before the onset of the PCR cycles, which consisted of 40 cycles at 95°C for 15 s, and at 65°C for 1 min. The relative mRNA expression levels were calculated using the ΔΔCt method.
Protein staining and blotting
Plasma HDL was isolated by ultracentrifugation at a density range of 1.063–1.210 g/ml, and the APOA1 concentration was determined using an immunoturbidimetric assay adapted for the COBAS 6000/501c autoanalyzer (Roche Diagnostics). Samples containing plasma HDL, lipid-free APOA1, APOE3, APOE4 (all from Sigma-Aldrich/Merck), or CSF were prepared by adding 40% v/v of 50% m/v sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck) to increase sample density and ensure proper loading into the wells during native agarose gel electrophoresis. Subsequently, 30 μl of each sample was size-separated electrophoretically on 4%–15% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Bio-Rad) at 80 V for 30 min, followed by 120 V for 2 h. Precision Plus Protein™ All Blue Prestained Protein Standards (Bio-Rad) was used as molecular weight marker.
For protein staining, a fixation solution consisting of 40% methanol (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck) and 10% acetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck) was applied to the gels for 1 h. Gels were then washed with water and stained overnight with GelCode™ Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following day, the gels were washed again with water to remove background staining.
For blotting, proteins were transferred onto 0.2 μm PVDF membranes (Bio-Rad). The membranes were blocked using EveryBlot Blocking Buffer (Bio-Rad) for 15 min and incubated overnight at 4°C with the goat anti-human APOE primary antibody (1:500 dilution, Roche Diagnostics). After incubation, the membranes were washed three times for 10 min each with TBS containing 0.1% of Tween-20 buffer and subsequently incubated with a rabbit anti-Goat IgG HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 h. The membranes were washed three times each for 10 min with TBS containing 0.1% of Tween-20 buffer and analyzed using Clarity Western ECL Substrate (Bio-Rad).
Images were captured using a ChemiDoc XRS Gel Documentation System (Bio-Rad) and Image Lab software (version 6.0.1, Bio-Rad).
Proteomic analysis
For the proteomic experiments, we used 30 μl of nonconcentrated CSF, which consisted of 25 μl of native CSF mixed with 15 μl of 50% sucrose solution to aid in sample loading. CSF samples were size-separated electrophoretically on 4%–15% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Bio-Rad) as described above. After staining, CSF lipoprotein bands known to contain APOE from blotting analyses were excised. Each band was placed in an individual tube with acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich/Merck) which was removed under vacuum. The bands were stored at −80°C until further analysis.
Bands were rehydrated with 1 ml of bicarbonate 25 mM pH 8.8 and dehydrated with acetonitrile 100%. Protein denaturation was performed incubating the bands with 400 μl of 10 mM DL-dithiothreitol in 25 mM bicarbonate pH 8.8 for 30 min at room temperature and rotation. For protein alkylation, bands were incubated with 400 μl of 54 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM bicarbonate pH 8.8 for 45 min at room temperature in rotation and protected from the light. Bands were dehydrated with acetonitrile 100% for 10 min and dried in the speed-vacuum. Protein digestion was performed with 1 μg of trypsin per band in 50 mM bicarbonate pH 8.8 and acetonitrile 10% buffer overnight at 37°C. Samples were desalted using NestGroup Spin columns following the manufacturer’s instructions, dried in the speed-vacuum and stored at 4°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.
LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted using an Evosep One HPLC (Evosep) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an Evotip C18 (Evosep) as trapping matrix and an Endurance Evosep (EV1106) column (15 cm × 150 μm ID) coupled to a stainless emitter of 30 μm ID and interfaced with the mass spectrometer using Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Column was heated to maintain temperature at 55°C. Peptides were eluted from Evotips and analyzed using Evosep One pre-programmed gradient for 15 samples per day. Samples were analyzed using a data independent acquisition strategy. Full MS resolutions were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and the full MS AGC target was 300% with a maximum injection time set to Auto. The AGC target value for fragment spectra was set to 1,000%. Fifty windows of 12 m/z scanning from 400 to 100 m/z were employed with an overlap of 1 Da. MS2 resolution was set to 30,000, IT to 54 ms, and normalized collision energy to 30%. Raw files were analyzed with DIANN (version 1.8.1) using an in silico predicted spectral library derived from Homo sapiens proteome Uniprot Database (2022 version, containing 20.958 entries). N terminal excision of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. The enzyme/cleavage rule was set to Trypsin/P, the digestion type was specific, and a maximum of one missed cleavage per peptide was allowed. Normalization was turned off, and quantification was conducted using Robust LC.
Quantitative information obtained from precursor intensities, as reported by DIANN, was integrated from the precursor level to the peptide level, and then to the protein level, using the WSPP model and Generic Integration Algorithm, implemented through the iSanXot program. In this model, quantitative protein values are expressed using the standardized variable Zq (normalized log2-ratios expressed in units of standard deviation based on the estimated variances). For functional analysis, proteins were annotated using DAVID. The analysis included proteins consistently detected across all samples and quantified with more than one peptide, with the full set of quantified proteins in the experiment used as background. Functional categories with an EASE score lower than 0.05 were considered significantly enriched.
Preparation and characterization of synthetic reconstituted APOE3-and APOE4-containing lipoproteins
Synthetic rHDL particles containing APOE3 or APOE4 (rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4) were generated using the cholate-dialysis method. 1,2-Dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocoline (DMPC, Merck KGaA) was selected as the phospholipid for rHDL particle reconstitution due to its well-defined biophysical properties, including a phase transition temperature near room temperature (∼24°C), which enables controlled thermal cycling during HDL assembly. Its saturated fatty acid chains form tightly packed, ordered bilayers, providing structural consistency and reproducibility in APOE-based rHDL preparations. Briefly, the lipid mixture was prepared with DMPC and free cholesterol (Merck KGaA) in a chloroform solution at a 9:1 DPMC/free cholesterol molar ratio. Synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 nanoparticles were fluorescently labeled for specific experiments. To this end, Oregon Green™ 488 1,2-Dihexadecanoyl-sn-Glycero-3-Phosphoethanolamine (Oregon Green™ 488 DHPE, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added into the lipid mixture in chloroform solution (0.03 mM). The organic solvent was removed under vacuum and nitrogen to form a dry lipid film, which was then rehydrated with 2 ml PBS containing 60 mg/ml sodium deoxycholate (cholate, Sigma-Aldrich/Merck). This suspension was incubated at 37°C for 30 min until a clear solution containing DMPC/free cholesterol/cholate mixed micelles was obtained. For the preparation of synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 nanoparticles, mixed micelles were incubated with recombinant APOE3 or APOE4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) at 59:7:1 DMPC/free cholesterol/APOE molar ratio. Next, three incubation cycles were performed at 4°C and 37°C to promote lipid-protein interaction. After incubation, self-assembly of the synthetic rHDL-APOE nanoparticles started with the removal of cholate through extensive dialysis against a 1000-fold excess of PBS at 4°C for 48 h, using 3,5 kDa Slide-A-Lyzer™ G3 Dialysis Cassettes with two buffer changes. Finally, the dialyzed samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min at 4°C to eliminate unbound lipids.
The composition of synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 nanoparticles, including unesterified cholesterol and APOE, was determined using enzymatic and immunoturbidimetric assays, respectively, with commercial kits adapted for a COBAS 6000 autoanalyzer (Roche Diagnostics and Randox). rHDL-APOE nanoparticles, along with lipid-free APOA1, APOE3, and APOE4 were size-separated electrophoretically on a 4%–15% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gel (Bio-Rad), followed by protein staining as previously described. Furthermore, particle-size distributions were determined using a dynamic light scattering analyzer together with noninvasive backscatter technology (Malvern Zetasizer, Malvern Instruments). The morphology of synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 nanoparticles was also observed by transmission electron microscopy with negative staining. An 8 μl aliquot of synthetic rHDL-APOE was added to freshly glow-discharged carbon 300 Mesh copper grids (Ted Pella Inc) for 1 min. After blotting excess fluid, samples were stained with 8 μl of 5% uranyl acetate for 1 min and examined in a JEM 1400 Transmission Electron Microscope (JEOL USA, Peabody).
Confocal microscopy and flow cytometry
SH-SY5Y neurons were seeded in individual plates of 3.5 cm2 (Ibidi®) at a cell density of 50,000 cells per well and differentiated as previously described. Subsequently, 1 ml of serum-free medium with or without synthetic rHDL-APOE3 or rHDL-APOE4 (5 μg/ml), was added to each plate and incubated for 4 h to facilitate the internalization of synthetic rHDL-APOE nanoparticles. The cells were stained with a solution of 0.5 μl of Hoechst and 1 μl of CellMask™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) diluted in 1 ml of PBS. Imaging of SH-SY5Y neurons was conducted using a Leica TCS SP5 X Tune confocal microscope (Leica).
The uptake of synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDP-APOE4 nanoparticles labeled with Oregon Green™ 488 DHPE fluorophore by SH-SY5Y cells was analyzed using flow cytometry. SH-SY5Y cells were seeded at a density of 200,000 cells per well in 12-well plates, and the differentiation protocol was performed. Upon reaching differentiation, the cells were incubated with or without synthetic rHDL-APOE3 or rHDL-APOE4 (5 μg/ml) in serum-free medium for 4 h. After incubation, cells were washed with PBS, trypsinized for 5 min at 37°C and resuspended in 100 μl of PBS. Flow cytometry analysis was performed using a MACSQuant Analyzer (Miltenyi Biotec), data were acquired for 10,000 events within the gate representing viable single cells and analyzed using MACSQuant Software.
Statistical analysis
The number of CSF samples per group was estimated using an α value of 0.05, a power of 80%, and an effect size of 1.28 in the cholesterol efflux and uptake assays. The Shapiro-Wilk normality test was conducted to assess Gaussian distribution. Continuous variables are presented as mean ± SD, while qualitative data are expressed as percentages and analyzed using Fisher’s exact test. The Student’s t test was used to compare statistical differences between AD and control groups. One-way ANOVA, followed by a post test for linear trend, was used to evaluate relative cholesterol uptake in human neuroblastoma cells, mediated by control CSF lipoproteins, in the absence or presence of t-Tau or Aβ1-42. Associations between variables were assessed using Pearson's correlation coefficient. The statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad, San Diego, CA). Differential expression analysis for proteomics data was performed using limma moderated t-statistics. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS:
Results
CSF cholesterol and APO levels are similar in patients with AD and control individuals
CSF AD biomarkers and CSF cholesterol and APO levels are shown in Table 1. As expected, AD patients had significantly higher CSF concentrations of t-Tau and p-Tau, as well as decreased levels of Aβ1-42 and a reduced Aβ1-42/Aβ1-40 ratio compared to control individuals. Regarding CSF total and free cholesterol, APO (APOE, APOJ, and APOA1), and PCSK9 concentrations, no significant differences were observed between the groups. The frequency of APOE4 carriers was significantly higher among AD patients (7 APOE-ε4/ε3, 1 APOE-ε4/ε4, and 3 APOE-ε3/ε3), whereas all control individuals were APOE-ε3/ε3. APOE levels did not differ significantly between male and female AD patients (P = 0.41).
Astrocyte cholesterol efflux to CSF is similar in patients with AD and control individuals
We adapted a cholesterol efflux assay by loading both A172 human glioblastoma astrocytes and differentiated SH-SY5Y human neurons with radiolabeled unesterified cholesterol and evaluated the release rate of radiolabeled cholesterol to CSF (see Fig. 1A for a schematic diagram of the method involving astrocytes). Cells were also treated with an LXR agonist to compare their responses to ABCA1/G1-mediated cholesterol efflux induction. Under baseline conditions, both cell lines exhibited low cholesterol efflux percentages that were similar to control CSF. However, LXR agonist treatment significantly increased cholesterol efflux in astrocytes, while it remained unchanged in neurons (Supplemental Fig. S1A). Consistent with the cholesterol efflux assay results, both ABCA1 and ABCG1 gene expression were highly upregulated upon LXR agonist exposure in astrocytes. In contrast, these changes were less pronounced in neurons (Supplemental Fig. S1B, C). In addition, we included lipid-free APOA1 and APOE as positive controls in our astrocyte assays to validate cholesterol efflux. Cholesterol efflux from astrocytes was significantly enhanced upon LXR agonist treatment (Supplemental Fig. S2).
Next, we evaluated cholesterol efflux from astrocytes to CSF samples obtained from AD patients and compared the percentage of efflux with that of control individuals under baseline conditions and after pretreating the cells with an LXR agonist. The LXR agonist induced an increase in CSF-mediated cholesterol efflux compared to baseline conditions (Fig. 1B left panel). However, CSF-mediated cholesterol efflux was similar when induced by CSF samples from both patients with AD and control individuals, under baseline conditions and after ABCA1/G1 activation. Furthermore, when comparing ABCA1/G1-dependent cholesterol efflux between groups (calculated as the increase in efflux after subtracting baseline levels), CSF from AD patients and control individuals induced cholesterol efflux at similar levels (Fig. 1B right panel).
CSF lipoprotein-mediated cholesterol delivery to neurons is impaired in patients with AD
We developed a cholesterol uptake assay by incorporating radiolabeled unesterified cholesterol into the lipoproteins of CSF and evaluated the rate of radiolabeled cholesterol uptake in both A172 human glioblastoma astrocytes and differentiated SH-SY5Y human neurons (see Fig. 1C for a schematic diagram of the method involving neurons). To establish optimal conditions for cholesterol uptake, neurons were incubated with radiolabeled control CSF for 2, 4, and 8 h. The percentage of CSF-mediated cholesterol uptake in neurons increased linearly in a time-dependent manner (Supplemental Fig. S3A). In contrast, cholesterol uptake assays in astrocytes showed no significant increase in radiolabeled cholesterol uptake over the same time points (Supplemental Fig. S3A), suggesting that neurons may depend more heavily on external cholesterol sources (Supplemental Fig. S3B). To evaluate cholesterol delivery to neurons, we then compared CSF lipoprotein-mediated cholesterol uptake in differentiated SH-SY5Y human neurons from CSF samples acquired from control individuals and patients with AD. The percentage of radiolabeled cholesterol uptake within a 4-h period was significantly reduced in neurons incubated with CSF from AD patients (Fig. 1D). Given that Aβ and Tau may potentially alter the lipid-binding function of CSF lipoproteins, we examined the association between CSF-mediated cholesterol uptake and other CSF parameters (Table 2). We observed a positive trend between CSF-mediated cholesterol uptake and CSF Aβ1-42 levels; however, this correlation did not reach statistical significance (Table 2). To further investigate whether Aβ1-42 or even Tau could directly alter CSF-mediated cholesterol uptake in neurons, we added isolated Aβ1-42 or Tau to CSF in the presence of differentiated neurons at increasing concentrations. Neither Tau nor Aβ1-42 affected the percentage of radiolabeled cholesterol uptake in neurons within the physiological range (Fig. 1E, F).
Furthermore, CSF-mediated cholesterol uptake was not associated with age in either control individuals (Pearson r = 0.37, P = 0.29) or AD patients (Pearson r = −0.10, P = 0.66). In addition, no significant differences were observed between males and females (P = 0.70) in the AD group, where the sex distribution was balanced.
The CSF lipoprotein proteome is modified in patients with AD
We separated CSF lipoproteins according to size using nondenaturing polyacrylamide gradient gel electrophoresis. Native gels revealed a homogeneous band corresponding to large HDL particles (Fig. 2A, left panel). Western blot analysis confirmed that APOE was localized at the same position as the lipoprotein band (Fig. 2A, right panel). To further characterize APOE migration, we ran lipid-free APOE3 and APOE4 in parallel with CSF samples (Fig. 2B). Although lipid-free APOE can form multimers and migrate above its apparent molecular weight—similar to albumin and lipid-free APOA1—we observed distinct migration patterns between lipid-free APOE isoforms and APOE-containing lipoproteins in CSF under native conditions (Fig. 2B).
Next, we separated the CSF lipoproteins from the CSF of patients with AD and control individuals with the polyacrylamide gradient gel electrophoresis, and performed a comparative MS profiling of proteins differentially expressed in the APOE-containing particles band. A total of 239 proteins were detected with two or more peptides and were consistently present across all CSF samples (Supplemental Table S1). Nine proteins were related to cholesterol metabolism, among which APOE was the most abundant protein. However, none of the cholesterol-related proteins showed significant differences between the control and AD groups (Fig. 2B). In contrast, the relative abundance of 27 noncholesterol-related proteins changed significantly in patients with AD compared to controls, with 10 upregulated and 17 downregulated (Fig. 2C). Functional enrichment analysis revealed that the majority of these proteins were mainly involved in apoptotic cell clearance, fibrinolysis, acute-phase response, complement activation, regulation of immune and inflammatory responses, cell adhesion, and proteolysis (Supplemental Fig. S4).
APOE4-containing HDL exhibits impaired cholesterol delivery to neurons
Given the higher prevalence of APOE4 carriers among patients with AD, we prepared both synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and HDL-APOE4 nanoparticles by assembling phospholipids and cholesterol with recombinant human APOE3 or APOE4 (see Fig. 3A for a schematic diagram of their synthesis). Both synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 nanoparticles showed a similar HDL migration pattern (Fig. 3B) and size (Fig. 3C), as well as a similar cholesterol/APOE ratio (0.278 for synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and 0.287 for rHDL-APOE4).
We then mimicked cholesterol efflux from astrocytes by replacing the AD and control CSFs with synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 nanoparticles, following the method depicted in Figure 1A. When comparing cholesterol efflux between the two rHDL nanoparticles, both synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 induced cholesterol efflux from astrocytes at similar levels. (Fig. 3D). We also compared the ability of both synthetic rHDLs, which were radiolabeled as in the graphic depicted in Figure 1C, to mediate cholesterol uptake in neurons. The percentage of radiolabeled cholesterol uptake was significantly reduced in neurons incubated with synthetic rHDL-APOE4 compared to rHDL-APOE3 (Fig. 3E). We further evaluated the capacity of neurons to internalize an Oregon Green–labeled phospholipid incorporated into synthetic rHDL-APOE3 and rHDL-APOE4 nanoparticles using confocal microscopy and a flow cytometry assay (Fig. 4A–F). After a 4-h incubation with the fluorescently labeled nanoparticles, SH-SY5Y neurons exhibited a trend toward decreased internalization of rHDL-APOE4-associated phospholipids compared with rHDL-APOE3 (Fig. 4G).

INTRODUCTION:
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes difficulty communicating and reasoning, mood changes, and progressive memory loss. Histologically, AD is defined by the pathologic accumulation of extracellular amyloid beta (Aβ) and abnormally hyperphosphorylated intracellular tau filaments in neurons, resulting in amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, respectively, with neuropathological lesions occurring many years before clinical signs. With few effective and approved treatments, AD is a growing public health concern.
The brain is predominantly composed of lipids, which are essential for functions such as blood-brain barrier regulation, amyloid precursor protein processing, myelination, membrane remodeling, receptor signaling, oxidation, inflammation, and energy balance. Cholesterol, in particular, is vital for brain health, neuron repair, membrane remodeling, and plasticity, and its metabolism has been extensively implicated in the pathogenesis of AD.
Since mature lipoproteins containing cholesterol cannot cross the blood-brain barrier, cholesterol synthesis in the central nervous system (CNS) primarily relies on astrocytes. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), the most nearby biofluid to the brain that can be used to evaluate both normal and aberrant brain physiology, contains unique lipoproteins, also known as "high density lipoprotein (HDL)-like particles" due to their similarity to peripheral HDL. These particles are present at concentrations 100 times lower than plasma HDL, making comprehensive biochemical analysis highly challenging. CSF lipoproteins are essential for cholesterol transport between glial cells and neurons, with apolipoprotein (APO)E as the primary protein necessary for this process. APOE must be synthesized locally by astrocytes and microglia. Notably, lipidated APOE contributes to the clearance of Aβ peptides, thus potentially impacting their transport in the CNS and contributing to AD pathophysiology. In this context, recent research has confirmed that APOE4 homozygosity is a significant genetic factor contributing to AD. Disruption of cholesterol homeostasis has been increasingly implicated in AD, particularly in the context of APOE4-related lipid trafficking defects. Although direct evidence for neuronal cholesterol depletion in AD brains remains limited, studies suggest that APOE4 impairs lipid delivery to neurons, potentially compromising synaptic integrity and accelerating neurodegeneration. Regarding cholesterol efflux to CSF lipoproteins in the CNS, ABCA1 is the main cholesterol efflux transporter in astrocytes, with ABCG1 playing a secondary role. Cholesterol efflux to the CSF is a potential mechanism in AD-related cholesterol metabolism deregulation, yet studies using human astrocytes to examine this in AD patients' CSF are lacking. Concerning cholesterol uptake, CSF lipoproteins deliver cholesterol to neurons through APOE interaction with specific lipoprotein receptors such as LDL receptor (LDLR), LDLR-related protein 1 (LRP1), very-low density lipoprotein receptor, and APOE receptor 2. In this regard, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) has been suggested as a potential player, since it degrades some APOE-binding receptors.
In this study, we investigated CSF-mediated cholesterol transport between human glioblastoma astrocytes and neurons via CSF lipoproteins from control individuals and AD patients, examining its association with AD biomarkers and the CSF lipoprotein proteome. In addition, we developed synthetic reconstituted HDL (rHDL) nanoparticles containing either APOE3 or APOE4 to assess the impact of the APOE-ε4 isoform on cholesterol transport. Our findings reveal that CSF lipoproteins from AD patients show reduced efficiency in delivering cholesterol to neurons, with APOE4 emerging as a potential key factor in the disrupted neuronal cholesterol uptake observed in AD pathophysiology.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
Data are provided within the manuscript or supplementary information files. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD057614.
Supplemental data
This article contains supplemental data.
Supplementary Data