PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Kidney; Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Tandem mass tag(tmt); Proteomics; Agining; Mouse; Orbitrap astral mass spectrometer

ABSTRACT:
Aging results in progressive decline in physiological function due to the deterioration of essential biological processes, such as transcription and RNA splicing, ultimately increasing mortality risk. Although proteomics is emerging as a crucial tool for elucidating the molecular underpinnings of aging, existing studies are constrained by limited proteome coverage and only observe a narrow range of lifespan. To overcome these limitations, we employed the Orbitrap Astral Mass Spectrometer with the multiplex tandem mass tag (TMT) technology to profile the proteomes of three brain tissues (cortex, hippocampus, striatum) and kidney in the C57BL/6 mouse model, achieving high-resolution quantification, ranging from 8,954 to 9,376 proteins per tissue. Our sample population represents balanced sampling across both sexes and three age groups (3, 12, and 20 months), comprising approximately young adulthood to early late life (~20-60 years-old for human lifespan). To enhance quantitative accuracy, we developed a rigorous peptide filtering strategy based on resolution and signal-to-noise thresholds. Our analysis uncovered distinct tissue-specific patterns of protein abundance, with pronounced age and sex differences in the kidney, contrasted by limited sex differences in brain tissues. Notably, we identified both continuous and non-continuous age-associated proteomic changes, revealing complex protein dynamics over adult lifespan. Integrating our findings with early developmental proteomic data from brain tissues highlighted further divergent age-related trajectories, particularly in synaptic proteins. This study not only expands the proteomic landscape of aging, but also underscores the utility of Orbitrap Astral Mass Spectrometry for capturing age-associated molecular alterations with unprecedented depth.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Expanding the Landscape of Aging via Orbitrap Astral Mass Spectrometry and Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Integration

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tissue collection: C57BL/6 mice were ordered through NIA. Upon arrival, mice were acclimated to the local facility for one month. To collect tissues, mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation, and tissues were collected as fast as possible and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Brain tissues were dissected on ice-cold PBS under a dissection microscope and each brain region was flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen upon dissection. Kidney tissues were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen.    Sample preparation for proteomic analysis: Tissue samples were homogenized using the FastPrep-24 Instrument using lysing matrix D in lysis buffer (8M urea, 200 mM EPPS, Roche protease inhibitor tablets) and cells sonicated. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (10 min at 13,000rpm at 4ºC) and protein concentrations were measured using Pierce BCA assay kits. Proteins were then reduced with TCEP (5mM for 15 minutes at room temperature) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (15mM for 15 minutes in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by DTT (10mM for 15 minutes). For each sample, 25µg of protein was aliquoted and diluted to a final concentration of 1mg/mL and cleaned by SP3 procedure25. Proteins were digested using LysC (Wako, 3 hr, 37ºC, 1,400rpm on a ThermoMixer) followed by trypsin (6 hr, 37ºC, 1400rpm). The resulting peptides were then labeled with TMTpro 18-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 1 hour at room temperature. The reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine (final concentration of 0.5% for 15 minutes). Labeled peptides were mixed. After labeling and mixing, peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 seppak cartridges (1mg, Waters). Desalted peptides were then fractionated using basic-pH reverse phase chromatography16. Briefly, peptides were resuspended in Buffer A (10mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% acetonitrile, pH 8) and separated on a linear gradient from 13% to 42% Buffer B (10mM ammonium bicarbonate, 90% acetonitrile, pH 8) over an Agilent 300Extend C18 column using an Agilent 1260 HPLC equipped with single wavelength detection at 220nm). Fractionated peptides were desalted using Stage-tips16 prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the Mus musculus UniProt database (January 26, 2022). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with COMET searches and linear discriminant analysis27,28. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR)29,30 . PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously27 and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%29. Peptide-Spectrum Matches (PSM) with any of the 18 reporter ions resolutions lower than 45K and a total signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio less than 1,440 across 18 channels were filtered out. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, as described previously31. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading.