PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell suspension culture; Astrocyte
diseases: Parkinson's disease
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Ubiquitin-proteasome system; Autophagy-lysosome pathway; Calcium dyshomeostasis; Synucleinopathies; Neuron-astrocyte co-culture

ABSTRACT:
Alpha-Synuclein (Syn) plays a central role in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and the p.A53T mutation causes an early-onset familial form of PD with severe manifestations. The pathological effects of the p.A53T-Syn mutation have been extensively investigated in neurons, yet the consequences on astrocytes and astrocytic contribution to PD pathology are understudied. Here, we differentiated induced pluripotent stem cells from PD patients carrying the p.A53T-Syn mutation to astrocytes, which uncovered cell-intrinsic phenotypes, including calcium dyshomeostasis and accumulation of protein aggregates. Proteomic profiling and functional analyses revealed perturbed protein catabolic processes, involving the proteasome and autophagy, associated with lysosomal malfunction. Dopamine neurons co-cultured with p.A53T-Syn astrocytes displayed exacerbated neurodegeneration with hallmark Lewy-like pathologies, rescued by control astrocytes due to their ability to resolve neuronal Syn aggregates by endocytic clearance. Our findings underscore a critical impact of p.A53T-Syn on astrocytic protein quality control mechanisms, positioning astrocytes as important contributors to PD neuropathology.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteostasis dysregulation in p.A53T--Synuclein iPSC-derived astrocytes exacerbates neurodegeneration in a Parkinson’s disease model with Lewy-like pathology

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Day-28 iAstrocytes were plated in Geltrex-coated 6-well plates at 300,000 cells/well (Supplementary Table 2). Cells were maintained in AM and upon 60-70% confluency, serum was withdrawn for 72 h. iAstrocytes were lysed in 0.25 M Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, boiled for 4 min, sonicated (2 x 5 s), and centrifuged (17,000 × g, 15 min). Supernatants were processed according to the Sp3 protocol 10 including an alkylation step in the dark for 15 min in 10 mg/mL iodoacetamide (Acros Organics). Τwenty micrograms of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag carboxylate-Smodified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. The proteins were allowed to bind to the beads for 15 min, followed by repeated steps of protein clean-up using a magnetic rack. The beads were washed twice with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical). The captured-on-beads proteins were digested under vigorous shaking (16-18 h, 37 °C, 1200 rpm, Eppendorf Thermomixer) with 0.5 μg Trypsin/LysC (MS grade, Promega) prepared in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next, the supernatants were collected, the peptides were purified using a modified Sp3 clean-up protocol, finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water), and sonicated. The peptide concentration was determined using Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were run on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex UltimateRSLC online with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on a 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9-μm 3 beads, 75 µm ID, Bruker) using a 1-h long run, starting with a gradient consisting of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5 min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5 min. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min in the sample loading phase and lowered to 250 nL/min in the main phase of sample analysis, A full MS was acquired in profile and positive mode using the mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120 K resolving power with an AGC of 3 × 10 6 and max IT of 60 ms followed by data independent analysis using 8 Th windows (39 loop counts) with 15 K resolving power with an AGC of 3 × 10 5 and max IT of 22 ms and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26. At least two technical replicates were acquired per sample.

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS/MS raw data analysis Orbitrap raw data was analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) 11 through searching against the Human Uniprot database containing 20583 proteins  (one protein per gene, UP000005640_9606) using the library-free mode of the software and allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyse them. DIA-NN default settings have been used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. N-terminal methionine excision was also enabled. The match between runs (MBR) feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR, and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides. The generated results were processed statistically and visualized in the Perseus software (1.6.15.0) 12 . Values were log(2) transformed, a threshold of —-% of valid values in at least one group was applied and the missing values were replaced from normal distribution. For statistical analysis, Student’s t-test was performed and permutation-based FDR was calculated.