PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Glutamatergic neuron; Cell culture
diseases: Tay-sachs disease; Gm1 gangliosidosis
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Quantitative proteomics; Tmt; Gangliosidosis; Neurodegeneration

ABSTRACT:
Glycosphingolipids (GSL) are important bioactive membrane components. GSLs containing sialic acids, known as gangliosides, are highly abundant in the brain and diseases of ganglioside metabolism cause severe early-onset neurodegeneration. The ganglioside GM2 is processed by β-hexosaminidaseA and when non-functional GM2 accumulates causing Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff diseases. We have developed i3Neuron-based disease models demonstrating storage of GM2 and severe endolysosomal dysfunction. Additionally, the plasma membrane (PM) is significantly altered in its lipid and protein composition. These changes are driven in part by lysosomal exocytosis causing inappropriate accumulation of lysosomal proteins on the cell surface. There are also significant changes in synaptic protein abundances with direct functional impact on neuronal activity. Lysosomal proteins are also enriched at the PM in GM1 gangliosidosis supporting that lysosomal exocytosis is a conserved mechanism of PM proteome change in these diseases. This work provides mechanistic insights into neuronal dysfunction in gangliosidoses highlighting that these are severe PM disorders with implications for other lysosomal and neurodegenerative diseases.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Plasma Membrane Remodelling in GM2 Gangliosidoses Drives Synaptic Dysfunction

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cultured cells were prepared for whole cell proteomics and plasma membrane profiling. Digested peptides were labeled with TMTpro reagents and fractionated prior to LC-MSMS using high-pH reverse phase HPLC. LC-MSMS data was acquired using an Orbitrap Lumos as previously described. An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 50 cm 2.1 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. Loading solvent was 0.1% FA, analytical solvent A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% MeCN + 0.1% FA. All separations were carried out at 40°C. Samples were loaded at 5 µL/minute for 5 minutes in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradients were used: 3-7% B over 4 minutes, 7-37% B over 173 minutes, followed by a 4-minute wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 15 minutes or 3-7% B over 3 minutes, 7-37% B over 116 minutes, followed by a 4-minute wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 15 minutes. Each analysis used a MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method. The following settings were used: MS1: 380-1500 Th, 120,000 Resolution, 2x105 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, CID fragmentation (normalised collision energy (NCE) 34) with ion trap scanning in turbo mode with 1.5x104 AGC target and 120 ms maximum injection time. MS3: In Synchronous Precursor Selection mode the top 10 MS2 ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE 45) and scanned in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1x105 and a maximum accumulation time of 150 ms. Ions were not accumulated for all parallelisable time. The entire MS/MS/MS cycle had a target time of 3 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data was processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using the Mascot search engine and a Uniprot human database (downloaded 11/01/2021). The results were imported into Perseus as a tab delimited text file. In Perseus the grouped reporter abundances were log2 transformed, data filtered to a minimum of 3 valid values and missing values replaced from a normal distribution. The replicates were grouped, and volcano plots generated, with significantly changed proteins determined using a two-sample t-test with an FDR cutoff of <0.05. Differences in protein abundance and adjusted P-value were used to ascribe significance and to generate volcano plots in GraphPad Prism.  The Database for Annotation, Visualisation and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) was used for functional annotation and enrichment analysis of proteomic datasets. Proteins that were significantly changed (p<0.05) in abundance by >20% compared to SCRM controls and with ≥2 PSMs were searched against a background reference list of all proteins quantified in the respective dataset with ≥2 PSMs. For functional enrichment analysis of WCP, only proteins increased in abundance were selected for analysis against a background list as defined above. Cellular Component GO_Direct terms were then selected based on FDR.