PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Chaperone-mediated autophagy (cma); Neurodegeneration

ABSTRACT:
Neurons are postmitotic cells that are highly sensitive to proteotoxic insults and reliant on tight protein quality control. Several forms of autophagy co-exist in neurons to maintain proteostasis. Defective autophagic pathways are one of the key hallmarks of the aging and neurodegenerative brains. Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) declines in neurons in aging and neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s  (AD) and Parkinson’s disease. CMA loss in neurons leads to protein aggregation, neuronal hyperactivity, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline, all reminiscent of brain again. Conversely, pharmacological enhancement of CMA reduces pathological tau and β-amyloid accumulation, mitigates neuronal hyperactivity and seizure susceptibility and ameliorates cognitive decline in multiple tauopathy mouse models. The molecular mechanism underlying the beneficial role of CMA activation in AD is largely unknow. Furthermore, neuronal hyperactivity has recently been proposed as an early hallmark of AD. However, the mechanisms underlying early neuronal hyperactivity in AD are also not fully understood. To investigate these molecular mechanisms, we performed quantitative proteomics in an AD mouse model in early disease following CMA activation.  The study analyzed total as well as aggregating proteome in hippocampus of triple-transgenic (x3TG) AD mice (expressing APPSwe, PS2N141I, and hTauP301L) following CMA activation with CA77.1 from 4-6 months of age. 5-6 samples per group were analyzed. Following bottom-up analysis, the enrichment analysis – GO, Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) and String analysis identified several pathways predicting aberrant synaptogenesis and increased activation of excitatory synaptic proteome including glutamate receptor signaling which was corrected by CMA activation. CMA activation also reverted the enrichment of synaptic proteins in the aggregates in early AD hippocampus which may restore their aggregation-driven loss of function.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Label free -DDA nano-LC/MS/MS analysis of aggregates and total hippocampal proteome in an early AD mouse model following activation of chaperone-mediated autophagy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay. Both the total protein fraction and the sarkosyl-insoluble fraction were digested with trypsin following the S-Trap™ Micro Spin protocol (PROTIFI). Briefly, after lysis with 10% SDS in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), samples were reduced with 200 mM TCEP and incubated at 50 °C for 30 minutes. Next, 375 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added, and samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The samples were then acidified with 27.5% phosphoric acid, followed by the addition of S-Trap buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1) and mixed immediately. The acidified lysate/buffer mixture was transferred to an S-Trap spin column and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 30 seconds to trap proteins. The columns were washed five times with S-Trap buffer, centrifuged at 4,000 g until dry, and then transferred to new elution tubes. Following overnight digestion with trypsin (0.2 µg/µL) at 37 °C, an elution step was performed. First, 40 µL of 50 mM TEAB was added and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 1 minute, followed by 40 µL of 0.2% formic acid (FA) with centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 1 minute, and finally 40 µL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) with centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 1 minute. The final pooled elution was snap-frozen, dried in a speed-vac, and the peptides were reconstituted in 20 µL of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. An optimized, equal number of samples were then injected into the Fusion Lumos Orbitrap MS in OTIT mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were processed using PEAKS ONLINE proteomic software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Waterloo, ON). The raw files were filtered, de novo sequenced, and assigned protein IDs by searching against the mouse (Mus musculus) revised SwissProt/UniProt database (17,207 entries, April 2023). The searches were performed with the following guidelines: trypsin as the enzyme, with up to two allowed missed cleavages at one or both peptide ends. The parent mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.06 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0215 on C) was specified in PEAKS as a fixed modification. Oxidations of methionine, lysine, proline, arginine, cysteine, and asparagine (+15.99 on CKMNPR), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ -0.98), and pyro-Glu formation from glutamine (Q -18.01 at the N-term) were set as variable modifications. Data from quantitation were validated using the false discovery rate (FDR) method built into PEAKS XPRO, and protein identifications were accepted if they could be identified with a confidence score (−10lgP) > 15 for peptides and (−10lgP) > 15 for proteins; a minimum of 1 or 2 unique peptides per protein was required after filtering for an FDR of less than 2.0% for peptides and less than 3% for protein identifications. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the quantification algorithm supported by the PEAKS Q module. The built-in PEAKS t-test/ANOVA (significance level p < 0.05) was used to assess the statistical significance of fold changes in protein expression for each sample set.