PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Saliva
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Saliva; Mouth breathing children; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Salivary proteins of mouth breathing children were compared with paired nose breathing children using label-free quantification (LFQ). The differentially expressed proteins were screened (fold-change 1.5, p value<0.05).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Saliva LC-MS/MS of mouth breathing children

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The supernatants of saliva were added with 1% PMSF to extract the total proteins of twenty saliva samples, and the concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. The protein fluid solution was added to a 10KDa ultrafiltration tube and digested with trypsin in 0.5M TEAB (1:100 w: w) overnight at 37℃. Each sample was evaporated using a Speedvac and subsequentially reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA). Chromatographic separations of peptides were analyzed with Thermo Scientific Q Exactive (Thermal Scientific, Chelmsford, MA, USA). The scan of first-grade MS ranged from 350-1800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×106. The scan of second-grade MS was initiated as 60 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 105. The raw files from the mass spectrometer were transferred to MGF files and retrieved in the database downloaded from uniprot through Maxquant software. The false discovery rate (FDR) was evaluated using the uniprot_rat library, and the proteins identified by sites, reverse database and common contaminant database were filtered. Based on the fundamental analysis of protein and peptides, the differentially expressed proteins were screened (fold-change 1.5, p value<0.05). Proteins from the LFQ experiment were processed with MetaCore to build an analysis of functional ontologies including canonical pathway maps.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw files from the mass spectrometer were transferred to MGF files and retrieved in the database downloaded from uniprot through Maxquant software (uniprot_rat_29389_20200312.fasta, included 29389 sequences, downloaded in 2020-03-12). The LC-MS/MS data were normalized and aligned according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was evaluated using the uniprot_rat library, and the proteins identified by sites, reverse database and common contaminant database were filtered. Based on the fundamental analysis of protein and peptides, the differentially expressed proteins were screened (fold-change 1.5, p value<0.05). Proteins from the LFQ experiment were processed with MetaCore to build an analysis of functional ontologies including canonical pathway maps. Functional annotation and pathway of the differentially proteins were performed to identify enriched cellular components, biological processes, and molecular functions between paired groups using gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis. A unimodal model (canonical correspondence analysis [CCA]) was constructed to evaluate the effect of differentially expressed protein, duration of mouth breathing and clinical characteristics (age and gender of participants, with or without caries, and the PLI and GI) on microbiota composition.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Study Subjects
This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and the protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Guanghua School of Stomatology (Ethics number: 2019-20; date of approval: 2019–3–1). With verbal agreement from the children, the guardians signed the informed consent for inclusion before the children participated in the study, then completed a detailed questionnaire about medical history, lifestyle, and the dietary habits of the children. Sample size was according to a previous literature and following the table look-up scheme of paired study [the minimum number of pairs was 10 when the efficiency of test (1–β) was set 0.8 with bilateral test (1:1)]. Ten mouth-breathing children (MB group) and 10 nose-breathing children (NB group) were respectively matched by age (differ within 6 months), gender, and caries status (with or without active caries).
Inclusion criteria. The MB group was confirmed according to the inclusion criteria (Table 1) that were integrated from a previous study. Three steps including questionnaire, visual with clinical assessment, and breathing test were implemented in order. Children in the MB group had laryngological examination in the otorhinolaryngologic department before and were diagnosed as rhinitis/nasosinusitis and/or adenoidal hypertrophy.
Exclusion criteria. Children had taken antibiotics in the past 1 month; children with syndromes or chronic systemic diseases, craniofacial deformity, complete nostril obstruction and perforation of the nasal septum, or any known acute disease of the nasal or oral cavity, nasal sinuses, salivary glands, or pharynx were excluded.
Sample Collection
Samples were obtained from eight sites of each subject in the morning between 8:00 and 10:00 AM, as this is the most stable timepoint during the day for saliva composition. Children were required to avoid diet or brushing for all night until sampling in the morning. The overall sampling and examination process are shown in Figure 1. Unstimulated saliva samples (site 6) were collected first. Children were instructed to sit and lean forward in a friendly dental clinic, rinse the mouth completely with pure water from dental chair supply at room temperature, and wait for 10 min, then expectorate into sterile tubes for 5 min. The other seven sites of samples were collected, including supragingival plaque (site 1) and mucosa swabs (labial and palatal, sites 2 and 3, respectively) of the anterior maxillary region, supragingival plaque (site 4) and labial mucosa swab (site 5) of the anterior mandibular region, swabs from both anterior nares (site 7), and throat swabs (site 8) (Figure 1A). The sampling procedures were following the Human Microbiome Project1; samples of saliva, soft tissue sites, and hard tissue sites were collected in sequence and labeled with appropriate preprinted label. Tubes were restored in a Ziploc bag and placed over ice and were transported to the laboratory in 1 h for further processing. After being centrifuged at 4,000 rpm (5,943 g at 4°C for 20 min), the saliva samples were isolated as sediments and supernatants, then saved at −80°C until use.
Dental examination was performed in dental chair under artificial light. The caries condition (decayed, missing, and filled tooth index, dmft/DMFT for primary/permanent teeth) and periodontal condition [plaque (PlI) and gingival (GI) index] were also recorded according to the methods described in the 5th edition of the WHO Oral Health Surveys—Basic Methods. The PlI was determined before sampling, and the GI was detected after sampling to avoid possible pollution of bleeding (Figure 1B). Children with a decayed index >1 were considered to have caries; the PlI and GI of the anterior and posterior areas were calculated. The above clinical investigations and records were implemented by a trained examiner (CF). The intraexaminer kappa value of caries assessment was 0.86.
Sample Processing and High-Throughput 16S rDNA Sequencing
The total genomic DNA was extracted from samples using a QIAamp DNA microkit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, United States). The V3–V4 hypervariable regions of the bacterial 16S rDNA gene were amplified using universal 16S rDNA primers (341F: CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG; 806R: GGACTACHVGGGTATCTAAT). The products of PCR amplification were collected by gel cutting and quantified using an ABI StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States). The purified amplification products were pooled in equimolar and paired-end sequenced (2 × 250) on an Illumina platform (Hiseq2500 PE250), following the procedure used in the Human Microbiome Project. Poor-quality sequences were excluded using the default parameters of the Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology program (QIIME) script split_libraries.py (minimum average quality score = 25, minimum/maximum sequence length = 200/1,000 base pairs, no ambiguous base calls, and no mismatches allowed in the primer sequence). Filtered sequence reads were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and subsequently assigned to taxa by the SILVA database of reference sequences with ≥97% identity. The representative sequences were classified into organisms by a naive Bayesian model using RDP classifier (version 2.2) based on the SILVA database (version 132) with an 80% confidence level by MOTHUR.
Salivary Protein Detection With LFQ
Briefly, the supernatants of 20 saliva samples were added with L3 lysis buffer and 1% phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) to extract the total proteins, and the concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. After reduction with 0.05 M tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 60 min and cysteine blocked with 55 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 45 min, the protein solution was added to a 10-kDa ultrafiltration tube (Pall Corporation, Port Washington, NY, United States) and digested with trypsin in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (1:100 w/w) overnight at 37°C. Each peptide sample was vacuum dried using a Speedvac and subsequently dissolved with a buffer [0.1% formic acid (FA), 2% acetonitrile (ACN)] and centrifuged at 13,200 rpm for 20 min at 4°C. Peptides were identified with Thermo Scientific Q Exactive (Thermal Scientific, Chelmsford, MA, United States). The scan of first-grade mass spectrometry (MS) ranged from 350 to 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106. The scan of second-grade MS was initiated as 60 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 105. For data from the Q-Exactive instrument, MS tolerance was set at 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance at 0.5 Da. Three biological replicates were used for proteomic analyses. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with identifier PXD0211062.
The raw files from the mass spectrometer were transferred to Mascot Generic Files (MGF) and retrieved in the database downloaded from uniprot through Maxquant software (uniprot_rat_29389_20200312.fasta, included 29,389 sequences, downloaded in 2020–03–12). The liquid chromatography–tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) data were normalized and aligned according to the manufacturer’s specifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was evaluated using the uniprot_rat library, and the proteins identified by sites, reverse database, and common contaminant database were filtered. Based on the fundamental analysis of protein and peptides, the differentially expressed proteins were screened (fold-change, 1.5; p < 0.05). Proteins from the LFQ experiment were processed with MetaCore to build an analysis of functional ontologies including canonical pathway maps. Functional annotation and pathway of the differentially proteins were performed to identify enriched cellular components, biological processes, and molecular functions between paired groups using gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis.
Statistical Analysis
The taxonomic composition and clinical characteristics of two groups were compared using non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test. According to the diversity indices, α diversity (within-subject diversity) using ACE, Sobs, Chao1, Shannon, Good’s coverage, numbers of observed species (richness), and the Simpson’s Index (evenness) was assessed. β diversity (between-subject diversity) was analyzed via UniFrac (unweighted and weighted) and principle coordinate analyses (PCoAs) using Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology program (QIIME) and displayed using the R software. Normality of the data distribution was evaluated with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. p < 0.05 were considered significant after adjustment for multiple tests.
Three steps of comparison were carried out for the microbial sequencing results: eight sites of samples were compared respectively between two groups, the six oral samples were merged as a whole and compared with nasal–pharyngeal samples, and the six oral samples were compared with each other, respectively. The differences within/between the MB and NB groups among oral–nasal–pharyngeal samples were evaluated using a Kruskal–Wallis test and a non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test. A p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The area under curve (AUC) for each receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve were calculated to assess the ability to differentiate two groups as candidate biomarkers.
A unimodal model [canonical correspondence analysis (CCA)] was constructed to evaluate the effect of differentially expressed protein, duration of mouth breathing, and clinical characteristics (age and gender of participants, with or without caries, and the PLI and GI) on microbiota composition.

RESULTS:
Results
One hundred sixty samples from 8 sites of 10 mouth-breathing and 10 paired nose-breathing children were analyzed for this study. We obtained a total of 13,268,156 high-quality bacterial 16S rDNA sequences. The sequences were clustered into 46,880 operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with 97% identity. Overall, 34 phyla, 89 classes, 178 orders, 292 families, and 601 genera were annotated from the 46,880 OTUs. The general information and clinical characteristics of paired groups are exhibited in Table 2. Among the participants, three paired children had caries, and seven paired children were caries-free. The PlI and GI of the anterior (A) and posterior (P) areas were calculated and compared in MB group that were PlI (A): 1.53 ± 0.49, PlI (P): 1.42 ± 0.51, GI (A): 1.36 ± 0.35, GI (P): 1.28 ± 0.27; and in NB group that were PlI (A): 1.32 ± 0.39, PlI (P): 1.40 ± 0.31, GI (A): 1.22 ± 0.19, GI (P): 1.28 ± 0.25; the MB group had slightly higher PlI and GI index than the NB group, especially in anterior area, but the differences were not significant (p = 0.31, 0.92, 0.29, 0.99, respectively).
Taxonomic Composition of the Mouth- and Nose-Breathing Group Samples
Among children in the two groups, the dominant bacteria and abundance of oral–nasal–pharyngeal samples were different. The most abundant genera of the oral cavity in the MB group were Streptococcus, Neisseria, Haemophilus, Alloprevotella, Actinomyces, and Gemella. The dominant genera of nasal samples (site 7) in the MB group were Haemophilus, Moraxella, Streptococcus, Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, and Neisseria. The dominant genera of pharyngeal samples (site 8) in the MB group were Neisseria, Prevotella_7, Streptococcus, Veillonella, Alloprevotella, and Actinomyces. The most abundant genera of the six sites from oral samples in both groups were Neisseria (sites 1, 4, and 6) and Streptococcus (sites 2, 3, and 5). The relative abundance of the bacterial community, heat map of species abundance, and ternary plots at the genus level among oral–nasal–pharyngeal samples between the MB and NB groups are shown in Figure 2. Distinctions in taxonomic composition between the two groups were shown.
The significantly different species among oral–nasal–pharyngeal samples between groups were screened with an AUC value higher than 0.7. In oral samples, increased Acinetobacter calcoaceticus (0.787) and Escherichia–Shigella (0.712) and decreased Olsenella (0.758) had power to distinguish the MB group. In nasal samples, increased A. calcoaceticus (0.820), Pseudomonas (0.820), Stenotrophomonas (0.920), Bacteroides (0.815), Faecalibacterium (0.830), Lysobacter (0.820), and Ralstonia (0.850), and decreased Capnocytophaga sp. oral taxon 863 str F0517 (0.785) characterized the MB group. In pharyngeal samples, there was increased A. calcoaceticus (0.865), Ruminococcus_2 (0.770), Streptococcus pneumoniae (0.770), and Dialister pneumosintes (0.780) and decreased Corynebacterium (0.790) and Olsenella (0.765) in the MB group. A. calcoaceticus was significantly increased in the oral–nasal–pharyngeal samples, and Olsenella was significantly decreased in the oral–pharyngeal samples of the MB group, and increased Stenotrophomonas in the nasal sample had a strong predictive power to distinguish the MB group.
Differences in Microbiota Diversity Among Oral–Nasal–Pharyngeal Samples
Eight Sites Comparison
For the eight sites of microbial samples, significant differences existed between the two groups based on α and β diversity analysis. The Wilcoxon test showed that the site 8 sample (p = 0.03) had a significantly higher index of Chao1 in the MB group than the NB group, illustrating that the microbial community richness in the pharynx increased significantly. The unweighted UniFrac index of samples, including sites 1, 3, 4, 5, and 8 between the two groups, were significantly different (p < 0.001). The weighted UniFrac index of sites 1 (p = 0.01), 2 (p = 0.04), 4 (p < 0.001), and 6 (p = 0.01) samples were significantly different. The results indicated that the species in the anterior maxillary mucosa swabs (site 2) and unstimulated saliva (site 6) between the two groups were nearly the same but with a different richness. Two sites of samples [sites 1 and 4 (anterior supragingival plaque)] were significantly different in both microbial species and richness between the two groups.
Oral–Nasal–Pharyngeal Comparison
We merged the six sites of oral samples as a whole and compared with nasal and pharyngeal samples by α diversity to study the microbial evenness and richness within samples. The analysis showed significant differences among the oral cavity, nasal cavity, and pharynx in the NB group (Simpson index, Kruskal–Wallis test, p = 0.01), while there is no statistical difference in the MB group (Simpson index, Kruskal–Wallis test, p = 0.17). The Wilcoxon test showed that oral samples had significantly higher ACE (p = 0.002) and Chao1 (p = 0.01) indices, and pharyngeal samples had a higher Chao1 index (p = 0.03) in the MB group than in the NB group. There were no differences between the nasal and pharyngeal samples in the MB group (Simpson, p = 0.11). Comparisons of the Simpson and ACE indices of the bacterial community in the oral–nasal–pharyngeal samples among the MB and NB groups are shown in Figures 3A,B.
The unweighted and weighted UniFrac calculations showed differences among the three cavity samples in both groups (Kruskal–Wallis test, p < 0.001). The unweighted UniFrac calculation showed species consistency among the pharyngeal and oral samples in NB group (p = 0.46) changed to consistency among nasal and pharyngeal samples in the MB group (p = 0.41). The oral (p < 0.001) and pharyngeal (p < 0.001) samples had significant differences between two groups (Figures 3C,D). Higher bacterial diversity of the oral–pharyngeal samples and the species consistency of the nasal–pharyngeal samples existed in the MB group.
Six Sites of Oral Samples
A comparison of the six oral sample sites also yielded meaningful results. The principal component analysis (PCA) of samples is shown in Figure 4A; different oral sites harbored distinct species. The α diversity analysis showed significant differences among the six sites of samples in the NB group (Good’s coverage, Kruskal–Wallis test, p = 0.03), while no significant difference was detected in the MB group (Good’s coverage, Kruskal–Wallis test, p = 0.06). The unweighted UniFrac analysis showed significant differences between site 2 and site 3/4/5 in the NB group (p < 0.001) and no differences between sites 2 and 3 (p = 0.59)/site 4 (p = 0.44)/site 5 (p = 0.39) in the MB group. Weighted UniFrac analysis showed differences between sites 4 and 3 (p = 0.004)/site 6 (p = 0.002), sites and 2 (p = 0.009) in the NB group and no differences between sites 4 and 3 (p = 0.39)/site 6 (p = 0.13), sites 1 and 2 (p = 0.14) in the MB group. The PCoA analysis of unweighted UniFrac is shown in Figure 4B; the overall species of the six sites of oral samples were nearly the same within groups but different between the two groups. With respect to the indicator species, the relative abundance of Acinetobacter was higher in sites 1 and 4 (anterior supragingival plaque), Aggregatibacter was lower in site 3 (anterior maxillary palatal mucosa), and Neisseria was higher in site 6 (unstimulated saliva) in the MB group compared with the NB group.
The LFQ of Salivary Proteins
In analyzing the collected saliva samples with the LFQ approach, 740 proteins and 4,744 peptides were identified and used for further comparative quantification (FDR < 0.1% at the protein level). Ten proteins from our LFQ data were differentially expressed between the MB and NB groups with a fold change >1.5 (Table 3). Five of these proteins had upregulated expression, and the other five proteins were downregulated in the MB group. Although the abundance of most proteins was not significantly altered between the MB and NB groups, the levels of lactoylglutathione lyase (GLOl) and peroxiredoxin-5 (PRDX5) were significantly higher (2.04- and 1.62-fold, respectively; p = 0.03), while integrin alpha-M [ITGAM (0.66-fold); p = 0.01] and proteasome subunit alpha type-1 [PSMA1 (0.52-fold); p = 0.02) were significantly lower in the MB group compared with the NB group.
The proteins found to be differentially expressed in the MB group showed significant enrichment of cellular and molecular processes involved in “cellular process,” “biological regulation,” “regulation of biological process,” “response to stimulus,” “immune system process,” “cellular anatomical entity,” “intracellular,” and “binding” (Figure 5). The Gene Ontology (GO) pathway mapping revealed that the most significantly regulated processes in the MB group were “regulation of leukocyte mediated immunity” and “heat shock protein binding.”
Specific Indicator Genera Are Associated With GLOl by CCA Analysis
CCA analysis of the association between the microbiota of two groups sample and differentially expressed salivary protein, duration of mouth breathing, and other characteristics (age and gender of participants, with or without caries, PlI and GI) showed that the abundance of Acinetobacter, Escherichia–Shigella, and Olsenella was positively related to GLOl, and the abundance of Streptococus and Gemella was negatively related to PRDX5. The duration of mouth breathing was positively associated with the abundance of Neisseria and negatively associated with Veillonella. The inflammation status of the anterior gingiva was positively related to Acinetobacter, Stenotrophomonas, Ralstonia, and Bacillus and negatively related to Streptococcus and Gemella. The relationships between environmental factors and the most contributing species and non-parametric Spearman correlation analysis are illustrated in Figures 6A,B. Variance partitioning analysis (VPA) showed that GLOl (explanatory value = 1.91%) and PRDX5 (explanatory value = 1.95%) had the greatest contribution to the oral–nasal–pharyngeal species distribution (Figure 6C), while caries (0.83%) and PSMA1 (0.81%) had a medium contribution. The duration of mouth breathing was the only significant factor with a high explanatory value (6.89%) contributing to microbiota at the genus level.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Microbiota and proteins play a very important role in human health and have a profound effect on human diseases. As the entry portal to the digestive and respiratory tracts, the oral cavity microbiome is strongly related to systemic disease, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), adverse pregnancy outcomes (APOs), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), human immune deficiency virus (HIV) infection, cardiovascular diseases, and Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Respiratory tract flora are also associated with many diseases, such as asthma, cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), pneumonia, and lung cancer. Saliva could reflect physiological or pathological states of an individual. Thus, salivary proteins also have been suggested to be a diagnostic tool for oral and systemic diseases, such as oral leukoplakia, caries, periodontal disease, Sjögren’s syndrome, cancer, cardiovascular disease, and stroke. Little is known, however, whether exogenous factors, such as mouth breathing, will cause dysbiosis of the microbiota or alteration of saliva state. Indeed, mouth breathing has attracted more considerable attention, with prevalence between 48 and 56.8%.
The human airways are important in heating and humidifying air during inhalation. Mouth breathers inspire and expire through the mouth, as a consequence of reduced patency of the nasal airways. The constant airflow from mouth breathing could dry the teeth and mucosa, especially in the anterior portion of the mouth, leading to chronic gingival inflammation, an increased level of Streptococcus mutans (CFU > 105), and a higher plaque index (PlI), although no significant difference was found in mean buffering capacity of saliva and the salivary flowrate. A higher risk of dental erosion and caries also exist among mouth breathers because of a decrease in intraoral pH compared with normal breathing during sleep. Mouth breathing may also lead to malocclusion and systemic diseases, such as asthma, gastrointestinal dysfunction, and sleep disorder. The above studies involved the adverse clinical effects; however, little is known regarding the distinction of microbiota and salivary proteins between children with and without mouth breathing. In the aggravation of mouth breathing, adenotonsillar hyperplasia involved with pathogens and cell-mediated humoral immune response is the main cause of the above symptoms. Several research results suggested the following physiological process: a change in oropharyngeal humidification and temperature was found in mouth breathers regardless of closed or open mouths, and microbial communities of the nose, mouth, and throat were affected by spatial heterogeneity and environmental features and, in turn, generate additional spatial heterogeneity. There are clear differences in the microbiota between the nasal and oral cavities in healthy adults, and different oral sites may provide distinct environment for bacterial adhesion, survival, and growth. Accumulating evidence support the hypothesis that mouth breathing cause an alteration of microbial communities together with some pathological mechanisms based on environment and interactions between host and microbiota. The mechanisms and related biomarkers would play an important role in the diagnosis and putative early intervention or therapeutic target of mouth breathing among children. To achieve this objective, 10 paired subjects were recruited for the mouth-breathing (MB) group and the matched nose-breathing (NB) group. Eight sites of oral–nasal–pharyngeal cavity were sampled for 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) gene sequence analysis, and the label-free quantification (LFQ) proteomics method was used to detect the unstimulated saliva.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated for this study can be found in the NCBI: GenBank accession number PRJNA642373. The RAW data and database search results of proteomics have been deposited to PRIDE from the ProteomeXchange consortium (PXD021106).
Ethics Statement
The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by Ethics Committee of Guanghua School of (Ethics number: 2019-20; date of approval: 2019-3-1). Written informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the participants’ legal guardian/next of kin. Written informed consent was obtained from the individual(s), and minor(s)’ legal guardian/next of kin, for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.
Supplementary Material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2020.575550/full#supplementary-material