PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Cell growth; Cell size; Proteome allocations

ABSTRACT:
Microbes exhibit precise control over their composition and geometry in order to adapt and grow in diverse environments. However, the mechanisms that orchestrate this simultaneous regulation, and how they are causally linked, remains poorly understood. In this work, we derive and experimentally test a biophysical model of cell size regulation in Escherichia coli which relates the cellular surface-to-volume ratio to the total macromolecular composition and partitioning of the proteome between cellular compartments. Central to this model is the observation that the macromolecular density of the cytoplasm and the protein density within the cell membranes are maintained at a constant ratio across growth conditions. Using quantitative mass spectrometry, single-cell microscopy, and biochemical assays, we show this model quantitatively predicts a non-linear relationship between the surface-to-volume ratio, proteome localization, and the total ribosome content of the cell. This model holds under perturbations of intracellular ppGpp concentrations–thereby changing the ribosomal content–demonstrating that cellular geometry is not strictly determined by the cellular growth rate. These findings provide a biophysical link between the coregulation of proteome organization and cellular geometry, offering a quantitative framework for understanding bacterial size regulation across conditions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Coordination Between Cytoplasmic and Envelope Densities Shapes Cellular Geometry in Escherichia coli

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The pellets were then resuspended in a denaturation/reduction buffer (0.07M Tris-Cl, 5% (v/v) mercaptoethanol, 0.6% (w/v) SDS and 15% (v/v) glycerol) by boiling for 10 min at 95 °C with intermittent vortexing. Debris was pelleted by centrifugation for 10 minutes (10,000 ×g). Cleared supernatants were alkylated with 5mM iodoacetamide, and then precipitated with three volumes of a solution containing 50% acetone and 50% ethanol. Proteins were re-solubilized in 2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 150 mM NaCl, and then digested with TPCK-treated trypsin (50:1) overnight at 37 °C. Trifluoroacetic acid and formic acid were added to the digested peptides for a final concentration of 0.2%. Peptides were desalted with a Sep-Pak 50mg C18 column (Waters). The C18 column was conditioned with 500 µL of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid and then washed with 1000 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After samples were loaded, the column was washed with 2000 µL of 0.1% acetic acid followed by elution with 400 µL of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid. The elution was dried in a Concentrator at 45 °C. De-salted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% Formic acid.  For each sample, 25 µg of desalted peptide samples were resuspended in 20 µL of 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate solution and labeled with 16-plex TMTpro at a ratio 4:1 (TMT:peptide). Total reaction volume was less than 25 µL. The labeling reaction was quenched with a final concentration of 0.5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Labeled peptides were pooled and acidified to pH ∼ 2 using drops of 10% TFA. Excess TMT label was removed by re-running the pooled sample through a Sep-Pak 50-mg C18 column (as described above).  TMT-labeled peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid analyzed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated by capillary reverse phase chromatography on a 25 cm column (75 µm inner diameter, packed with 1.6 µm C18 resin, AUR2-25075C18A, Ionopticks, Victoria Australia). Peptides were introduced into the Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer using a 180-min stepped linear gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL / min. The steps of the gradient are as follows: 6–33% buffer B (0.1% (v:v) formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) for 145 min, 33-45% buffer B for 15min, 40–95% buffer B for 5 min and maintain at 90% buffer B for 5 min. The column temperature was maintained at 50°C throughout the procedure. Xcalibur software (v.4.4.16.14) was used for the data acquisition and the instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. Advanced peak detection was disabled. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (centroid mode) over the range 380–1,400 m/z with a mass resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). For MS1, the normalized AGC target (%) was set at 250 and maximum injection time was set to 100 ms. Selected ions were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energies of 34 and the tandem mass spectra were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer with the scan rate set to ‘Rapid’. The isolation window was set to the 0.7 m/z window. For MS2, the normalized AGC target (%) was set to ‘Standard’ and maximum injection time to 35 ms. Repeated sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 30 s. The maximum duty cycle length was set to 3 s. Relative changes in peptide concentration were determined at the MS3 level by isolating and fragmenting the five most dominant MS2 ion peaks.

DATA PROCESSING:
All raw files were searched using the Andromeda engine embedded in MaxQuant (v2). Reporter ion MS3 search was conducted using TMTpro (16-plex) isobaric labels. Variable modifications included oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation. Carbamidomthyl (C) was a fixed modification. The number of modifications per peptide was capped at five. Digestion was set to tryptic (proline-blocked). Database search was conducted using the UniProt proteome - Ecoli_UP000000625_83333. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. 1% FDR was determined using a reverse decoy proteome.  To calculate the proteome mass fraction of each mapped protein, we utilized the peptide feature information in MaxQuant’s evidence.txt output file. Each row of the evidence.txt file represents an independent peptide and its corresponding MS3 reporter ion measurements. Peptides without signal in any of the TMT channels were excluded. Peptide measurements were assigned to a protein based on MaxQuant’s ‘Leading razor protein’ designation. For each individual peptide measurement (i.e., each row in the evidence table), the fraction of ion intensity in each TMT channel was calculated by dividing the ‘Reporter ion intensity’ column by the sum of all reporter ion intensities. To correct for loading differences between the TMT channels, each reporter ion channel was then normalized by dividing the fraction of ion intensity in each channel by the median fraction for all measured peptides (i.e., the median value for each column). This normalization scheme ensures that each individual peptide measurement is equally weighted when correcting for loading error. To calculate proteome mass fractions, the MS1 precursor ion intensity of each peptide measured (the “Intensity” column in the evidence.txt table) was distributed between the individual MS3 reportion channels according to the loading-normalized value described. Protein-level ion intensities were then calculated for each TMT channel by summing together all peptides ion intensities for each protein.