PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Oxphos complex; Dhe3; Cross-linking; Human muscle biopsy; : interactome; Intra/inter cross-linked peptides; Dead-end peptides; Supercomplex; Xl-ms; Mitochondria; Thil.; Acadv

ABSTRACT:
In living systems, protein function relies on many interactions within a network called the interactome.  The majority of available interactome data has been acquired with isolated proteins and complexes, but understanding interactome changes in living systems is crucial to advance understanding of functional changes with diseases and for development of improved therapies.  With model animal systems, quantitative cross-linking mass spectrometry has been successfully applied to uniquely mitochondrial interactome changes with mitochondrial dysfunction both in heart failure and with age-related muscle function decline.  In this study, we investigated the feasibility of qualitative cross-linking mass spectrometry for mitochondrial interactome studies with clinically-relevant human muscle biopsy samples and amounts.  By analyzing biopsy samples from two volunteers, 3175 unique peptides from 322 mitochondrial proteins were identified from all mitochondrial subcompartments.  Many of the identified human biopsy cross-linked peptides were derived from protein complex and supercomplex assemblies that exhibited altered levels in model systems of heart failure and aging.  The findings demonstrate the initial feasibility that these and other cross-linked species can be detected in human muscle biopsy samples to enable future studies of age- and disease-related changes in mitochondrial structure-function relationships.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
On the feasibility of clinical studies with cross-linking mass spectrometry

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
212.5 and 206.5 mg of muscle tissue were obtained from two healthy male volunteers using a modified Bergstrom technique with suction.  Briefly, a subcutaneous injection of lidocaine was performed to numb the area over the vastus lateralis muscle. After 5 minutes an incision was made, then the Bergstrom biopsy needle was introduced into the incision, suction was applied and the trocar was introduced to clip the muscle biopsy. Following skeletal muscle biopsy, tissue was blotted until dry using a Kimwipe then weighed and placed in ice-cold BIOPS buffer for 20 minutes containing 2.77 mM CaK2EGTA, 7.23 mM K2EGTA, 5.77mM Na2ATP, 6.56 mM MgCl2•6H2O, 15 mM NaPCr, 20mM Imidazole, and 50 mM KMES pH 7.0. Samples were then transferred to a glass homogenizer with 1 mL mitochondrial isolation buffer per 5 mg tissue weight. Mitochondrial isolation buffer contained 210 mM Sucrose, 30 mM HEPES, 40 mM NaCl, and 2 mM EGTA, pH 7.4. Sample was homogenized for 1 minute until a uniform homogenate was achieved.  Homogenates were transferred to 15 ml conical tubes and centrifuged at 900 x g and 4 oC for 10 minutes. Mitochondrial supernatants were transferred to new tubes and centrifuged at 10,000 x g and 4 oC for 10 minutes to pellet mitochondria. Cytoplasmic fractions were aliquoted into new tubes and stored at -80 oC. Mitochondrial pellets were resuspended in 50 µl respiration buffer containing 110 mM Sucrose, 20 mM HEPES, 60 mM KMES, 10 mM KH2PO4, 3 mM MgCl2•6H2O, 0.5 mM EGTA, pH 7.1.  Mitochondrial protein concentration was measured by Bradford assay which indicated 1.0 mg and 0.7 mg total protein amounts were present in the mitochondrial isolates from each human muscle biopsy sample.

DATA PROCESSING:
For Mango analysis, .ms2 files were generated containing individual precursor masses of released peptides for each spectrum and .peaks files containing all relationships within a 20 ppm tolerance. Comet was used to search for the mzXML files against the whole human database downloaded from UniProt, containing both forward and reverse of 20,367 protein sequences.  Database search was accomplished with Comet using generated pep.XML files that were then analyzed with XLinkProphet to yield cross-link probabilities.  The cross-linking results were uploaded to XLinkDB with an estimated 1 % false discovery rate (FDR).  Cross-linking-derived protein-protein interaction networks were generated with Cytoscape (v3.10.3) and NGL viewer (v0.10.0) was used for visualization of protein structures.