PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Neuromelanin granules; Proteomics; Parkinson’s disease; Aging; Dementia with lewy bodies

ABSTRACT:
Physiological ageing is accompanied by numerous structural and molecular changes in the brain, with varying degrees in different brain areas, and is therefore considered one of the major risk factors for neurodegenerative diseases. As early pathomechanisms of neurodegeneration are often difficult to assess, analysing the ageing brain and its substructures may lead to insights into earliest alterations eventually leading to neurodegeneration. The present study focuses on elucidating age-related changes in the substantia nigra pars compacta, a brain region particularly vulnerable in Parkinson’s disease and its substructures. With a particular emphasis on neuromelanin granules we aimed to gain a spatially resolved view on aging-dependent alterations to draw conclusions on early processes potentially leading to neurodegeneration. Our findings, which included the identification of reduced levels of proteins involved in dopaminergic neurotransmission, suggest either a specific loss of dopaminergic neurons or a reduction in metabolic activity. Furthermore, we observed alterations in the abundances of mitochondrial proteins that are potentially indicative of an age-related shift in their localization within aged tissue donors. Consequently, the present exploratory study suggests that proteomic changes, frequently referred to as potential pathomechanisms of PD, namely dopaminergic dysfunction and aberrations in the mitochondrial population, are already occurring in the physiological aging process of the human SN

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A spatially resolved view on the aging substantia nigra: an exploratory proteomic study

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Substantia nigra (SN) tissue slices of eight control (CTRL, all male) patients, which are identified as controls based on a combination of clinical and pathological measures by the Navarrabiomed Brain Bank, were used. Of those, four patients had a mean age of 27.8 years and were defined as young cohort and four patients with a mean age of 76 years as old cohort. The SN tissue slices were stored at -80°C until further use. The isolation of neuromelanin granules (NMG) and SN. tissue was performed as previously reported. In brief, NMGs covering a tissue area of 500,000 µm² and surrounding SN tissue (SNsurr), covering a tissue area of of 1,000,000 µm² were isolated and collected in water-filled caps of non-adhesive microtubes (MicroTube 500, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH) using a PALM Micro Beam (P.A.L.M.-System, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH). Samples were lysed in formic acid (FA) and sonicated. Samples were subsequently dried in a vacuum-centrifuge (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany), and refilled with ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Digestion was carried out using trypsin, at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), samples were vacuum-dried again and peptides were stored in 20 µl of 0.1 % TFA at  80 °C. Liquid chromatography (LC) and mass spectrometry (MS) were carried out as described. Briefly, The LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Separation of peptides was performed at a flow rate of 400 nL/min with a linear gradient starting with 95 % solution A (0.1 % FA) and 5 % solution B (84 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA), up to 30% B at 105 min. The nano LC-system was directly coupled to the electrospray ionization source (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) of the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer operated within a scan range from 350 to 1,400 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 and a maximum injection time of 80 ms. In a fixed cycle time of 2 seconds, all precursor ions with an intensity above 1x104 were selected for fragmentation at a fixed collision energy of 28 % (HCD). Precursor ions selected for fragmentation were maintained on a dynamic exclusion list for 30 seconds. Fragment ion scans were performed at a resolution of 30,000 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data obtained by MS were analysed using MaxQuant (version: 1.6.10.43), with label free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) activated. Furthermore, trypsin was selected as the protease, with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. The spectra were compared against a MaxQuant contaminant database and a homo sapiens reference proteome (as of 20.03.2022) obtained from Uniprot (UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase in 2021 2021). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was chosen, which was determined using a reverse-decoy database obtained from MaxQuant. Oxidation of methionine, carbamidomethylation of the N-terminus and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were chosen as the dynamic modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as the static modification. The data sets obtained by MaxQuant were subsequently analysed with Perseus by first filtering out all decoys and contaminations and transforming the LFQ values logarithmically (log2(x)). For further analysis, only proteins were selected which could be identified in 75% of all samples in an age group. If values were missing, they were added by imputation using a normal distribution. A two-tailed Student's T-test was used to determine the significantly different proteins in both age groups. Proteins with a p-value below 0.05 were considered significant and analysed utilizing Gene Ontology association provided by Uniprot.