PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Histone turnover; Lc-ms; Hff cells; Single cel proteomics; Pulsed silac

ABSTRACT:
Single-cell proteomics (SCP) has advanced significantly, yet it remains largely unidimensional, focusing primarily on protein abundances. This limitation hinders our understanding of the dynamic processes occurring within individual cells, particularly protein turnover, which is crucial for cellular function and regulation. In this study, we employed a pulsed stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) approach to simultaneously evaluate protein abundance and turnover in single cells (SC-pSILAC). Using state-of-the-art SCP workflow, we demonstrated that two SILAC labels are detectable from ~4000 proteins in single HeLa cells recapitulating known biology. We investigated drug effects using protein synthesis and degradation inhibitors on global and specific protein turnover in single cells and performed a large-scale time-series SC-pSILAC analysis of undirected differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) encompassing six sampling times over two months and analyzed >1000 cells. Abundance measurements highlighted cell-specific markers of stem cells and various organ-specific cell types. Protein turnover dynamics highlighted differentiation-specific co-regulation of core members of protein complexes with core histone turnover discriminating dividing and non-dividing cells with potential in stem cell and cancer research. Lastly, correlating the abundance of individual proteins from cells displaying a wide range of diameters show that histones and some proteins involved in the cell cycle do not scale with cell size confirming previous observations in yeast. Our study represents the most comprehensive SCP analysis to date, offering new insights into cellular diversity and pioneering functional post-translational measurements beyond protein abundance. This method not only distinguishes SCP from other single-cell omics approaches and enhances its scientific relevance in biological research in a multidimensional manner but also showcase the discovery potential of SCP in fundamental biology.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Global analysis of protein turnover dynamics in single cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell sorting Cells were detached using trypLE select (Gibco), fresh medium was added to dilute the tryplE and cells were centrifuged at 400 x g for 3 min then washed twice with Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) (Gibco) with centrifugation in-between, before being resuspended in degassed PBS with thorough pipetting. The cell concentration was adjusted to ∼200 cells/μl with degassed PBS. 1 cell, 10 cells or 20 cells were sorted into either label-free, LF-48 or Evo96 proteoCHIPs (Cellenion) onto pre-dispensed lysis and digestion buffer consisting of 0.2% n-Dodecyl-β-D-Maltoside (DDM), 100 mM TEAB, 10 ng/µl lysyl endopeptidase and 20 ng/µl trypsin56. For each condition a bulk sample was also collected by taking 1 µl of cell suspension and mixing it with 1 µl of lysis and digestion buffer. The digestion was conducted at 50℃ for 1.5 hours and quenched by adding 4 µl of 0.1% formic acid to the wells. The oil present on the plate was frozen by placing the chips in the fridge and then transferred on ice. Lastly samples were loaded onto pre-equilibrated Evotips (Evosep) following manufacturer’s protocol and stored in the fridge prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis Evotips containing the samples were loaded on an Evosep One (EvoSep Biosystems) LC system connected to an Orbitrap Astral MS (ThermoFischer Scientific). Samples were analyzed in 40SPD (31-min gradient) using a commercial analytical column (Aurora Elite TS, IonOpticks) interfaced online using an EASY-Spray™ source. The Orbitrap Astral MS was operated at a full MS resolution of 240,000 with a full scan range of 380 − 980 m/z when stated. The full MS AGC was set to 500% or 30 ms. MS/MS scans were recorded with 4 Th isolation window, 6 ms maximum ion injection time. MS/MS scanning range was from 380-980 m/z were used. The isolated ions were fragmented using HCD with 27% NCE.

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein identification and quantification was performed on Spectronaut v 19 (Biognosys) with a spectral library-free approach (directDIA + ) using the human protein reference database (Uniprot 2022 release, 20,588 sequences) complemented with common contaminants (246 sequences). Default settings were used, except that “channel1” was added with no modification and “channel2” with Lys8 and Arg10 and that carbamidomethylation was not included in the fixed modifications. Exclusion of interfering fragments is added by default and cross-run normalization was removed. Data were analyzed using R.