PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cardiac gastric gland; Cell culture
diseases: Cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: TMT
keywords: Synthetic circular rna; microrna sponge; microrna loss of function; gastric carcinoma; gene therapy

ABSTRACT:
MicroRNA (miRNA) sponges containing miRNA complementary binding sites constitute a potentially useful strategy for miRNA-inhibition therapeutics in cancer patients. Recently, naturally occurring circular RNAs (circRNAs) have been revealed to function as efficient microRNA sponges. We hypothesized that synthetic circRNA sponges targeting oncomiRs could be constructed and used to achieve potentially therapeutic microRNA loss of function. In this study, linear RNA molecules containing five miR-21 binding sites were transcribed in vitro. After dephosphorylation by calf intestinal phosphatase and phosphorylation by T4 polynucleotide kinase, circRNA sponges were circularized using 5’-3’ end ligation by T4 RNA ligase 1. Synthetic circular sponge stability was assayed in the presence of RNase R or fetal bovine serum. Luciferase reporter and cell proliferation assays were performed to assess competitive inhibition of miR-21 activity by circRNA sponges in NCI-N87 gastric cancer cells. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling proteomics analysis and Western blotting were performed to delineate effects of circRNA sponges on miR-21 downstream targeted proteins. Our experiments revealed that artificial circRNA sponges can be synthesized using enzymatic ligation. These synthetic circRNA sponges are more resistant than their linear RNA counterparts to nuclease degradation in vitro. They effectively suppress the activity of miR-21 on its downstream protein targets, including the important cancer protein DAXX. Finally, they also inhibit gastric cancer cell proliferation. Our results suggest that synthetic circRNA sponges represent a rapid, effective, convenient strategy to achieve loss of miRNA function in vitro, with potential future therapeutic application in vivo.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Synthetic circular RNA functions as a miR-21 sponge to suppress gastric carcinoma cell proliferation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labeling and Proteomics Sample Preparation NCI-N87 cells were transfected in a 6-well plate with 420 ng per well of either scRNA21, nscRNA, or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) blank control using Lipofectamine RNAiMax (Invitrogen); a specific synthetic circRNA directed against miR-93 was also included as an experimental control. Because we reasoned that some downstream proteomic effects of scRNAs would occur shortly after treatment, while others might take longer to become apparent, total protein was extracted from treated and control cells at three different treatment time intervals: at 1 h, 8 h, and 24 h after transfection. Cells were harvested and washed with ice-cold PBS 5 times to remove serum proteins. The cells were then scraped using 0.1 ml 2% SDS containing freshly prepared 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM EDTA per well of each 6-well plate, while maintaining the cells at 4°C. The lysate was sonicated on ice using 20% power input for 5 seconds followed by a 10-second gap, repeated 20 times or until the cloudy cell lysate became clear. The lysate was then centrifuged to remove any pellet. Total protein concentration was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kits (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). An SDS-page gel stained with Protea's Super Coomassie Blue was performed to confirm that samples were reproducible. Samples were aliquoted for subsequent proteomic analyses and Western Blotting.  TMT Labeling and Liquid Chromatography−Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) Analyses  Ten samples (NCI-N87 cells were transfected with either scRNA21, nscRNA, or PBS blank control at 1 h, 8 h, and 24 h after transfection, or transfected with synthetic circRNA directed against miR-93 at 8 h after transfection), each containing 50 ug protein, were reduced in 5 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1h at 57°C, then alkylated with in mmol/L iodoacetamide. Proteins were precipitated with TCA/acetone overnight, re-constituted in 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and proteolyzed with trypsin (Promega, V511A). For quantification, peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tags according to the manufacturer’s guidelines (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides in the combined TMT labeled sample were then fractionated by basic reverse phase (bRP) chromatography on an Agilent HPLC system using XBridge C18 Guard Column (Waters, Milford, MA). The resulting 24 bRP fractions were analyzed by LC−MS/MS using a Nano-Acquity HPLC system (Waters) interfaced with a QExactive HF (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap (S-10µM, 120Å, 75 µm x 2 cm, YMC, Japan) in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography in-line with a 75 μm x 150 mm ProntoSIL-120-5-C18 H column (5µm, 120Å, BISCHOFF). Peptides eluting during the 2%-90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid gradient over 90 min were directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer through a 1 µm emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA) at 2.0 kV.  Survey scans (full MS) were acquired from 350-1700 m/z with up to 15 peptide masses (precursor ions), each individually isolated in a 1.0 Da window and fragmented using HCD activation collision energy at 32 and 30 s dynamic exclusion. Precursor and fragment ions were analyzed at 120,000 and 60,000 resolution, respectively.  Isotopically resolved masses in precursor (MS) and fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra were extracted from raw MS data with and without deconvolution using the Thermo Scientific Xtract or MS2 Processor in Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (http://portal.thermo-brims.com/). All extracted data were searched using Mascot v2.5.1 (www.matrixscience.com) against the 2015RefSeq_72r_human protein database with the added enzymes and BSA, using the following criteria: trypsin as the enzyme, allowing two missed cleavage; cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT 10-plex on N-terminus as fixed modifications; methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and TMT 10plex on lysine as variable modifications. Peptide identifications from Mascot searches were filtered at 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) confidence threshold, based on a concatenated decoy database search. Proteome Discoverer uses TMT reporter ions for quantification only from the peptide identifications with the highest Mascot score from the three different extraction methods of the same peptide matched spectrum (PSM). Protein quantification is based on the normalized median ratio of all spectra of tagged peptides from the same protein.

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteomic data derived from a 10-plex TMT labeling Mass-Spec analysis using the Proteome Discoverer platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA USA) were imported into Partek Genomics Suite v6.6 (Partek Inc. Saint Louis MO, USA) for protein annotation and further analysis. One or more mass spectra were assigned to each NCBI gi identifier, which represented a single protein, and for each protein the median of these multiple spectra values was calculated to produce a single value representing that protein. These protein identifiers were mapped to their cognate NCBI Entrez genes to facilitate downstream analyses. Only those spectra with a Proteome Discoverer Isolation Interference value of <30% were accepted for further evaluation. The values of these human proteins were converted to log2 notation for statistical analysis and quantile-normalized to minimize possible noise and experimental variation across the ten experimental samples. For QC, Partek Genomics Studio was used to create boxplots and PCA plots to detect possible outliers. Different pairs of biological samples’ values were compared, yielding linear and log2 fold change values for each protein/gene.  To examine differential protein expression further, these results were imported into Spotfire DecisionSite with Functional Genomics v9.1.2 (TIBCO Spotfire, Boston, MA, USA). To characterize the proteins’ fold changes, their log2 values underwent standard deviation (SD) analyses, allowing us to set appropriate fold-change thresholds of differential expression

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Differential miR-21 Expression in TCGA Patients
446 GC and 45 normal samples with miR sequence data were retrieved from the TCGA data portal. After the data were combined and data without expression were filtered out, differential miR expression analysis was carried out using the Bioconductor package EdgeR, based on R Project version 3.5.1. Read counts were normalized, and miRs with fold changes >1.5 and p < 0.05 were selected.
Cell Lines
The human GC cell lines NCI-N87, KATOIII, AGS, and MKN28 were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). The human immortalized normal gastric epithelial cell line HFE145 was obtained from Dr. Hassan Ashktorab (Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA) and Dr. Duane Smoot (Department of Medicine, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN, USA). All five cell lines were cultured in DMEM (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 1% penicillin-streptomycin (GIBCO) and 10% FBS (GIBCO).
RNA Extraction
Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
qRT-PCR Analysis of miR-21 Expression Assays
TaqMan miR assays, human (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) were used to assess miR-21 expression. Threshold cycle (Ct) was normalized to RNU6B expression. Fold change in miR-21 level was calculated using the 2−ΔΔCt method. All qRT-PCR assays were performed in duplicate.
Circular Sponge Design
To engender resistance to Argonaute 2-mediated endonucleolytic cleavage, we designed each miR-21 binding site as perfectly complementary to the miR-21 seed region, but with a bulge (mismatch) at positions 9–12 caused by deleting one nucleotide. We incorporated a bulge because linear bulged miR sponges are more effective than perfectly complementary sponges in competing with regulation of natural miR targets. The sequence of each miR-21 binding site was 5′-TCAACATCAGGACATAAGCTA-3′. A short 4-nt sequence (“spacer”) was inserted to separate the two miR-21 binding sites.
To produce linear RNA molecules, two sense and antisense DNA oligonucleotides, each containing three or two miR-21 bulged binding sites, respectively, separated by a “spacer,” were first ordered (IDT, Coralville, IA, USA). These oligonucleotides each contained a 19- to 21-nt region at their respective 3′ ends that allowed them to hybridize to one another after heat denaturation. The sequences of the two oligonucleotides were 5′-GATTCCTTGGTCAACATCAGGACATAAGCTACCAATCAACATCAGGACATAAGCTACCAATCAACATCAGGACATAAGCTAAATGCTGAT-3′ (sense) and 5′-TAGCTTATGTCCTGATGTTGACCAATAGCTTATGTCCTGATGTTGACCAAATCAGCATTTAGCTTATGTCC-3′ (antisense).
As a control, a sponge containing a scrambled seed sequence was also designed and constructed. The sequence of each miR-21 scrambled site was 5′-ACTTAGTGTCTATGCGTATGT-3′. This sequence was predicted by BLAST to not bind to any known human miR (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). The sequences of the two scrambled oligonucleotides were 5′-ACTTAGTGTCTATGCGTATGTCCAAACTTAGTGTCTATGCGTATGTCCAAATCAGCATTACTTAGTGTC-3′ (sense) and 5′-GATTCCTTGGACATACGCATAGACACTAAGTCCAAACATACGCATAGACACTAAGTCCAAACATACGCATAGACACTAAGTAATGCTGAT-3′ (antisense).
A specific synthetic circRNA directed against miR-93 was also designed and constructed as another experimental control. The sequences of the two oligonucleotides were 5′-TTCCTTGGCTACCTGCACGTGTGCACTTTGCCAACTACCTGCACGTGTGCACTTTGCCTTCTACCTGCACGTGTGCACTTTGAATGCTGA-3′ (sense) and 5′-CAAAGTGCACACGTGCAGGTAGCCAACAAAGTGCACACGTGCAGGTAGCCAATCAGCATTCAAAGTGCACACG-3′ (antisense).
Circular Sponge Synthesis
To synthesize the scRNA21, we generated a double-stranded DNA PCR product by one cycle of overlap PCR. Overlapping, complementary 3′ ends allowing the two oligomers to anneal to one another after heating were used as template DNA for PCR to create the full-length product. The product was then cloned into the pCR 4-TOPO TA vector (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and transformed into Escherichia coli (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Plasmid DNA was extracted using QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kits (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA). Plasmid DNA was subsequently digested with BamHI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) and purified by QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit (QIAGEN). Large quantities of 5′-monophosphorylated linear RNA were synthesized by T7 RNA polymerase using HiScribe T7 High Yield RNA Synthesis Kits (New England Biolabs): approximately 150 μg of RNA could be transcribed from 1 μg of template DNA. After purification by RNeasy MinElute Cleanup Kits (QIAGEN), the linear RNA was treated with calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (New England Biolabs) and then by T4 polynucleotide kinase (New England Biolabs) in the presence of ATP, to provide a phosphorylated 5′ terminus (required for ligation). Finally, the linear RNA was circularized using T4 RNA ligase 1 (New England Biolabs). A scrambled control circRNA (negative control scrambled circRNA) (described above) and a specific synthetic circRNA directed against miR-93 were also synthesized using the same methods.
RT-PCR and Sanger Sequencing of Synthetic circRNA Sponges
After reverse transcription, divergent primers, 5′-AGCACACTGGCGGCCGTTAC-3′ (sense) and 5′-ATATCCATCACACTGGCGG-3′ (antisense), were used to amplify a DNA PCR fragment containing the head-to-tail circRNA junction point. Convergent primers, 5′-AATTGGGCCCTCTAGATGCA-3′ (sense) and 5′-ACTAGTAACGGCCGCCAGTG-3′ (antisense), were used to amplify a DNA PCR fragment containing the five repeat miR binding sites. PCR products were then cloned and subsequently sequenced.
Stability Assays of Synthetic circRNA Sponges
Increasing Concentrations of FBS Digestion
Because several types of RNA exonucleases and endonucleases are enriched in serum, and because a future goal is to administer circRNAs intravenously, we compared the stability of scRNA21 and its sequence-identical LRNA21 by incubating 0.5 μg of each RNA with increasing concentrations of FBS (from 0% to 9%) at 37°C for 30 min.
RNase R Digestion
To evaluate circRNA resistance to a specific ribonuclease, we incubated scRNA21 and LRNA21 with or without RNase R (Epicenter Biotechnologies) at 37°C for 10 min. Ratios after incubation with either 1 U RNase R/1 μg RNA or 3 U RNase R/1 μg RNA were then calculated. Finally, RNAs were analyzed by 2.0% TAE-agarose gel electrophoresis; band intensities were determined using ImageJ software, and relative ratios were calculated.
Luciferase Reporter Assays
A luciferase reporter vector containing the miR-21 binding site was constructed by inserting annealed miR-21 binding site (IDT) into the pmirGLO vector (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), using PmeI and XbaI restriction enzymes (New England Biolabs). At 70%–80% confluence, NCI-N87, AGS, and MKN28, which express high endogenous levels of miR-21 based on our qRT-PCR results (described in Results), were co-transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) with 15 nM of either negative control scrambled circRNA or miR-21 inhibitor (MH10206; Thermo Fisher Scientific) or scRNA21, together with 80 ng of either luciferase reporter plasmid containing the miR-21 binding site, or empty pmirGLO vector per well of a 96-well plate. 24 hr after transfection, cells were analyzed for luciferase activity using a Dual-Glo Luciferase Assay Kit (Promega) and VICTOR2 fluorometry (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to that of Renilla luciferase. All transfections were performed in triplicate, whereas luciferase activity was averaged from duplicate experiments.
Transfection of Synthetic circRNAs and Cell Proliferation Assays
NCI-N87, AGS, and MKN28 were transfected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) with 15 nM of either negative control scrambled circRNA or miR-21 inhibitor or scRNA21 per well of a six-well plate. Cells were re-seeded onto 96-well plates at a density of 1,000 cells/well at day 0 (24 hr after RNA transfection). Cell proliferation was assessed at days 0, 1, 3, and 5 using the cell proliferation reagent WST-1 (Roche, Mannheim, Germany).
Immunofluorescence Staining
NCI-N87, AGS, and MKN28 were transfected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX with 15 nM of either negative control scrambled circRNA or scRNA21. 24 hr after transfection, cells were fixed in acetone. Primary antibodies were rabbit anti-cleaved caspase-3 (1:400; #9661; Cell Signaling Technology), and secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG (1:500; A-11034; Invitrogen). Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
TMT Labeling and Proteomics Analyses
NCI-N87 cells were transfected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) in six-well plates with 15 nM per well of scRNA21, negative control scrambled circRNA, or PBS blank control; a specific synthetic circRNA directed against miR-93 was also assayed as an experimental control. Because we reasoned that some downstream proteomic effects of scRNAs would occur shortly after treatment, whereas others might take longer to become apparent, total protein was extracted from treated and control cells at three different treatment time intervals: at 1, 8, and 24 hr after transfection.
TMT labeling, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, and proteomics analyses were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD008584.
Bioinformatics Analyses
Proteomic data derived from a 10-plex TMT labeling Mass-Spec analysis using the Proteome Discoverer platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were imported into Partek Genomics Suite v6.6 (Partek, St. Louis, MO, USA) for protein annotation and further analysis. One or more mass spectra were assigned to each NCBI gi identifier, which represented a single protein, and for each protein the median of these multiple spectra values was calculated to produce a single value representing that protein. These protein identifiers were mapped to their cognate NCBI Entrez genes to facilitate downstream analyses. Only those spectra with a Proteome Discoverer Isolation Interference value <30% were accepted for further evaluation. The values of these human proteins were converted to log2 notation for statistical analysis and quantile-normalized to minimize possible noise and experimental variation across the 10 experimental samples. For quality control (QC), Partek Genomics Studio was used to create boxplots and principal components analysis (PCA) plots to detect possible outliers. Different pairs of biological samples’ values were compared, yielding linear and log2 fold change values for each protein and its associated gene counterpart.
To examine differential protein expression further, these results were imported into Spotfire DecisionSite with Functional Genomics v9.1.2 (TIBCO Spotfire, Boston, MA, USA). To characterize the proteins’ fold changes, their log2 values underwent SD analyses, allowing us to set appropriate fold change thresholds of differential expression.
Western Blotting
Total protein was extracted from NCI-N87 and AGS, after transfection with either PBS blank control, negative control scrambled circRNA, or scRNA21, at four different treatment time intervals: 1 hr, 8 hr, 24 hr, and 5 days. Mouse anti-Daxx (H-7; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and anti-β-actin peroxidase (AC-15; Sigma-Aldrich), horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen), and ECL Western Blotting detection kits (Amersham-Pharmacia Biotech) were used.
Statistical Analyses
Means and SD were displayed as representative values for data in the figures. ANOVA with post hoc test of means and Student’s unpaired t test were used to assess statistical significance, which was done with SPSS (version 14.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA), unless otherwise noted. p < 0.05 was regarded as significant.
Data Availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD008584.

RESULTS:
Results
miR-21 Is Overexpressed in The Cancer Genome Atlas Patients
Based on miR sequence data from 446 GC and 45 normal samples within The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 185 aberrantly expressed miRs were identified, with 137 (74.1%) upregulated and 48 (25.9%) downregulated. miR-21, our miR of interest, was upregulated 1.76-fold in GC versus normal samples (p = 6.50e−43; Figure 1A).
miR-21 Is Aberrantly Overexpressed in Gastric Cancer Cells
Using TaqMan qRT-PCR analysis, relative to the normal gastric epithelial cell line HFE145, we found significant overexpression of miR-21 in NCI-N87 (fold changes 4.2; p < 0.0001), KATOIII (fold changes 1.9; p = 0.034), AGS (fold changes 2.2; p = 0.007), and MKN28 (fold changes 4.4; p < 0.0001) (Figure 1B). We chose NCI-N87, AGS, and MKN28 for subsequent studies because miR-21 was expressed at higher levels than in KATOIII cells.
circRNA Sponges Can Be Correctly and Successfully Synthesized In Vitro
Our strategy for RNA circularization in vitro used enzymatic ligation of synthetic linear RNA containing five repeated miR bulged binding sites (Figure 2). Accurate construction of circRNA sponges was validated by RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing. RT-PCR results confirmed that divergent primers generated the expected 100-nt product only from the circular (scRNA21) template RNA, but not from the corresponding linear (LRNA21) template RNA. In contrast, convergent primers generated the expected product from both circular and linear RNA templates (Figure 3A). Moreover, the head-to-tail circRNA junction point (a unifying characteristic of all circRNAs) was validated only in divergent PCR products generated from scRNA21 (Figure 3B). Five repeated miR-21 bulged (mismatched) binding sites were verified in convergent PCR products generated from both LRNA21 and scRNA21 sponges (Figure 3C). The head-to-tail junction and five repeated scrambled sites were also confirmed in a negative control scrambled circRNA.
A circRNA Sponge Is More Resistant to Nuclease Degradation Than Its Linear Counterpart RNA
Resistance to nuclease-mediated degradation of the scRNA21 sponge was compared with that of its linear counterpart LRNA21, first using fetal bovine serum (FBS)-mediated degradation. LRNA21 was 92% degraded in 4% FBS after 30 min (Figure 4A). In contrast, the scRNA21 was significantly more stable, being only 9% degraded after 30 min (p < 1 × 10−4). In fact, the scRNA21 was degraded only in FBS at concentrations of 7% or higher. Stabilities of the circular and linear RNAs were then compared after digestion with the specific exonuclease, RNase R. LRNA21 was 94% or 97% degraded with 1 or 3 U RNase R/1 μg RNA, respectively; in contrast, the scRNA21 was only 9% or 14% degraded (p = 8 × 10−4 and p = 1.2 × 10−3, respectively; Figure 4B).
Functional Efficacy of a Synthetic circRNA miR Sponge
To assess the functional effectiveness of our synthetic circular miR-21 sponge, we assayed normalized firefly luciferase activity (i.e., firefly luciferase activity/Renilla luciferase activity) in NCI-N87, AGS, and MKN28 GC cells 24 hr after co-transfection. Relative to a luciferase reporter plasmid lacking any miR-21 binding sites, decreased normalized firefly luciferase activity was observed in all three cell lines upon co-transfection of a luciferase reporter plasmid containing miR-21 binding sites with a negative control scrambled circRNA (Figure 5A). Firefly luciferase activity was restored when the luciferase reporter plasmid containing multiple miR-21 binding sites was co-transfected with a conventional linear miR-21 inhibitor. Notably, even greater restoration of luciferase activity was observed when cells were co-transfected with our scRNA21 (Figure 5A). These findings confirmed the functional effectiveness of scRNA21 as a miR-21 sponge.
Subsequently, we evaluated the effects of scRNA21 on proliferation in NCI-N87, AGS, and MKN28 GC cells by WST-1 assays. On day 5, a significantly decreased cell proliferation was observed in all three cell lines after transfection with our scRNA21, relative to either a scrambled control circRNA or a conventional miR-21 inhibitor (Figure 5B).
Next, we assessed the functional effects of scRNA21 on apoptosis. 24 hr after transfection of either negative control scrambled circRNA or scRNA21, we measured cleaved caspase-3 levels in NCI-N87, AGS, and MKN28 GC cells. scRNA21 induced increased apoptosis, evidenced by significantly higher cleaved caspase-3 levels than with negative control scrambled circRNA in all three GC cell lines (Figure 6).
Downstream Proteomic Effects of a Synthetic Circular miR Sponge
Effects of our scRNA21 on global protein expression were then comprehensively analyzed. Because oncomiRs exert at least some effects on target mRNAs by altering their translation into proteins, we performed pan-proteomic screening using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling to delineate proteins whose levels were altered by scRNA21. These experiments generated a list of 6,314 individual proteins. According to target prediction by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, 235 of these 6,314 proteins represented putative direct binding targets of miR-21. 19 of these 235 proteins increased by a fold change at least two SDs above control levels (Table S1). Protein levels of these predicted direct miR-21 targets, which should be downregulated by miR-21, were restored after scRNA21 treatment (which is expected to antagonize miR-21; Figures 7A–7C). We then further explored these 19 proteins in the COSMIC consensus cancer gene database: only 1 of these 19, the death domain-associated tumor suppressor protein DAXX, was found in the COSMIC consensus cancer gene list. Therefore, Daxx was selected for further study, due to its known tumor-suppressive function and based on its fold change increase of >2 SDs 8 hr after scRNA21 treatment.
To validate our TMT results, we then performed western blotting using an anti-DAXX antibody. These experiments confirmed restoration of DAXX protein levels 8 hr after scRNA transfection of two GC cell lines, NCI-N87 and AGS (Figure 8). These data demonstrate the functional activity of scRNA21 against a specific miR-21 downstream target tumor suppressor gene.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Gastric carcinoma (GC) remains the fifth most common cancer and the third highest cause of cancer death worldwide, with 984,000 new cases and 841,000 deaths in 2013. Most GC cases are diagnosed at late stages with consequent poor outcomes, for which treatment is largely restricted to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Fortunately, as our understanding of gastric molecular carcinogenesis deepens, novel potential therapeutic strategies based on molecular target therapies are now being discovered.
MicroRNAs (miRs) are small non-coding RNAs that mediate post-transcriptional silencing of 30% of protein-coding genes by base pairing between the miR seed region (2–8 nucleotides) and target 3′ UTRs of mRNAs. Dysregulated miRs can act as oncogenes (oncomiRs) or tumor suppressor genes (ts-miRs), and play important roles in tumorigenesis and progression. miR-21, one of the most well-characterized oncomiRs, is overexpressed in GC. Elevated expression of miR-21 has been implicated in critical GC-related processes, including proliferation, invasion, and apoptosis, by inhibiting tumor suppressor genes such as PDCD4 and RECK. Thus, miR-21 represents an appealing therapeutic target. Moreover, linear sponge RNAs containing binding sites for specific miRs have been shown to induce miR loss-of-function.
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a new class of unique RNAs with single-stranded, covalently closed, continuous loop structures. circRNAs are produced by “backsplicing” or “head-to-tail splicing” of linear RNAs. Due to their circularity, lack of 5′ to 3′ polarity, and absence of polyadenylated tails, circRNAs are more stable and resistant to exonuclease degradation than linear RNAs. Naturally occurring endogenous circRNAs can contain selectively conserved miR binding sites, thereby functioning as efficient miR “sponges” and counteracting miRs. Thus, recent circRNA research has provided promising new insights into miR regulation. However, to our knowledge, the construction and use of synthetic artificial circRNAs targeting specific oncomiRs (i.e., synthetic circRNA sponges) have not yet been explored.
In the current study, we hypothesized that a synthetic circRNA could function as a miR-21 sponge to suppress GC proliferation. We used enzymatic ligation to synthesize a circRNA containing several miR-21 bulged (i.e., partially mismatched) binding sites in vitro. This circRNA was shown to be more resistant to nuclease degradation than its linear counterpart RNA. We then assessed competitive inhibition of miR-21 activity by the circRNA, as well as its inhibition of GC cell proliferation, dysregulation of global protein expression, and upregulation of a known miR-21 tumor suppressor gene target, DAXX. We conclude that synthetic circRNA sponges represent a rapid, convenient, effective strategy for achieving miR loss-of-function in vitro, with substantial potential for future application in human gastric cancer patients.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information includes one table and can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtn.2018.09.010.