PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Pre-eclampsia; Endometrium; Sgk1; Pregnancy; Placentation; Mechanobiology; Plgf

ABSTRACT:
After menstruation the uterine spiral arteries are repaired through angiogenesis. This process is tightly regulated by the paracrine communication between endometrial stromal cells (EnSCs) and endothelial cells. Any molecular aberration in these processes can lead to complications in pregnancy including miscarriage or pre-eclampsia (PE). Placental growth factor (PlGF) can increase cell stiffness contributing to pathological angiogenesis but the biomechanisms remain poorly understood. In this study, we investigated whether PlGF contributes to pathological uterine vasculature by disrupting EnSCs and endothelial paracrine communication. We observed that PlGF mediates a tonicity-independent activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells 5 (NFAT5) in EnSCs. NFAT5 activated downstream targets including SGK1, HIF-1α and VEGF-A. In depth characterization of PlGF - conditioned medium (CM) from EnSCs using mass spectrometry and ELISA methods revealed low VEGF-A and an abundance of extracellular matrix organization associated proteins. Secreted factors in PlGF-CM impeded normal angiogenic cues in endothelial cells (HUVECs) by downregulating Notch-VEGF signalling. Interestingly, PlGF-CM failed to support human placental (BeWo) cell invasion through HUVEC monolayer. Inhibition of SGK1 in EnSCs improved angiogenic effects in HUVECs and promoted BeWo invasion, revealing SGK1 as a key intermediate player modulating PlGF mediated anti-angiogenic signalling. Taken together, perturbed PlGF-NFAT5-SGK1 mechano-signaling in the endometrium can contribute to pathological uterine angiogenesis by negatively regulating EnSCs -endothelial crosstalk resulting in poor quality vessels in the uterine microenvironment. Taken together the signaling may impact on normal trophoblast invasion and thus placentation and, may be associated with an increased risk of complications such as PE.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Placental growth factor mediates pathological uterine vasculature by activating the NFAT5-SGK1 mechano-signaling axis in the endometrium: Implications for pre-eclampsia development.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Conditioned medium (Supernatant) was collected from EnSCs treated with and without PlGF as mentioned above. For precipitation of protein from conditioned medium, 100 % acetone (ice cold): 100% MeOH (ice cold): protein solution was mixed at a ratio of 8:1:1, followed by incubation at -20 °C overnight. Post incubation the samples were washed (2X) at 2,500 g, 4 °C for 20 mins. Post washing, the supernatant was then aspirated, and the pellet was air dried.

DATA PROCESSING:
max quant 1.6.7.0, match between runs enabled, labe free quantiifcation enabled

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell culture
Primary human EnSCs (#T0533, Applied Biological Materials Inc) were cultured at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere in DMEM/F-12 medium (#11039-021, Invitrogen) containing 10% (v/v) dextran coated charcoal stripped (#C6241, Sigma-Aldrich) fetal bovine serum (#10270-106, Invitrogen), 1% (v/v) antibiotic-antimycotic solution (#15240-062, Invitrogen) and 1% (v/v) L-glutamine (#25030-024, Invitrogen). Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) (#C-12,203, Sigma-Aldrich) and GFP-tagged HUVECs (#P20201, Innoprot) were cultured in endothelial growth medium (#C-22,010, PromoCell) with 1% (v/v) antibiotic-antimycotic solution (#15240-062, Invitrogen). Human trophoblast cell line, BeWo cells (#86,082,803, Sigma-Aldrich) were cultured in DMEM/F-12 medium (#11039-021, Invitrogen) containing 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (#10270-106, Invitrogen). All work was carried out in a Class I laminar flow hood. All cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma (every 3 months) and always gave a negative result.
Treatment and transfection of EnSCs
Before treatment or transfection of EnSCs, the culture medium was changed to fresh DMEM containing 2% (v/v) dextran coated charcoal stripped fetal bovine serum, 1% (v/v) antibiotic-antimycotic solution and 1% (v/v) L-glutamine for serum starvation. EnSCs were subjected to treatment with PlGF (#P1588, PlGF-1, Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 20 ng/ml for 6 days. The concentration was determined by a kinetic assay and time course experiments (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). For hyperosmolarity treatment in EnSCs, cells were treated with 800 mOsm in 2% DCC DMEM for 6 h. For gene silencing experiments, EnSCs were treated with siSGK1 (50 nM, #L-003027-00-0005, Dharmacon). The siRNAs were transfected with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (#13,778,075, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 48 h with and without additional PlGF treatment. Stromal cell cultures were first treated with PlGF (20 ng/ml) for 4 days followed by transfection with SGK1 siRNA or in combination with PlGF for 48 h, and then continued with PlGF treatment for a further 2 days. The experimental groups are classified as Con (untreated EnSCs), PlGF, siSGK1 and siSGK1 + PlGF. Dimethyloxalylglycine, N-(Methoxyoxoacetyl)-glycine methyl ester (DMOG) (#D3695; Sigma-Aldrich) treatment in EnSCs was carried out for 24 h at a concentration of 0.5 mM.
Conditioned medium treatment of HUVECs
Post 6 days PlGF treatment in EnSCs, cell supernatant was collected as conditioned medium (CM). The control-CM (untreated) / PlGF-CM / siSGK1 CM / siSGK1 + PlGF CM were collected respectively and stored at -80 °C until processing. HUVECs were split and plated onto cell culture plates at a density as required. Post cell adhesion, the HUVECs were treated with respective conditioned medium diluted with HUVEC growth medium at 1:1 dilution factor and incubated at 37 °C for 48 h. HUVECs were treated with Dimethyloxalylglycine, N-(Methoxyoxoacetyl)-glycine methyl ester (DMOG) (#D3695; Sigma-Aldrich) to induce hypoxia for 24 h. VEGF-A (#PHC9391, ThermoFisher Scientific) treatment was carried out for 24 h at a concentration of 40 ng/ml to induce vascular permeability. The experimental groups in HUVECs are classified as Con-CM, PlGF-CM, siSGK1-CM and siSGK1 + PlGF-CM.
Quantitative real time-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
Post treatment, cells were collected for downstream analysis of messenger RNA (mRNA) extraction and Quantitative Real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Total RNA was extracted using TRizol™ reagent (#15,596,026, Invitrogen). One µg RNA was utilized to synthesize cDNA using the ThermoFisher Scientific Maxima™ H Minus cDNA Synthesis Master Mix with dsDNase (#M1681, Invitrogen). qRT-PCR was performed on the QuantStudio 3 Real-Time PCR System (Invitrogen) by using sets of gene-specific primers and the PowerUp™ SYBR® Green Master Mix (#A25742, Invitrogen). The relative differences in PCR product amounts were quantified by the ΔΔCT method, using ribosomal L19 (L19) as an internal housekeeping control. Experiments were performed in triplicate (technical replicates). Melting curve was used to confirm amplification specificity. The gene expression levels of the samples are provided as arbitrary units defined by the ΔΔCt method. All the gene-specific primers used in this study were designed using primeblast (NCBI) and purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The primer sequence can be provided on request.
Western blotting
Whole cell protein lysate was extracted from EnSCs cultured on 6-well plates (approx. 1 × 106 at time of harvesting) using hot 1X Laemmli buffer with a cell scraper as previously reported. Lamelli lysis buffer contains 0.5 M Tris hydrochloride (#9090.1, Roth) pH 6.8, 20% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (#151-21-3, Sigma-Aldrich), 0.1% Bromophenol blue (#34725-61-6, Serva),1% beta mercaptoethanol (#60-24-2, Sigma-Aldrich), and 20% glycerol (#56-81-5, Roth). Whole cell protein lysates were collected and heated at 95 °C for 3 min. Protein extracts were then loaded on to a 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel (SDS-PAGE) using the XCell SureLock® Mini-Cell apparatus (Invitrogen) followed by electrophoresis. The protein from the gel was then transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (#10,600,003, GE HealthCare). After incubation with 5% non-fat milk or BSA in TBST (10 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Tween 20) for 60 min, the membrane was washed once with TBST and incubated with primary antibodies against NFAT5 (1:2000, #NB20-3446, Novus Biologicals), SGK1 (1:1000, #07-315, Merck), phospho-SGK1 (1:1000, #36 − 002, Merck), p38 MAPK (1:1000, #8690S, Cell Signaling Technologies), phospho-p38 MAPK (1:1000, #4511, Cell Signaling Technologies), VEGF-A (1:3000, #ab46154, abcam), VEGFR1 (1:1000, #2893, Cell Signaling Technologies), VEGFR2 (1:1000, #2479, Cell Signaling Technologies), or GAPDH (1:1000, #5174, Cell Signaling Technologies) at 4 °C for overnight. Membranes were then washed three times for 15 min and incubated with HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary (1:2000, #7074s, Cell Signaling Technologies) antibodies for 1 h in room temperature. Post-secondary antibody incubation, blots were washed with TBST three times for 15 min and developed with the ECL system (#R-03031-D25, Advansta) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. The fluorescence signals were scanned with an iBright CL1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific), and the intensities were assessed by densitometry analysis to measure the relative expression of the target proteins using GAPDH as a loading control by ImageJ software.
Immunofluorescence
For immunolabelling of cells, EnSCs (5000 cells) were seeded on 4-well glass chamber slides (#94.6170.402, Sarstedt) and cultured in 10% DCC FBS containing DMEM medium. Post treatment with PlGF as described above, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, washed with PBS, and permeabilized for 15 min in 0.1% Triton X-100/PBS. The samples were then blocked with 5% BSA in 0.1% TritonX-100/PBS for 1 h at RT and washed with PBS. The slides were then incubated with primary antibodies for NFAT5 (1:200, #NB20-3446, Novus Biologicals) at 4 °C overnight. Subsequently, washed with PBS and incubated with FITC conjugated secondary antibody (#4412, Alexa Fluor 488 Conjugate, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 1 h at room temperature. Post incubation, slides were washed again with PBS, dehydrated, air-dried and mounted using ProLong Gold antifade reagent containing DAPI (#P36931, Invitrogen). Fluorescence was detected with LSM 800 confocal laser scanning microscope (Zeiss). The images were captured using oil immersion, 40x objective lens. Scale bar − 20 μm. Mean fluorescence intensities were calculated using ImageJ software.
Luciferase reporter assay
EnSCs cells were seeded onto 24-well plates at a density of 5 × 104 cells/well with 10% DCC-FBS/DMEM and allowed to attach for 24 h. Post serum starvation, cells were transfected with HIF-1α vector (#87,261, Addgene) using Lipofectamine LTX with Plus reagent (#15,338,100, ThermoFisher Scientific) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. After transfection for 24 h, cells were subjected to treatment with PlGF ± siSGK1 as described above. The reporter activation was determined using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (#E2920, Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, growth medium was removed and cells were washed with PBS. Subsequently, cells were lysed for 15 min at room temperature using 1X passive lysis buffer. Lysed cells were used for determination of luciferase activity. LAR II reagent was added to each well, and firefly luminescence was measured using a microplate reader (LUX VARIOSKAN, ThermoFisher Scientific). Next, Stop & Glo reagent was added to each well and renilla luciferase activity was measured using a microplate reader. Three replicate wells were used for each analysis, and the results were normalized to the activity of renilla luciferase.
ELISA
The secreted VEGF-A levels in PlGF-conditioned medium were measured with ELISA. Briefly, after the treatment of EnSCs with PlGF as described above, the conditioned medium was harvested and stored at -80 °C. The collected medium was processed with Human ELISA kit for VEGF-A (#BMS277-2, Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions performed in biologically independent experiments (with three technical replicates).
Preparation of conditioned medium for proteomic analysis
For proteome analyses, conditioned medium (three biological replicates) was collected from EnSCs treated with and without PlGF as mentioned above. For precipitation of protein from conditioned medium, 100% acetone (ice cold): 100% MeOH (ice cold): protein solution was mixed at a ratio of 8:1:1, followed by incubation at -20 °C overnight. Post incubation the samples were washed (2X) at 2,500 g, 4 °C for 20 min. Post washing, the supernatant was then aspirated, and the pellet was air dried. After desalting using C18 stage tips, extracted peptides were separated on an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) as detailed in. The peptide mixtures were separated using a 90 min segmented gradient from to 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 12 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Acquired MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.6.7.0 with integrated Andromeda search engine. A database search was performed against a target-decoy Homo sapiens database obtained from Uniprot, containing 103.859 protein entries and 286 commonly observed contaminants. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach and the fold change cut-off was set at > ± 1.0 The LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) algorithm was enabled, as well as match between runs and LFQ protein intensities were used for relative protein quantification. Data analysis was performed using Perseus, DEP and R packages.
BrdU cell proliferation
The effect of PlGF treated CM on HUVEC proliferation was measured using the BrdU cell proliferation assay on 96-well plates with 3000 cells (#QIA58, Sigma-Aldrich). Briefly after the treatment of HUVECs with respective CM for 48 h or/and thymidine (2 mM; #T1895, Sigma-Aldrich) for 42 h. Post treatment the cells were immunolabelled for BrdU and the cells incubated for an additional 24 h. Incorporated BrdU was detected by the BrdU Cell Proliferation Assay as instructed in the manufacture’s protocol. The experiment was performed in biologically independent experiments (with three technical replicates).
Wound healing scratch assay
GFP-tagged HUVECs were seeded in 6-well plates at a concentration of 2 × 105 cells per well. After reaching 100% confluency, HUVECs were deprived of serum for 12 h and scratched with a sterile P200 pipette tip as previously described. After removal of the debris by repeated washes, cells were subjected to respective CM treatment and scratch wound closure was closely monitored by fluorescence microscopy (EVOS M7000 cell imaging system, ThermoFisher Scientific) capturing images of the same field with a 4X objective at 0 h and 24 h. The percentage of migrated area was calculated with Image J software (v1.53k). The experiment was performed in biologically independent experiments (with three different fields of view taken for the average).
In vitro tube formation assay
The effect of CM on angiogenic potential was assessed by the spontaneous formation of capillary-like structures by the GFP-tagged HUVECs. 96-well plates were coated with ice-cold Matrigel solution (#3533-005-02, 3533-005-02) and incubated at 37 ℃ for 60 min to allow the Matrigel to solidify. GFP-tagged HUVECs were harvested, suspended in serum-reduced (2%) endothelial growth medium, seeded in the Matrigel-coated wells at a density of 5 × 104 cells/well in 100 µl of respective CM/DMOG treatment solution. Images of the tubular structures were taken using a fluorescence microscopy (EVOS M7000 cell imaging system, ThermoFisher Scientific) capturing images of the same field with a 4X objective for every 3 h. The experiment was performed in biologically independent experiments and the relative tube length and relative number of tubes formed at 24 h were calculated using an angiogenesis plugin with Image J software (v1.53k).
Endothelial barrier function study with Electrical Impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
An EIS approach was employed to study the influence of stroma secreted conditioned medium on the endothelial barrier function of HUVECs. The E16 plate (#5,469,830,001, Agilent, Germany) was mounted on to the xCELLigence RTCA (Agilent, Germany) for background reading. Later, HUVECs were trypsinized and 7000 cells per well was seeded. Respective treatment conditions with CM (technical duplicates) as mentioned above was added to the E16 plates with cells and kept for incubation at 37 °C for 30 min, for cells to equilibrate and adhere. Post cell adhesion, E16 plate containing cells was mounted on to the xCELLigence RTCA for impedance measurements. Live cell impedance was monitored every 15 min for a total period of 24 h. The experiment was performed in biologically independent experiments and the data is represented as cell index. Data acquisition and data analysis was performed using RTCA Software Pro (Agilent, Germany).
BeWO cell invasion through endothelial monolayer with electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
The invasion of BeWo through the endothelial monolayer was studied with EIS measurements. The E16 plates were coated with 0.1% gelatin and let to incubate for an hour at 37 °C. Next, 100 µl of HUVEC growth medium was added to E16 plate for background measurement. The plate was mounted on to the xCELLigence RTCA (Agilent Technologies, Germany) for background reading. Later, HUVECs were trypsinized and 5000 cells per well were added to the E16 plates and kept for incubation at 37 °C for cells to equilibrate and adhere. Post 24 h, the cells were treated with respective treatment conditions with CM (Con / PlGF / siSGK1 / siSGK1 + PlGF) as mentioned above for 48 h. Ten hours prior treatment end point, E16 plates containing cells were clamped again onto the xCELLigence RTCA and placed in the incubator at 37 °C. Live cell impedance was monitored every 15 min for a total period of 10 h to ensure stromal cell monolayer formation.
Post treatment time point, the cell index measurement was paused and 2500 BeWo cells per 100 µl of 10% FBS DMEM were added. EIS cell index measurement was continued to monitor to the BeWo invasion through CM treated HUVEC monolayer. Live cell impedance was monitored every 30 min for a total period of 8 h. The experiment was performed in biologically independent experiments and the data is represented as normalized cell index relative to the time point BeWo cells were added to the HUVEC monolayer. Data acquisition and data analysis was performed using RTCA Software Pro (Agilent Technologies, Germany).
In silico data analysis
In silico analysis was performed on an open-access gene-expression data platform. The gene expression of NFAT5 was verified by analysis of the normal endometrium at distinct phases of the menstrual cycle (GDS2052). To investigate the significance of NFAT5 in PE pathogenesis, we obtained its gene expression data in human decidua of pre-symptomatic preeclamptic women and healthy pregnant women (GDS3467).
Statistical analysis
Data are presented here as means ± SEM. n represents the number of independent experiments (biological replicates). All treatment groups are normalized with their respective control groups in EnSCs (Con) and HUVECs (Con-CM) respectively. Data represented were analysed for significance using student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction approach and One-way ANOVA. Results with p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Figures and statistical analysis were made in Graphpad Prism (v 7.0) and Inkscape (v 1.3).

RESULTS:
Results
PlGF drives tonicity independent activation of NFAT5 in endometrial stromal cells
We first explored the spatio-temporal expression of NFAT5 in the endometrium. Expression of NFAT5 (Supplementary Fig. 1a) was found to be higher in the proliferative phase compared with the late secretory phase of the menstrual cycle (GEO 2052). Single cell analysis confirmed high NFAT5 expression in the stromal population among the other endometrial cell types and extra villous trophoblast (Supplementary Fig. 1b & c). According to the Human Protein Atlas, NFAT5 is expressed throughout the endometrium and staining was highest in the perivascular area and blood vessels (Supplementary Fig. 1d). We next assessed the involvement of NFAT5 in the etiology of PE pathogenesis. To address this, we manually mined expression levels of NFAT5 obtained from gene expression studies of the first trimester decidua prior to the onset of PE compared with healthy pregnancies (GEO 3467). We found that NFAT5 transcripts were upregulated in the decidua of pre-symptomatic women who developed PE later (Supplementary Fig. 1e). Taken together, the in-silico analysis reveals that endometrial NFAT5 expression is highest in the proliferative phase and is associated prior to the onset of PE.
PlGF is a member of the VEGF superfamily and aberrant expression is associated with abnormal blood vessel physiology via NFAT5. Thus, we sought to determine a putative link between PlGF on NFAT5 regulation in endometrial cells. EnSCs were treated with varying concentrations (titration of 2.5–50 ng/ml) of PlGF for 6 days. As illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 2a, NFAT5 mRNA expression was highly upregulated by PlGF at a concentration of 20 ng/ml compared with the other concentrations tested. The time kinetics study revealed gene expression of NFAT5 when EnSCs were treated with PlGF (20 ng/ml) were highest after 6 days of treatment (Fig. 1a). All proceeding experiments used PlGF at a concentration of 20 ng/ml for a treatment period of 6 days in EnSCs. Consistent with our mRNA data, PlGF also significantly upregulated NFAT5 protein levels in parallel (Fig. 1b-c and Supplementary Fig. 2b). Further, we examined PlGF activated NFAT5 spatial regulation in EnSCs using an immunofluorescence approach. Endogenous NFAT5 was localized to the cytosol in untreated EnSCs and was found to be translocated to the nucleus upon PlGF treatment (Fig. 1d). NFAT5 is well recognized to be activated under hyperosmolarity cellular stress (Hyp Osm), we compared its transcriptional activity in EnSCs by treating with Hyp Osm (800 mOsm/ml) medium for 3 h as a positive control (Supplementary Fig. 3a-c). Thus, we observed that PlGF can activate NFAT5 in EnSCs in a tonicity independent manner.
p38 MAPK regulated NFAT5 activation upregulates SGK1 expression in endometrial stromal cells
p38 Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (p38 MAPK), is known to activate NFAT5 transcriptional activation under hypertonic stimulus. To verify the participation as an upstream target of NFAT5, we examined protein levels of total and phosphorylated levels of p38 MAPK following treatment with PlGF. Figure 2a-c and Supplementary Fig. 4 demonstrates the increased levels of total p38 MAPK protein, with significant upregulation of phosphorylated levels of p38MAPK. NFAT5 is a regulator for various angiogenic mediators and factors including; SGK1, HIF-1α and VEGF-A. Next a further series of experiments tested if PlGF indeed contributed to the activation of these downstream targets. Our findings show both total and phosphorylated SGK1 protein levels were significantly upregulated in PlGF treated stromal cells (Fig. 2a, d-e). SGK1 is a known stimulator of HIF-1α, a known modulator in angiogenic signaling. Elevated levels of HIF-1α transcripts were observed with PlGF treatment in stromal cells (Fig. 2f). Additionally, PlGF exerted a strong stimulating effect on HIF-1α promoter activity (luciferase) in EnSCs (Fig. 2g). DMOG treatment was used as positive control for HIF-1α promoter activation (0.5 mM for 24 h).
To further validate the angiogenic pathway mediated by NFAT5 activation, we verified the intracellular and secreted protein levels of pro-angiogenic factor, VEGF-A. PlGF mediated NFAT5 stimulation significantly increased cellular VEGF-A protein levels in EnSCs (Fig. 2a-h). Surprisingly, the secreted protein levels of VEGF-A (Fig. 2i) in EnSCs supernatant (CM) was decreased compared with untreated control levels. These data identify the aberrant PlGF mediated angiogenic signaling in EnSCs with a decrease in secreted proangiogenic factor VEGF-A.
Secretome analysis reveals that PlGF treated CM is associated with pathological angiogenic signaling
To investigate if PlGF can dysregulate other angiogenic mediators in EnSCs, we sought to understand its comprehensive and global effect on stromal cell secreted factors. We utilized proteomics to characterize the supernatant (CM) from EnSCs. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis was performed by comparing the protein cargo present in Con-CM (n = 3) and PlGF-CM (n = 3) collected from EnSCs post 6 days treatment with and without PlGF as described in Fig. 3a. This comparison revealed a total of 68 dysregulated secreted proteins. Differentially regulated proteins were shown in volcano plots as seen in Fig. 3b. A total of 36 upregulated and 32 downregulated differentially regulated proteins were identified in the CM as being associated with PlGF treatment in the EnSCs. Some of the significantly upregulated proteins (green) in PlGF-CM were actin and extra cellular matrix (ECM) associated components such as ECM-1, ACTA1, PFN1, COL1A2, MMP2 and inhibitors of the matrix metalloproteinases such as TIMP2. The significantly downregulated proteins (orange) include AHNAK, FLNA and YWHAZ. Other ECM associated proteins such as COL2A6, COL6A3, and COL3A1 were not differentially expressed based on the differential expression thresholds we used in this study, however we observed modest but significant changes in their expressions too. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of the protein signature associated with supernatant from the PlGF treated cells identified pathways associated with structural remodelling, ECM modification and pathological vessel development (Fig. 3c). Thus, the proteomic analysis points to an anti-angiogenic signature mediated by PlGF.
HUVECs display abnormal ‘hypersprouting’ behaviour when treated with conditioned medium (CM)
Pathological PlGF is associated with poor vessel development in the retina. We postulated that the paracrine signaling from PlGF treated endometrial cells would also support poor vessel formation. To test this conjecture, HUVECs were treated with CM collected from untreated or PlGF treated EnSCs (Fig. 4a). We then verified its effects on angiogenic checkpoints in HUVECs employing different functional assays. As seen in Fig. 4b, PlGF-CM significantly increased cell proliferation in HUVECs as evidenced with the BrdU ELISA assay. Further, a wound healing scratch assay with GFP-HUVECs showed reduced cell migration upon PlGF-CM treatment (Fig. 4c-d) and an in vitro tube formation assay showed no significant change in tube length between Con-CM and PlGF-CM treatment on HUVECs (Fig. 4e-f). However, PlGF-CM treated HUVECs displayed a greater number of endothelial cell branches pointing to an abnormal ‘hypersprouting’ behaviour (Fig. 4e-g). Hypersprouting behaviour in endothelial cells is a phenotype of deregulated Notch signaling. To investigate Notch signaling in PlGF-CM mediated anti-angiogenic behaviour seen in HUVECs, gene expression levels of Notch signaling effectors such as Notch receptors (Notch 1 and Notch 2), ligands (Dll4 and Jagged-1) and target genes (Hey 1 and Hes1) were downregulated with PlGF-CM treated HUVECs (Fig. 4h-l and Supplementary Fig. 5a). Further, to substantiate the increase of hypersprouting and notch downregulation, we verified the protein levels of VEGF receptors and VEGF-A levels in HUVEC after CM treatment. PlGF-CM treated HUVECs showed enhanced VEGFR2 protein expression with downregulated levels of VEGFR1 and VEGF-A (Fig. 4m-n and Supplementary Fig. 5b). Thus, these results strongly suggest that PlGF-CM modulate hypersprouting in HUVECs via repression of notch signaling and upregulation of VEGFR2. Regulation and maintenance of the endothelial barrier during angiogenesis is critical for end organ function. The influence of the stromal secreted factors on endothelial barrier function regulating vascular resistance and permeability is studied with an EIS approach. EIS measurements revealed an increase in cell index in HUVECs with PlGF-CM treatment, demonstrating an increase of junctional resistance and decrease in permeability between endothelial cells (Fig. 4o). Together, these data indicate that dysregulated PlGF-NFAT5-SGK1 signaling in stroma mediate negative angiogenic effects on HUVECs with an altered secretome signature.
Silencing of SGK1 improves secreted VEGF-A levels in EnSCs
Endometrial SGK1 plays a paramount role in endometrial physiology and for the maintenance of pregnancy. We therefore examined whether SGK1 is the key ‘check point’ molecule driving the stroma-endothelial paracrine pathway upon PlGF stimulation. SGK1 gene silencing was efficient, suppressing both total and phosphorylated SGK1 protein expression levels in EnSCs (Fig. 5a-c and Supplementary Fig. 6).
Similarly, SGK1 inhibition with PlGF again paralleled the effect on gene silencing, significantly downregulating both total and phosphorylated levels of SGK1 protein (Fig. 5a-c). Strikingly, silencing of SGK1 transcripts was also followed by significant decrease in HIF-1α mRNA levels and promoter activity in EnSCs (Fig. 5d-e). The effect was mimicked in EnSCs treated with siSGK1 + PlGF as well (Fig. 5d-e). DMOG treatment in EnSCs was used as a positive control (0.5 mM for 24 h). Intriguingly, attenuated SGK1 expression in EnSCs did not significantly alter total VEGF-A levels when using western blotting (Fig. 5a-f). However, SGK1 silencing improved secreted VEGF-A levels in the CM (Fig. 5g) and the VEGF-A protein signature (total and secreted) remained the same also in sample groups where siSGK1 inhibition was combined with PlGF treatment in EnSCs (Fig. 5a, f-g). These results confirm the key molecular role of SGK1 in the angiogenic communication pathway.
Inhibition of endometrial stromal SGK1 improves angiogenic behaviour of HUVECs
To explore the functional relevance of SGK1 in mediating the paracrine mechanism, HUVECs were treated with CM from EnSCs with SGK1 inhibition with and without PlGF treatment. siSGK1 ± PlGF-CM decreased cell proliferation and improved cell migration behaviour in HUVECs as seen with Con-CM (Fig. 6a -c). Further, the tube formation ability in HUVECs was improved both with siSGK1 ± PlGF-CM with decrease in number of branches observed (Fig. 6d-e). siSGK1 ± PlGF-CM treatment in HUVECs also showed an increase in notch receptors (Notch 1 and Notch 2), ligands (Dll4 and Jagged-1), and target genes (Hey 1 and Hes1), confirming rescue of notch signaling function upon SGK1 inhibition (Supplementary Fig. 7). With upregulation of notch signaling, the protein expression levels of VEGFR1/2 and VEGF-A in HUVECs were reversed with siSGK1 ± PlGF-CM (Fig. 6f-g and Supplementary Fig. 8). Thus, these data confirm SGK1 inhibition in EnSCs improves secreted angiogenic cues, attenuating the hypersprouting phenotype in HUVECs. In addition, cellular impedance analysis with EIS showed improved endothelial barrier function with increase in cell permeability under the influence of both siSGK1 ± PlGF-CM (Fig. 6h). HUVECs were treated with VEGF-A (40 ng/ml for 24 h) as positive stimulator for permeability.
Trophoblast invasion of the maternal blood vessels is critical for development of the placenta. Shallow or poor invasion of the maternal blood vessels by is associated with PE. We postulated that aberrant PlGF signaling in the endometrial stromal in turn produces cues to prevent adequate trophoblast invasion. As seen in Fig. 6i, the BeWo invasion was impeded and associated with high resistance (i.e. higher cell index) in PlGF-CM treated HUVECs compared with Con-CM. Interestingly, SGK1 inhibition improved the PlGF driven poor BeWo invasion through the HUVEC monolayer as measured by the decrease in cell impedance values (Fig. 6i). Together, these findings emphasis the important role of stromal SGK1 regulation in mediating angiogenic stimulus during uterine angiogenesis.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Pregnancy-associated vascular transformations of the decidua are coordinated by complex cellular mechanisms to induce remodelling at the maternal-fetal interface, which are critical for a healthy pregnancy outcome. Angiogenesis is the development of new vessels from existing blood vessels. In the adult, (healthy) angiogenesis rarely occurs except during wound healing and during repair of the vascular bed after menstruation. Uterine angiogenesis within the decidua is coordinated by several factors secreted from stromal cells, surrounding the endometrial vessels. Any aberrations in remodelling of the uterine vasculature during early pregnancy results in miscarriage or pregnancy disorders such as preeclampsia (PE), fetal growth restriction (FGR) and intrauterine deaths (IUD) or stillbirths. PE, a pregnancy-specific pathology is associated with hypertension and multiorgan dysfunction. PE is reported to occur in 5 to 7% of all pregnancies globally, unfortunately this number is rising. In 2022, pregnancies affected by PE were responsible for over 70,000 maternal deaths and 500,000 fetal deaths worldwide. Insufficient vascularization within the uterine decidua, followed by poor placentation at the maternal-fetal interface contributes to ischemia, uteroplacental hypoxia, inflammation and elevated levels of oxidative stress. Women diagnosed with a pre-eclamptic pregnancy are reported to be associated with 4-fold increased risk in future incident heart failure and a 2-fold increase in coronary heart diseases. Currently, there are no tests or treatments to predict the onset of preeclampsia or prevent it. Hence, there exists an urgent unmet clinical need to identify new molecular targets for early diagnosis and therapeutics in PE. Recent studies support that the pathophysiology of PE likely involves endometrial determinants in its pathogenesis. Therefore, studying maternal uterine health prior to pregnancy is of importance to identify new molecular pathways driving adverse pregnancy outcomes such as PE.
After menstruation, one of the critical processes of the regenerating endometrium is the regrowth of blood vessels (angiogenesis). During each menstrual cycle and in early pregnancy, the uterine endothelium becomes activated and undergoes sprouting angiogenesis to increase the size and number of blood vessels in the endometrium. The demand for angiogenic stimulus varies both spatially and temporally across the different menstrual phases. Endometrial stromal fibroblasts are known to secrete biochemical cues (growth factors and cytokines) to induce a pro-angiogenic response in endothelial cells of the spiral arterioles. Employing a 3 dimensional (3D) bioengineered vascularized endometrium on-a-chip model, Ahn et al. highlighted the importance of endometrial stromal cells in stimulating angiogenesis in endothelial cells. Stromal cells exhibit functionally directed proangiogenic cues in regulating microvascular network formation through neo-vessel sprouting of the endothelial cells. From a maternal standpoint, pregnancy is an example of extraordinary rapid histogenesis that is unrivalled in healthy adult tissues. This emphasizes the importance of signaling factors produced by the ‘master’ stromal cells within the uterine environment to influence dynamic angiogenesis processes within the endothelial compartment of spiral arteries. Hence, identifying molecular factors that deregulate the vascularized endometrial microenvironment prior to pregnancy and during early placentation is of critical importance.
Placental growth factor (PlGF) is found in the endometrial stroma and abnormal production of endometrial PlGF may result in pregnancy complications, though the mechanism is yet to be determined. The functional role of PlGF in various biological processes continues to expand, in particular its activity in disease progression. The interplay of PlGF as a pleiotropic cytokine is reported to augment ischemia, hypoxia, inflammatory or malignant processes. PlGF shares a biochemical and functional relationship with vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF-A), that is translated into high synergic activity in physiological and pathological angiogenesis. PlGF-VEGFR1 signaling is reported to modulate angiogenesis and tumour growth by regulating the Dll4-Notch pathway. Inhibition of PlGF is further reported to selectively inhibit pathological angiogenesis. Soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1), is a circulating anti-angiogenic protein that acts by binding to the receptor binding domains of PlGF and to VEGF thereby preventing its interactions with endothelial receptors. Circulating VEGF concentrations are low through pregnancy whilst free PlGF increases in normal pregnancies. Therefore, free PlGF a priori is pivotal for maintaining vascular endothelial cell homeostasis.
PlGF is produced in many organs and cells including the human endometrium, decidua, placenta, uterine natural killer cells and trophoblasts cells. Endometrial PlGF is higher in the proliferative phase with expression levels declining in the secretory phase, higher levels of PlGF were associated with implantation failure after IVF. Moreover, gene expression studies of the first trimester decidua prior to the onset of PE compared with healthy pregnancies reveals that local decidual PlGF levels are higher in the PE group. Therefore, it is crucial to identify the underlying local factors that potentially contribute to the clinical manifestation of PE within the decidua. To the best of our knowledge, the potential role of endometrial PlGF- associated physiological vessel development in the endometrium and its relation to pregnancy complications has not been investigated.
Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT5) is part of the Rel family of transcriptional activators. It was originally characterized as a cell volume – regulated transcriptional factor activated by osmotic cell stress. In addition to its well-known osmoprotective role, NFAT5 activation can be mediated independent from tonicity, thus having wider consequences on physiological functions such as development, immune function and cellular stress responses. In a recent study, it was revealed that the transcriptional activity of NFAT5 mediates production of angiogenic factors causing neovascularization and angiogenesis associated oedema. In retinal pigment epithelial cells aberrant PlGF signaling via NFAT5 activity causes abnormal vessel development in diabetic retinopathy. NFAT5-inducible genes include serum glucocorticoid regulated kinase 1 (SGK1), which is a known activator of hypoxia inducible factor 1 subunit alpha (HIF-1α) proteins and subsequent VEGF-A formation and angiogenesis. Thus, these findings so far point to a compelling potential role of PlGF-NFAT5-SGK1 in vessel remodelling and thus warrant further investigation in delineating this signaling axis and its role in endometrial angiogenesis.
In the present study, we studied the effect of PlGF mediated NFAT5 regulation in the endometrial stromal cells (EnSCs). Further, we identified a signaling downstream pathway involving PlGF-NFAT5-SGK1 activation in EnSCs. We also characterized the angiogenic factors secreted by the stromal cells upon PlGF mediated NFAT5 activation. To mimic the effect of secreted angiogenic cues on vessel formation ability we also demonstrated its responsiveness in endothelial (HUVECs) cells. Aberrant PlGF mediated secreted factors impaired trophoblast invasion through the HUVEC monolayer. Furthermore, angiogenic behaviour and trophoblast invasion were reversed by inhibiting SGK1.
Our study reveals that PlGF mediated NFAT5-SGK1 activation in endometrial stromal cells negatively regulate secretion of pro-angiogenic factors within the uterine microenvironment. Additionally, we show that the secreted angiogenic factors activate pathological pathway in endothelial cells resulting in impaired angiogenesis. In summary, aberrant endometrial PlGF expression could lead to dysregulated stromal-endothelial communication leading to poor trophoblast invasion.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
The proteomic datasets supporting the results in this article are available in the PRoteomics IDEntification database (PRIDE) with the accession number PXD051697. The source data behind the other data available in the figures can be found in the supplementary data file 2.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
All authors approve for submission and confirm no conflict of interest.