PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Lung
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Lysosome-targeting chimeras; Polyvalent strategy; Targeted protein degradation; Folate receptor

ABSTRACT:
Lysosome-targeting chimeras (LYTACs) have emerged as a revolutionary targeted protein degradation (TPD) technology in modulating the levels of extracellular and membrane proteins. However, lack of lysosome-trafficking receptors (LTRs) limits the development of LYTACs. Here, we firstly confirm that folate receptor α (FRα) is a new generation of lysosome-targeting receptor (LTR) of LYTAC, facilitating the transport of membrane proteins to lysosomes to realize degradation. Moreover, novel FRTACs are constructed by a new “polyvalent crosslinking strategy”, instead of the traditional “one folate conjugating one drug strategy”. Polyvalency creates avidity, allowing FRTACs crosslinking FRα to dramatically improve the degradation efficiency. As a result, the optimized FRTACs, including EGFR-targeting FR-Ctx, PD-L1-targeting FR-Atz, TROP2-targeting FR-Stz, and HER2-targeting FR-Ttz, successfully eliminate cell surface targets with a subnanomole activity. Mechanism investigation reveals that FRTACs trigger targets degradation in a FRα- and lysosomal-dependent manner. Besides, FR-Ctx reduces cancer cell proliferation, and FR-Atz increases the cytotoxicity of T cells toward tumor cells. Furthermore, FR-Atz exhibits potent degradation efficiency of PD-L1 in vivo and elicits tumor-specific immune responses by switching the tumor immune microenvironment from a suppressed state to an activated state in both RM-1 mice model and humanized PD-1/PD-L1 B16F10 mice model. To our knowledge, FRTACs are the most potent protein degrader ever reported. The novel FRTACs will expand the application of FRα and provide a new platform for designing tumor-targeting LYTACs.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Development of polyvalent folate receptor-targeting chimeras (FRTACs) for lysosomal degradation of membrane proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human H292 cells were cultured in RPMI medium 1640 (Gibco, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. Cells were cultivated in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. H292 cells were treated with 10 nM LYTAC or 10 nM antibody for 48 h. Then cells were washed with PBS three times and lysed in M2 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM EGTA, 1 mM sodium pyrophoshate, 5 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 0.5% Triton X-100, and 1 mM DTT) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, Shanghai, China) on ice for 30 min. The supernatant was collected by centrifuging at 21,000g for 15 min at 4 °C and the protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Samples were analyzed by an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) equipped with a Vanquish Neo system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first dissolved in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water), directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then were separated using a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (150 mm×75 μm, 2 μm). The mobile phases (A: water with 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) were driven, and gradient elution was performed at 400 nL/min. Mobile phase B was increased to 6% over 1.8 min, followed by an increase to 6.5% at 2 min, a ramp to 99% B at 114 min, and a wash at 99% B for 6 min. for a total analysis of 120 min. Peptides were ionized using an nano-electrospray ionization source held at +2.1 kV, Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 400-1200; and a resolution of 120,000 MS/MS scans were collected using high-energy collisional dissociation at 25, 27, 30 collision energy respectively  with an automatic gain control target of 1×106  and a maximum injection time of 40 ms.