PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Microbial proteomics; N2o; Shotgun proteomics; Metaproteomics

ABSTRACT:
The majority of potent greenhouse gas nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions originate from microbially mediated reactions. The enzyme N2O reductase is the only known biological N2O sink and has evolved in two phylogenetically distinct lineages (clades I and II). Clade II is of particular interest for biotechnology as it is often associated with non-denitrifying N2O reducers. In this study, Laureni et al. investigated the environmental conditions that select for clade II. To do so, we enriched two N2O-respiring communities at low dilution rates, under both electron donor (acetate) and electron acceptor (N2O) limitations, in order to assess the impact of substrate affinity and N2O cytotoxicity on community assembly. We used a combination of genome-resolved metagenomics and shotgun metaproteomics to identify the taxonomy and metabolic potential of the steady-state community members. Corresponding author: Michele Laureni, contact: m.laureni@tudelft.nl

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Shotgun proteomics on clade II N2O-reducer enrichments

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein Extraction: Approximately 25 mg of biomass (wet weight) was collected in an Eppendorf tube and solubilized in a suspension buffer consisting of 175 µL B-PER reagent (Thermo Scientific) and 175 µL TEAB buffer (50 mM TEAB, 1% (w/w) NaDOC, adjusted to pH 8.0). Next, 0.1 g of glass beads (acid-washed, approximately 100 µm in diameter) were added and the cells were disrupted using 5 cycles of bead beating on a vortex for one minute, followed by cooling on ice for 30 seconds. Then, a freeze/thaw step was performed by freezing the suspension at -80°C for 20 minutes and thawing it while shaking in an incubator. The cell debris was pelleted at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes while being cooled at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. Protein Precipitation: The protein was precipitated by adding 1 volume of TCA (trichloroacetic acid) to 4 volumes of the supernatant. The solution was then incubated at 4°C for 10 minutes and pelleted again at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes. The resulting protein pellet was washed twice with 200 µL of ice-cold acetone. Trypsin Digestion: The protein pellet was dissolved in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 6M urea to achieve a final concentration of approximately 100 µg/µL. To 100 µL of the protein solution, 30 µL of a 10 mM DTT solution was added and incubated at 37°C for one hour. Next, 30 µL of a freshly prepared 20 mM IAA solution was added and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes. The solution was then diluted to a concentration of <1 M Urea using a 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and an aliquot of approximately 25 µg of protein was digested with Trypsin (Promega, Trypsin to protein ratio of 1:50) at 37°C overnight. Solid Phase Extraction: The peptides were desalted using an Oasis HLB 96-well plate (Waters) as per the manufacturer's instructions. The purified peptide eluate was then dried using a speed vac concentrator.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data were analysed with a database of in silico translated gene-coding sequences obtained from shotgun metagenome experiments of the analysed enrichment cultures using PEAKS Studio 10 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc, Canada). Database searching was performed by allowing for 20 ppm parent ion mass error tolerance and 0.02 m/z fragment ion mass error tolerance and allowing of up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N/Q deamidation were considered as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered against 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and protein identifications with ≥2 unique peptides were considered as significant identifications.