PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Skin; Cell culture
diseases: Melanoma
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method; Relative quantification
keywords: Heparane sulfate; Immunity; Rna; Cell surface; Rna-binding proteins

ABSTRACT:
Recent discoveries have shown the presence of RNA molecules on the cell surface, defying the traditional view that RNA only functions intracellularly. However, it is not well understood how cell-surface RNA (csRNA) is stably present on the plasma membrane and what functions it performs. We answer the pressing questions in the emerging field by taking integrated omic-wide approaches and multiple orthogonal validatory methods. Firstly, we exploited the RNA-sensing ability of TLR7 as a specific recombinant probe to detect csRNA. Coupling it with a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9- knockout screening, we identified heparan sulfate (HS) as a crucial factor for RNA presentation on cells. Using the TLR7 probe, cell surface proximity labelling revealed that these HS-associated csRNAs (hepRNAs) are in vicinity with a plethora of RNA-binding proteins. The compelling observation led us to a molecular model where HS, RNA and RBP form ternary complexes at cell surface. A novel photochemical RNA-protein crosslinking technology termed SCOOPS were then established to validate the termolecular model in a TLR7-orthogonal manner. Moreover, enabled by SCOOPS, we unveiled identities of hepRNA using next-generation sequencing, and identified traits in RNA primary structures that facilitate HS association. We further show that hepRNA binds to killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor 2DL5 (KIR2DL5), recruiting the protein to cell surface and potentially enhancing receptor-ligand interactions. Our findings provide a foundation for exploring how cell-surface ribonucleoproteins contribute to immune modulation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cell-Surface RNA Forms Ternary Complex with RNA-Binding Protein and Heparan Sulfate to Recruit Immune Receptors Complex with RNA-Binding Protein and Heparan Sulfate to Recruit Immune Receptor

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The procedure follows the reported one by Santos-Barriopedro et al.59 The supernatant from the sonicated lysate of proximity biotinylated cells was subjected to bead enrichment with 12.5 μL per sample streptavidin sepharose high-performance beads (Cytiva, 15511301) on an end-to-end rotator for 2 h at RT. The beads were washed 5 times with 500 μL RIPA buffer and 4 times with 500 μL PBS. Beads were incubated with 50 μL elution buffer (2 M Urea, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris pH 8) on a thermoshaker at 1250 rpm for 20 minutes at room temperature. Iodoacetamide (50 mM final concentration) was then added, and the samples were incubated in a thermoshaker at 1250 rpm in dark for 10 minutes at room temperature. 2.5 μL of trypsin (0.1 mg/mL stock solution) was then added, followed by incubation in a thermoshaker at 1250 rpm for 2 hours at room temperature. Samples were spun down (1500 x g, 2 min, RT) and supernatant was collected. Another 50 μL elution buffer was then added to the beads, which were incubated on a thermoshaker at 1250 rpm for 5 minutes at room temperature. Beads were then spun down (1500 x g, 2 min, RT), and the supernatant collected and combined with the first elution. 1 μL trypsin (0.1 mg/mL) was added and the samples were incubated overnight at room temperature. Tryptic peptides were acidified by adding 10 μL 10% (v/v) TFA, and purified using C18 Stagetips (3M Empore). Briefly, StageTips were prepared and washed with methanol followed by a wash with buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and two washes with buffer A (0.1% formic acid). All washes were done at 1500 × g for 4 min at RT. Samples were loaded onto the StageTips and centrifuged at 600 × g for 10 min at RT and washed once with buffer A. StageTips were stored at 4oC.Peptides  were eluted from StageTips with 30 ml of buffer B, reduced to a volume of 5 ml by Speedvac centrifugation, after which 7 ml of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) was added. For the TLF7 proximity labeling experiments, 6 µl of each sample was loaded on an Easy LC1000 (Thermo Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific). The machine was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, with acquisition time set at 60 minutes. An acetonitrile gradient of 12-30% in 43 minutes was used followed by an increase of the acetonitrile concentration to 60% in 10 minutes and to 95% in 1 minute. The full scan of the peptides was set to a resolution of 120,000 in a scan range of 350–1300m/z. For biotinylation-OOPS experiments, 3 µl of each sample was loaded on a Vanquish Neo UHPLC connected to a Orbitrap Astral. The machine was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode, with acquisition time set at 24 minutes. An acetonitrile gradient of 8-35% in 15 minutes was used followed by an increase of the acetonitrile concentration to 45% in 3 minutes and to 99% in 30 seconds. The full scan of the peptides was set to a resolution of 240,000 in a scan range of 150–2000m/z.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw mass spectrometry data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer version 3.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the human UniProt/SwissProt database. For DDA, we used the built-in processing workflow “PWF_OT_Precursor_Quan_and_LFQ_CID_SequestHT_Percolator” and the built-in consensus workflow “CWF_Comprehensive_Enhanced Annotation_LFQ_and_Precursor_Quan”, with default settings. For the Sequest HT search, database parameters were enzymatic digestion with trypsin allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids and a maximum peptide length of 144 amino acids. We used a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a static modification (57.021 Da), while methionine oxidation (15.995 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.011 Da) were included as dynamic modifications. FDR filtering was performed via percolator with a strict target FDR of 0.01 and a relaxed FDR of 0.05. Strict parsimony was applied for protein grouping, and unique plus razor peptides were used for quantification. Peptide quantification normalization was applied based on total peptide amount. Imputation Mode was set to “Low Abundance Resampling”. “Proteins” tab was exported for downstream processing and statistical analysis with R. For DIA, we used the built-in processing workflow “PWF_Astral_CHIMERYSonArdia_DIA_MBR.BestPSM” and the built-in consensus workflow “CWF_Comprehensive_Enhanced Annotation_LFQ_and_Precursor_Quan”, with default settings. For the CHIMERYS search, database parameters were enzymatic digestion with trypsin allowing two missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum peptide length of 30 amino acids. We used a fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was included as a static modification, while methionine oxidation was included as dynamic modification. FDR filtering was performed via percolator with a strict target FDR of 0.01 and a relaxed FDR of 0.05. Strict parsimony was applied for protein grouping, and unique plus razor peptides were used for quantification. Peptide quantification normalization was applied based on total peptide amount. Imputation Mode was set to “Low Abundance Resampling”. “Proteins” tab was exported for downstream processing and statistical analysis with R. For downstream processing, proteins were first filtered for having at least 2 unique peptides. Proteins containing “KRT” in their names as well as proteins with less than 3 values in at least 1 condition were filtered out. Statistical analysis was done using the DEP package, which uses a Student’s t-test. Criteria for enrichment are listed in the figure legends. Volcano plots were generated by plotting the –log10 of the p-value against the log 2 fold change. Gene ontology term searches for identified hits were performed using RBP2GO.36.