PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver; Hepatocyte
diseases: Liver disease
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Liver fibrosis; Hepatotoxic injury (ccl4); Mouse; Cholestatic injury (ddc); Extracellular matrix

ABSTRACT:
This study suggests that the composition of the extracellular matrix in a mouse model of liver fibrosis changes depending on the cause of liver fibrosis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Dynamics of compartment-specific proteomic landscapes of hepatotoxic and cholestatic models of liver fibrosis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
C57BL/6J male mice 8–10 weeks old were used for the analysis. To induce cholestatic liver injury, mice were either injected with 1 μl/g CCl4 or fed a diet supplemented with 0.1% DDC. A sample of ca 1 mm3 excised from the middle section of left lateral liver lobe was cryo-homogenized using TissueLyser II (QIAGEN, Germantown, MD, USA), resuspended, and sonicated. An aliquot of the sample was precipitated and labeled “Total”. The remaining solution was centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 20 minutes to separate the supernatant containing soluble (S)-fraction from the pellet, which itself contained insoluble ECM- enriched (E)-fraction. Nano reversed-phase columns were used for liquid chromatography MS analysis. Eluting peptide cations were analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion collision cell, linear ion trap mass analyzer (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptides were identified and quantified by MaxQuant label-free quantification software (1.6.7 version) using Mus musculus UniProt protein database (UniProtKB version July 2020) and a set of commonly observed contaminants (supplied with MaxQuant software).