PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Plasma; Extracellular vesicles; Human; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Rugby players may repeatedly incur high-impact collisions that could predispose them to neurodegenerative conditions but the processes underlying the heightened risk are currently unclear. This project investigates whether the proteome of plasma extracellular vesicles (EV) could carry putative diagnostic biomarkers to indicate differences in risk to neurodegenerative conditions across a rugby playing career. Twenty-four males were recruited, including eight academy players (18 ± 1 y), eight professional rugby players (33 ± 5 y) with >10-year rugby career and eight CrossFit athletes (32 ± 5 y) with no history of collision-related sports injuries. Membrane-bound particles (i.e. EV) were enriched from plasma using hyper-porous strong-anion exchange magnetic microparticles and tryptic peptides were analysed using nano-flow liquid chromatography and high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry. Differences in protein abundance  were investigated by one-way analysis of variance (with correction for multiple testing) after label free quantitation. In total, 449 proteins were confidently identified (false discovery rate; FDR <1 %) and gene ontology profiling confirmed 414 of these proteins were of EV origin. One-way ANOVA highlighted 128 significantly (P<0.05, q<0.02) different proteins across the three participant groups, of which 31 proteins were specific to professional rugby players. Seven of these proteins (APOA1, APOM, CLUS, BIP, VCAM1, NID1 and MMP9) which were depleted and one protein ZPI which was elevated have previously recognised roles in neurodegenerative processes.  In conclusion, non-targeted analysis highlighted that proteins associated with neuroprotection were specifically depleted in the plasma EV proteome of long-serving professional rugby players compared to younger academy rugby players or age-matched cross-fit athletes that did not have a history of collision-related sports injuries. Our findings shed new light on processes affected by a professional rugby playing career, further application of this type of analysis could be used to develop biomarker panels useful for predicting at-risk athletes or for guiding treatment interventions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Plasma EV proteome in Rugby players

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Blood Samples Collection Blood samples were collected in vacutainers containing Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). Blood samples were centrifuged at 1200 × g for 10 mins at 4°C. Plasma was aliquoted and stored at −80°C until further analysis. Freeze/thaw cycles were prohibited.   Membrane Particle Enrichment Magnetic affinity-based isolation was used to enrich the membrane particle fraction using a bead based protocol developed by Wu et al (Wu et al., 2023). Twenty-five µL MagReSyn® SAX (Resyn Biosciences, Ranburg, South Africa) (MAG) beads was equilibrated with wash buffer (Wb; 50mM Bis Tris Propane pH 6.3, 150mM NaCl) then mixed with 100 µg plasma protein diluted in binding buffer (Bb; 100 mM Bis Tris Propane pH 6.3, 150 mM NaCl) supplemented with cOmplete™ mini- EDTA free protease inhibitor (Roche). During each incubation, the protein and bead slurry was mixed at 550 rpm (ThermoMixer® Eppendorf, UK/Ireland). After an initial 30-min incubation, beads were washed thrice with 500 µL of Wb then incubated in Lysis and Reduction Mix (LR) (50 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1% SDS, 10 mM TCEP) for 60 min at 37°C with mixing. Iodoacetamide (15 mM final concentration) was added, and samples were incubated protected from light for 30 mins with mixing. Beads were washed 3 times in acetonitrile (ACN) and 3 times in absolute ethanol prior to on-bead digestion in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) at 37°C for 2 hours with mixing. Digestion was halted by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). The concentration of the supernatant was estimated using spectrophotometry (260 nm/ 280 nm ratio; N50 Nanophotometer, IMPLEN, Munich, Germany). Peptide aliquots (5 μg) were purified on C18 Zip-tips (Millipore) and eluted using a 40:60 mix of ACN and 0.1% TFA. Peptide solutions were dried by vacuum centrifugation (Thermo Scientific, SpeedVac SPD1030) for 40 minutes at 50°C, then reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Progenesis Quantitative Informatics for Proteomics (QI-P; Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters Corp., Newcastle, UK) was used for label-free quantitation, consistent with previous studies (Hesketh et al., 2020; Burniston et al., 2014). Log-transformed MS data was normalized by inter-sample abundance ratio, and relative protein abundances were calculated using nonconflicting peptides only. MS/MS spectra were exported in Mascot generic format and searched against the Swiss-Prot database (2023_08) restricted to ‘Homo Sapiens (human)’ (20,424 sequences) using locally implemented Mascot server (v.2.8; www.matrixscience.com). The enzyme specificity was trypsin with 2 allowed missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed modification) and oxidation of methionine (variable modification), m/z error tolerances of 10 ppm for peptide ions and 20 ppm for fragment ion spectra were used. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database search and only high confidence peptide identifications (>1 % FDR) were retained. The Mascot output (xml format) was recombined with MS profile data in Progenesis.

METHODS:
Methods
Participants
Figure 1A,B provide an overview of the experimental design and analysis protocol. Eight academy players (Acd; 18 ± 1 years) in their third week of preseason with no reported incidence of concussion from the previous 6 months, eight Professional rugby players with 10+ years professional rugby experience (Pro; 33 ± 5 years) in the first week of preseason with no concussions reported for the last 6 months and eight CrossFit athletes (Xfit; 32 ± 5 years) age matched to the Pro group and no history of concussion or other high grade impact injuries, were recruited for blood sampling (Figure 1). All participants were male and gave their informed consent to the procedures approved (M23_SPS_3182) by the Research Ethics Committee of Liverpool John Moores University.
Blood Samples Collection
Blood samples were collected in vacutainers containing Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). Blood samples were centrifuged at 1200 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Plasma was aliquoted and stored at −80°C until further analysis. Freeze/thaw cycles were prohibited.
Membrane Particle Enrichment
Magnetic affinity‐based isolation was used to enrich the membrane particle fraction using a bead‐based protocol developed by Wu et al.. Twenty‐five microliters MagReSyn SAX (Resyn Biosciences, Ranburg, South Africa) (MAG) beads was equilibrated with wash buffer (Wb; 50 mM Bis Tris Propane pH 6.3, 150 mM NaCl) then mixed with 100 µg plasma protein diluted in binding buffer (Bb; 100 mM Bis Tris Propane pH 6.3, 150 mM NaCl) supplemented with cOmplete mini‐ EDTA free protease inhibitor (Roche). During each incubation, the protein and bead slurry was mixed at 550 rpm (ThermoMixer Eppendorf, UK/Ireland). After an initial 30‐min incubation, beads were washed thrice with 500 µL of Wb then incubated in Lysis and Reduction Mix (LR) (50 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 1% SDS, 10 mM TCEP) for 60 min at 37°C with mixing. Iodoacetamide (15 mM final concentration) was added, and samples were incubated protected from light for 30 min with mixing. Beads were washed three times in acetonitrile (ACN) and three times in absolute ethanol prior to on‐bead digestion in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio) at 37°C for 2 h with mixing. Digestion was halted by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). The concentration of the supernatant was estimated using spectrophotometry (260 nm/280 nm ratio; N50 Nanophotometer, IMPLEN, Munich, Germany). Peptide aliquots (5 µg) were purified on C18 Zip‐tips (Millipore) and eluted using a 40:60 mix of ACN and 0.1% TFA. Peptide solutions were dried by vacuum centrifugation (Thermo Scientific, SpeedVac SPD1030) for 40 min at 50°C, then reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC‐MS/MS analysis.
Liquid Chromatography‐Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Peptide mixtures were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Q‐Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples (700 ng) were loaded on to the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap 100, 5 µm C18, 300 µm X 5 mm), using ulPickUp injection, for 1 min at a flow rate of 25 µL/min with 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) ACN. Samples were resolved on a 500 mm analytical column (Easy‐Spray C18 75 µm, 2 µm column) using a gradient of 97.5% A (0.1 % formic acid) 5% B (79.9% ACN, 20% water, 0.1% formic acid) to 70% A: 30% B over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The data‐dependent selection of the top 10 precursors selected from a mass range of m/z 300–1600 was used for data acquisition, which consisted of a 70,000‐resolution full‐scan MS scan at m/z 200 (AGC set to 1e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 250 ms). MS/MS data were acquired using quadrupole ion selection with a 3.0 m/z window, HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30 and in the orbitrap analyzer at 17,500‐resolution at m/z 250 (AGC target 5e4 ion with a maximum fill time of 250 ms). To avoid repeated selection of peptides for MS/MS, the program used a 20s dynamic exclusion window.
Label‐Free Quantitation of Protein Abundances
Progenesis Quantitative Informatics for Proteomics (QI‐P; Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters Corp., Newcastle, UK) was used for label‐free quantitation, consistent with previous studies. Log‐transformed MS data were normalized by inter‐sample abundance ratio, and relative protein abundances were calculated using nonconflicting peptides only. MS/MS spectra were exported in Mascot generic format and searched against the Swiss‐Prot database (2023_08) restricted to “Homo Sapiens (human)” (20,424 sequences) using locally implemented Mascot server (v.2.8; www.matrixscience.com). The enzyme specificity was trypsin with two allowed missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (fixed modification) and oxidation of methionine (variable modification), m/z error tolerances of 10 ppm for peptide ions and 20 ppm for fragment ion spectra were used. False discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using a decoy database search and only high confidence peptide identifications (>1% FDR) were retained. The Mascot output (xml format) was recombined with MS profile data in Progenesis.
Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses were performed in R version 4.5.1. Differences between Acd, Pro and Xfit were investigated by comparing the intercepts amongst the linear regression models of each group. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05 and q‐values were used to calculate FDR and account for multiple testing. Fuzzy c‐means clustering (Mfuzz package in R) was used to segregate patterns of abundance difference amongst statistically significant proteins. This analysis revealed five distinct cluster patterns, with each protein assigned a membership value (MV) based on its abundance pattern across the three groups.
Bioinformatic Analysis
Gene ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway analyses were performed against whole human genome using ShinyGO (v0.80). Enrichment of GO terms were accepted at an FDR cutoff 0.005 and pathways were restricted to 10 and a pathway size range of 2–2000. InteractiVenn was used to create Venn diagrams.

RESULTS:
Results
Data Reproducibility
The repeatability of the Mag‐NET technique was assessed using two aliquots of a single sample that were processed in parallel to create technical replicates of the processing workflow, encompassing: enrichment, digestion, and LC‐MS/MS analysis. Two hundred and twenty‐four proteins were included in the analysis, Reduced Major Axis (RMA) regression found a significant (R 2 = 0.665, p < 0.0001) linear relationship between replicates (Figure S1A). The 95% confidence interval (CI) of the intercept and slope were used to assess fixed‐ and proportional‐bias, respectively. The 95% CI for the Intercept (−1.4390 to 2.2910) did span zero (i.e., no fixed bias was detected), whereas the 95% CI for the slope (0.8201–0.8766) did not span 1, which suggests proportional bias existed between replicate analyses. Coefficient of variation was used to assess the technical variation of protein‐specific data The mean CV was 38.1% (SD 30.6%) and the median and inter‐quartile range in CV was M = 29.7% (Q1 16.5% to Q3 53.3%) (Figure S1B).
EV Proteome Validation
In total, 449 proteins were confidently identified (>1 unique peptide at FDR <1%) in plasma EV samples, 411 of which were curated in the Vesiclepedia database and 344 were curated Exocarta database (Figure 2A,B). Of the 344 proteins that overlapped with Exocarta database, 41 proteins were amongst the top 100 most abundant proteins in exosomes (Figure 2B). After filtering to remove missing values, 403 proteins with a minimum of n = 3 samples per group were used to investigate statistical differences between Pro, Acd, and Xfit groups.
The dynamic range of protein abundances included in the statistical analysis spanned from 0.002 to 663.02 nmol/µg total protein and encompassed 38 proteins from the top 100 exosome proteins reported in Exocarta (Figure 2D). The high abundance proteins included chaperones (heat shock proteins; HS71A, HSP7C, BIP), actin and actin binding proteins (ACTB, FLNA, ACTN4) and proteins of metabolism and transport (ENOA, GBB1, G3P, KPYN, CLIC1) as well as glycoproteins, protein kinase C inhibitors (1433F, 1433Z, TSP1) and ubiquitin related protein (UBA1) (Table S1).
Statistical analysis highlighted 141 significant (p < 0.05) differences in protein abundance between Acd, Pro, and Xfit groups (Figure 3A) and 52 of these proteins had a false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (p < 0.05 and q < 0.01). Gene ontology cellular components (GO:CC) enriched amongst the significant proteins included Extracellular space [enrichment FDR (eFDR) = 9.8E−63], Extracellular region (eFDR = 7.2E−63), and Extracellular organelle (eFDR = 8.5E−49) (Figure 2C). Fuzzy c‐means clustering segregated the 141 proteins significant at p < 0.05 into five patterns of abundance difference amongst Acd, Pro, and Xfit groups. All abundance measurements, statistical outcomes (p‐ and q‐values) and assignments to the numbered clusters are reported in Table S2.
Cluster 1 comprised 65 proteins that were specifically more abundant in older athletes without a history of contact sport (Xfit) and were enriched in GO:BP including Platelet aggregation (eFDR = 3.39E−16) and Platelet Activation (eFDR = 3.65E−16), and KEGG pathways such as Motor protein (eFDR = 1.24E−08) and Cytoskeleton in muscle cells (eFDR = 1.82E−05).
Clusters 2 and 3 encompassed 34 and 31 proteins, respectively, and were most abundant in Xfit athletes, intermediate in Acd players and had the lowest abundance in Pro rugby players. Functional enrichment analysis of Cluster 2 proteins included GO: BP terms involving Complement Activation, classical pathway (eFDR = 6.40E−05) and Regulation of triglyceride catabolic process (eFDR = 0.0003) and KEGG pathway associated to Complement and coagulation cascades (eFDR = 1.38E−09) and Cholesterol metabolism (eFDR = 0.0441). Functional enrichment analysis of Cluster 3 proteins highlighted enrichment in GO: BP involving Immunoglobulin mediated immune response (eFDR = 0.00883) and B cell mediated immunity (eFDR = 0.00883) and KEGG pathways associated with Lipid and atherosclerosis (eFDR = 0.0214) and Vitamin digestion and absorption (eFDR = 0.0269).
Cluster 4 included six proteins that were less abundant in Pro rugby athletes compared to Acd and Xfit groups and was enriched in GO: BP terms, including Lipid transport (eFDR = 0.0297) and Lipid localization (eFDR = 0.0297) and KEGG pathways associated with Cholesterol metabolism (eFDR = 0.0598) and PPAR signaling pathway (eFDR = 0.0598).
Cluster 5 consisted of five proteins (AMBP, C4A, C4B, RAN, SERPINA10), that were more abundant in Pro rugby players only, and were associated with GO: BP terms, regulation of apoptotic cell clearance (eFDR = 0.0003) and Complement Activation, classical pathway (eFDR = 0.0020) and KEGG pathways associated with Pertussis (eFDR = 0.0001) and Complement and coagulation cascades (eFDR = 0.0010). All Cluster annotations, including enrichment FDR, fold enrichment and GO Pathway enrichment are reported in Tables S2 and S3.
Volcano plots were used to illustrate protein‐specific detail relating to the contrasts between pairs of experimental groups (Figure 4). Forty‐six proteins exhibited differences (p < 0.05) between Pro and Acd groups (Figure 4A) but only four proteins (OMD, NID1, PCD12, UFO) had an FDR < 20% (p < 0.05, q < 0.2) and no proteins were significantly different at the 1% FDR criterion used in the three‐way analysis (Figure 3A) of Pro, Acd, and Xfit groups. Differences between Pro and Xfit groups were more numerous and encompassed 114 differences (p < 0.05), including 16 proteins (CLUS, PEDF, BTD, IC1, HGFA, ZPI, BGH, ATL4, CAD13, UBA1, CO3, BIP, NID1, AACT, KVD33, LV743) at <1% FDR (Figure 4B).
Analysis of Proteins Significantly Different Only in Pro Rugby Players
Figure 5A, illustrates proteins that were significantly different (p < 0.05, q < 0.01) in samples from Pro rugby players compared to either aged‐matched athletes with no history of contact sports (Xfit group) or younger academy (Acd) rugby players. Proteins (n = 52) that exhibited significant differences (one way ANOVA; p < 0.05; q < 0.01) amongst the three experimental groups were plotted based on their fold difference between either Pro rugby players versus age‐matched Xfit athletes with no history in contact sports (x‐axis) or Pro versus Acd rugby players (y‐axis). The majority of proteins occupy the bottom left quadrant and were less abundant in older rugby players than either age‐matched Xfit athletes or Academy rugby players. The bottom left quadrant included 42 proteins, which shared GO: BP terms including High‐density lipoprotein particle remodeling and clearance (eFDR = 7.89E−05), Lipoprotein metabolic process (eFDR = 7.89E−05) and Reverse cholesterol transport (eFDR = 7.89E−05) and (Table S5).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Rugby has a high injury incidence rate compared to other team contact sports and players are regularly exposed to collision injuries, including blunt trauma to the upper body, head and neck. Sport‐related concussion (SRC) is the most common (20% of all match injuries) injury in Rugby Football Union in England and SRC incidence rates are rigorously monitored. The England professional Rugby injury surveillance project reported 18.4 incidences of SRC per 1000 h of professional play during the 2022–23 season. Reliable diagnosis of concussion is the first step in the management of player health but diagnosis can be challenging in the context of team contact sports. The diagnostic criteria for concussion include actual or suspected loss of consciousness, which may not always occur and players may also present co‐occurring collision or crush injuries to the torso or neck.
The long‐term consequences of SRC remain to be fully understood but connections have been drawn between concussions and negative consequences on cognitive function, including chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), Alzheimer's disease (AD), and motor neuron disease (MND). Former elite rugby players may have lower cognitive function compared to non‐contact sport players and older adults with a history of three or more concussions during adulthood have worse cognitive performance than those with no history of concussion. Electroencephalography (EEG), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and advanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can each distinguish distinct patterns in individuals with persistent post‐concussion symptoms, and there is growing interest in identifying blood biomarkers for SRC diagnosis.
Plasma biomarker studies in rugby players have targeted biomarkers of neurodegeneration such as Tau, neurofilament light (NFL), glial fibrillar acidic proteins (GFAP), and others, as potential indicators of traumatic brain injury (TBI). These hypothesis‐led studies suggest a connection between changes in plasma proteins and the occurrence and recovery of SRC. However, biomarkers, such as S100 Calcium binding protein B (S100B), that are elevated after SRC, are also known to be elevated by physical activities such as running and may, therefore, also indicate exercise‐induced muscle damage rather than collision‐specific processes. Plasma proteomics offers broader insights into the physiological responses of athletes and there is growing interest in using omic techniques to discover protein biomarkers related to tissue inflammation and cerebrovascular integrity, particularly in athletes with a history of concussions.
Extracellular vesicles (EV), including microvesicles and exosomes, have gained attention for their roles in exercise‐induced cytokine secretion and as mediators of intercellular communication. EV can be characterized by size, cargo, and surface markers and can contain cargoes, including proteins, lipids, metabolites, messenger RNA, micro RNA (miRNA), and nucleic acids. The unique properties of EV, including their resistance to enzymatic degradation, ability to cross the blood‐brain barrier, and traceability to their cell of origin, make them a promising source for TBI biomarkers. Indeed, EV miRNA biomarkers can distinguish between injured and control samples and recent EV proteomic studies have identified proteomic signatures in National Football League (NFL) players at risk of CTE.
EV represent a small portion of the plasma proteome and methods for isolating EV, including size exclusion chromatography, and ultracentrifugation are labor‐intensive and require specialized equipment. Herein, we employed magnetic polymeric microparticles (Mag‐Net) designed for the isolation, purification, and enrichment of EV from plasma. EV proteomes were studied across three independent groups of athletes, including: young academy rugby players (Acd), older professional rugby players (Pro) with >10 years experience, and CrossFit (Xfit) athletes age‐matched to the Pro players. The Xfit athletes reported no history of impact or concussion injuries and the rugby players had no reported incidence of concussion during the 6 months prior to the collection of samples for this study.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD061593 an https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD061593.