PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Chondrocyte; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: SWATH MS; Data-independent acquisition
quantification: SWATH MS
keywords: Palmitoylation; Senescence

ABSTRACT:
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a chronic, degenerative whole-joint disorder that interferes with quality of life in older individuals. Here, we report a high expression of ZDHHC11 in articular chondrocytes, which is downregulated in the degenerated cartilage of aged mice and OA patients. ZDHHC11 prevents chondrocyte senescence and fosters cartilage anabolism, culminating in an improved OA phenotype. Mice with Zdhhc11 deletion (Zdhhc11fl/fl) exacerbate OA progression in a destabilized medial meniscus (DMM) model.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ZDHHC11-mediated palmitoylation alleviates chondrocyte senescence

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The rProtein A/G MagBeads was applied for the co-immunoprecipitation experiment, following the manufacturer's provided instructions. Briefly, we mixed the treated cells with RIPA Buffer and protease inhibitor cocktail at 4℃ overnight. Then the lysate was incubated with MagBeads that bind specific IP antibodies at 4℃ overnight. After incubation, the IP proteins in complex was released by protein heat-denature and detected by Western blot or for mass spectrometry

DATA PROCESSING:
Spectronaut software (Version 18) was used to search the DIA raw data. 6 peptides per protein and 3 daughter ions per peptide were selected for quantitative analysis. The parameters are as follows up: Protein FDR≤0.01, Peptide FDR≤0.01, Peptide Confidence ≥99%, XIC width≤75ppm. The shared peptides and modified peptides were excluded, and the peak areas were calculated and summed to give the quantitative results. Only the proteins which has at least one unique peptides were used for protein identifications. Bioinformatic analysis of proteomic data was performed with the Majorbio Cloud platform (https://cloud.majorbio.com). P-values and Fold change (FC) for the proteins between the two groups were calculated using R package “t-test”. The thresholds of fold change (>1.2 or <0.83) and P-value <0.05 were used to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Functional annotation of all identified proteins was performed using GO (http://geneontology.org/) and KEGG pathway (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). DEPs were further used to for GO and KEGG enrichment analysis. Protein-protein interaction analysis was performed using the String v11.5 .