PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Ap-ms; Arabidopsis; Tor complex; Proximity labeling; Snrk1 complex; Nitrogen signaling

ABSTRACT:
Nitrogen (N) is of utmost importance for plant growth and development. Multiple studies have shown that N signaling is tightly coupled with carbon (C) levels, but the interplay between C/N metabolism and growth remains largely an enigma. Nonetheless, the protein kinases sucrose non-fermenting 1 (SNF1)-related kinase 1 (SnRK1) and target of rapamycin (TOR), two ancient central metabolic regulators, are emerging as key integrators that link C/N status with growth. Despite their pivotal importance, the exact mechanisms behind the sensing of N status and its integration with C availability to drive metabolic decisions are largely unknown. Especially for SnRK1 it is not clear how this kinase responds to altered N levels. Therefore, we first monitored N-dependent SnRK1 kinase activity at high resolution with our in vivo separation of phase-based activity reporter of kinase (SPARK), revealing a contrasting N-dependency in shoot and root tissues. Next, using affinity purification (AP) and proximity labeling (PL) coupled to mass spectrometry (MS) experiments, we constructed an N-specific SnRK1 and TOR interactome in Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures during N-starved and  repleted growth conditions. To broaden our understanding of the N-dependency of the TOR/SnRK1 signaling pathway, the resulting network was compared to corresponding C-related networks, identifying a large number of novel, N-specific interactors. Moreover, through integration of N dependent transcriptome and phosphoproteome data, we were able to pinpoint additional N dependent network components, revealing SnRK1 regulatory proteins that might function at the crosstalk of C/N signaling. Finally, confirmation of known and identification of novel interactors, such as IRE1A and RAB18, indicate that the endoplasmic reticulum functions as a key regulatory hub for TOR and SnRK1 via integration of C/N signaling. Part2, kinase assay on RAB18, PANK2, SEC12 and NLP8.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A Nitrogen-specific Interactome Analysis Sheds Light on the Role of the SnRK1 and TOR Kinases in
Plant Nitrogen Signaling - part2 kinase assay

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For kinase assays coupled to mass spectrometry, recombinant His-MBP fusion proteins were incubated with His-MBP-KIN10 or His-MBP-KIN10-K48M (kinase-dead). Kinase reactions were performed overnight 4h at 30°C, combining 2.5 μL kinase with 5 μL substrate in kinase assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM EGTA, 2.5 mM DTT, 5 mM MgCl2, 50 uM cold ATP, 1x PhosSTOP). Reactions were stopped by addition of NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (NP0007, Invitrogen) and NuPAGE Sample reducing agent (MP0004, Invitrogen) and incubated for 10 min at 70°C. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on a NuPAGE gel and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Gel excision and preparation of the samples for MS was further completed as described in Van Leene et al., 2015. LC-MS/MS analysis Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 μl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)), of which 4 μl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column that was made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, peptides were separated on a 50 cm μPAC™ column with C18-endcapped functionality (Pharmafluidics, Belgium) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a nonlinear gradient from 99% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) reaching 10% solvent B’ (0.1% formic acid in water/ACN, 20/80 (v/v))  in 9 min, 33% solvent B’ in 32 min, 55% solvent B’ in 43 min, 70% solvent B’ in 48 min, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by a 2 min wash with 70% solvent B’. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 5 most abundant peaks in each MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (400–2,000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 5 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated with a width of 2 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 25% after filling the trap at a target value of 50,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200–2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

DATA PROCESSING:
The Thermo raw files were searched with MaxQuant (version 2.2.0.0) against the Araport11plus database with recombinant His-MBP fusion protein (substrates and kinases) sequences added. Fixed modification was set to Carbamidomethyl (C). Variable modifications were set to oxidation(M), acetyl (protein N-termini) and phospho(S,T,Y). Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 4.5 ppm and on fragment ions to 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as protease, allowing for 2 missed cleavages, and cleavage when R or K was followed by P. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.