PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Bone marrow; Stem cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Hspcs; Emp1

ABSTRACT:
To illustrate EMP1-interacting proteins, we performed co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) followed by mass spectrometry using HSPCs (Lin-c-Kit+) to characterize protein interactomes of EMP1. Murine HSPCs (Lin-c-Kit+) were infected with retrovirus to force EMP1 overexpression (with HA tag). Then IgG or HA antibodies were used to conducted co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP), followed by and mass spectrometry analysis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
EMP1 preserves hematopoietic stem cell potential under homeostasis and radiation-induced injury by alleviating ER stress

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
All the samples were sent on dry ice to Jingjie PTM Biolad (Hangzhou) for proteomic analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 5% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) over 60 min, 25% to 35% in 22 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flowrate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific). The separated peptides were analyzed in Q ExactiveTM HF-X (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nano-electrospray ion source. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The full MS scan resolution was set to 60,000 for a scan range of 350–1600 m/z. Up to 20 most abundant precursors were then selected for further MS/MS analyses with 30 s dynamic exclusion. The HCD fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 28%. The fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 1E5, with an intensity threshold of 3.3E4 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were analyzed using the R package limma and edgeR. DEPs were selected if they showed a fold-change of at least 1.5 and with statistical significance of P<0.05.