PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: acetylated residue; methionine oxidation with neutral loss of 64 Da; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition; Metaproteomics
keywords: A. aphrophilus; A. actinomycetemcomitans; T6ss

ABSTRACT:
The Type VI secretion system (T6SS) is a bacterial mechanism that delivers effectors to eliminate competitors and modulate host responses. We previously discovered that the oral symbiont Aggregatibacter aphrophilus uses its T6SS to kill the pathobiont Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. To understand how the T6SS-dependent mechanism of A. aphrophilus affects host cells and A. actinomycetemcomitans, we co-cultured our immortalised epithelial cell line with A. actinomycetemcomitans and various strains of A. aphrophilus: wild-type (HK83 + JP2, n = 6), a T6SS-deficient strain (HK83 Δhcp + JP2, n = 6), and double mutants (HK83 Δtle5 Δglh + JP2, n = 6). As a baseline, we also examined single inoculations of A. aphrophilus (HK83, n = 6), the Δhcp mutant (HK83 Δhcp, n = 6), the Δtle5 Δglh mutant (HK83 Δtle5 Δglh, n = 6), and A. actinomycetemcomitans JP2 (JP2, n = 6). Cells not challenged served as controls. This study aims to identify specific effectors and characterize host responses to A. aphrophilus T6SS.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A. aphrophilus uses a type VI secretion system to modify epithelial cell responses to highly leukotoxic A. actinomycetemcomitans

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Co-cultured samples were digested and cleaned using in-StageTip (iST) sample preparation kit (PreOmic). Cells seeded 24-well plates collected from co-cultured assay were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), lysed in lysis buffer from iST sample, and then removed by cell scraper. 50 µg of cured extracted proteins were collected and processed following the manufactory protocol of iST kit. Subsequent analysis occurred on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Easy nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In brief, one microgram of each sample was separated on EASY-Spray™ LC Columns (Thermo Scientific), coupled to a 15 cm-long and 75 µm-diameter silica emitter, as well as a ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 120 A and 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH).  A three-liner gradient of acetonitrile/water (containing 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute), first from 2% to 30% acetonitrile in 60 min, second from 30% to 97% in 10 minutes, then 97% for 10 min, was applied. The mass spectrometer was set into a data-depended manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS using Xcalibur software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A mass range of 300–1500 m/z was selected for the Orbitrap analyzer. Sample injections were randomized, and a pooled sample from all cases was strategically inserted around the midpoint of the sequence, serving as the reference for the label-free quantification stage.

DATA PROCESSING:
Progenesis QI for Proteomics (Nonlinear Dynamics) was employed for label-free quantification, following the procedure outlined by Bao et al. in 2017 (PMID: 28667274). In summary, all raw files from a sample experiment were aligned with their corresponding pooled sample serving as an alignment reference. These aligned files were then searched using Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) with the same parameters described above for protein identification. To identify proteins, the spectrum reports of the search results were generated by Scaffold v4.0 (Proteome Software) with a protFDR threshold of 1%, requiring a minimum of one peptide, and a pepFDR of 0.5%. These reports were used by Progenesis QI to identify the quantified proteins. Only proteins with at least two identified peptides were considered as genuinely identified in the study. Their quantification was based on the normalized abundances of the protein between the two given conditions within each experiment. Proteins with a student-test p-value < 0.05 and fold change > 2 were considered as genuinely “regulated”.

METHODS:
Methods
Construction of A. aphrophilus glh and tle5 Mutants
A. aphrophilus strain HK83 (CCUG 49494), originally isolated from saliva, was previously modified to a V factor–independent growth phenotype. BLAST searches were conducted against the whole-genome sequence of strain HK83 (GenBank accession GCA_003703745.1) to obtain the sequences of the genes encoding Tle5 and Glh, respectively. Novel mutants A. aphrophilus tle5::spe (HK83 Δtle5), glh::kan [Sper, Kmr](HK83 Δglh), and tle5::spe, glh::kan [Sper, Kmr] (HK83 Δtle5 Δglh) were generated in the present study using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)–based gene replacement approach as applied to the hcp gene of HK83 in our recent work (i.e., strain HK83 hcp::kan [Kmr]). Sequences of the oligonucleotide primers used for amplifying flanking sequences to the respective target genes for mutant construction and protein gene database entries are listed in Supplementary Table 1. Confirmation of the glh and tle5 allelic replacements and the orientation of the inserted resistance cassette were done by PCR, using the same approach as described for the hcp gene replacement. In brief, we used a target gene–specific F1 and R2 oligonucleotide primer (Supplementary Table 1), respectively, in combination with a primer specific for the appropriate antibiotic determinant, that is, spectinomycin (Spe1: 5′-CCACTCTCAACTCCTGATCC-3′) or kanamycin (H7R: 5′- GGACGGCGGCTTTGTTGAATAAATCG-3′). The A. aphrophilus strains were cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2 on blood agar (5% defibrinated horse blood, 5 mg hemin/L, 10 mg vitamin K/L, Columbia agar base) routinely or in transformation experiments on trypticase soy broth (TSB) agar (0.1% yeast extract, 5% heat-inactivated horse serum, and 1.5% TSB agar) (Becton, Dickinson and Company). For selection, 100 μg/mL kanamycin or spectinomycin was added to the growth media when required.
Multispecies Biofilm Formation and Harvesting
An in vitro biofilm, containing A. actinomycetemcomitans strain JP2 (OMZ 295), Actinomyces oris (OMZ 745), Candida albicans (OMZ 110), Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. nucleatum KP-F2 (OMZ 598), Streptococcus oralis SK248 (OMZ 607), Streptococcus mutans UA159 (OMZ 918), and V. dispar ATCC 17748T (OMZ 493) with or without A. aphrophilus strains (HK83, HK83 Δhcp, HK83 Δtle5 Δglh) was cultivated on the hydroxyapatite disk and anaerobically incubated for 64 h in a growth medium consisting of 60% saliva, 10% human serum, and 30% modified fluid universal medium as previously described. The number of the bacteria was quantified by colony-forming unit (CFU). Specifically, serial dilutions of suspended biofilm bacteria were prepared in 0.9% NaCl, and 50-µL aliquots were plated on selective agars: Columbia blood agar (Oxoid, + 5% whole human blood) for total CFU, A. oris, A. aphrophilus, and V. dispar; mitis salivarius agar (Difco) + 1 mL of 1% sodium tellurite solution) for S. oralis; fastidious anaerobe agar (Lab M, Potters Bar) with erythromycin (1 mg/L), vancomycin (4 mg/L), and norfloxacin (1 mg/L) for F. nucleatum; Biggy agar (Difco) for Candida albicans; and Aac-selective agar (Oxoid) + 5% horse serum, vancomycin (5 mg/L), bacitracin (50,000 International units per liter (IU/L)), and 5% human blood for A. actinomycetemcomitans.
Co-culture of Epithelial Cells with A. actinomycetemcomitans and/or A. aphrophilus
Immortalized human gingival epithelium keratinocytes (HGEK-16) were seeded in 24-well plates (4.5 × 104 cells/well) and cultured overnight in defined keratinocyte serum-free medium (Invitrogen) at 37 °C, 5% CO2. After washing, cells were infected with wild-type A. aphrophilus HK83, A. actinomycetemcomitans JP2, or mutant strains (HK83 Δhcp, HK83 Δtle5 Δglh) alone or in combination (A. aphrophilus:A. actinomycetemcomitans in 3:1 ratio) at a multiplicity of infection of 100. Seven co-culture groups were tested, each with 6 replicates. Plates were centrifuged (5 min, 1,500 rpm) to engage bacteria and incubated for 24 h at 37 °C, 5% CO2.
Protein Extraction and Cleanup
Co-cultured cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 3 times, lysed in lysis buffer from the iST sample, and then removed by cell scraper. Fifty micrograms of cured extracted proteins was collected and processed following the manufactory protocol of the in-StageTip (iST) kit (PreOmic). Extracted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Savant SPD121P, Thermo Scientific) and stored at −20 °C.
Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry Analysis and Protein Quantification
Peptides were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and label-free quantification was performed with Progenesis QI as described previously. Protein identifications were conducted using the Mascot (version 2.4.1, Matrix Science) against an in-house database downloaded from Uniport (Supplementary Table 2). Proteins with a fold change >2 and a t-test P value <0.05 were considered regulated.
Data Clustering and Functional Analysis
Quantified protein data were analyzed using R software (Quantable package, https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/quantable/index.html) for unsupervised clustering and heat maps, whereas principal component analysis (PCA) was generated with ggplot. Regulated human proteins were further annotated using WebGestalt for gene ontology (GO) enrichment, specifically “Biological Process noRedundant” (GO-BPnR), against all identified proteins (Supplementary Table 3).

RESULTS:
Results
Identification of T6SS Effectors Glh and Tle5 in A. aphrophilus Strain HK83
Blast search of the genome of HK83 revealed that this strain encodes a phospholipase of the Tle5 family (GenBank: RMW89110.1; database name phospholipase) with a length of 719 amino acids (Supplementary Table 1). This protein displays approximately 30% amino acid identity with the type VI secretion system-dependent phospholipase D effector PldB of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (GenBank: MBF3156171.1). As a hallmark of this family of proteins, the A. aphrophilus protein contains an HxKxxxxD amino acid motif. Blast search also revealed that strain HK83 encodes a glycoside hydrolase (Glh; GenBank: RMW80835.1; “hypothetical protein”; and GenBank WP_259642111; “glycoside hydrolase family 19 protein”), with a length of 668 amino acids. This protein exhibits partial amino acid identity (approximately 36%) to the Glh family 19 protein of P. aeruginosa (GeneBank: HCR1337642.1). The observation that at least the Tle5 protein of HK83 is encoded directly downstream of a gene encoding a type VI secretion-related VirG protein (type VI secretion system Vgr family protein; GenBank: WP_114975745) further prompted us to conduct genetic analysis to assess a potential role of Glh and Tle5 in the T6SS-dependent antagonism against A. actinomycetemcomitans. For this, derivatives with allelic replacements of these genes as single and double mutants were subsequently generated in strain HK83.
Role of Glh and Tle5 in T6SS-Dependent Killing of A. actinomycetemcomitans in Multispecies Biofilms
We next evaluated the T6SS-mediated competitive potency of wild-type or mutant A. aphrophilus HK83 strains against the A. actinomycetemcomitans JP2 strain within multispecies biofilms. Consistent with previous findings, the presence of wild-type A. aphrophilus significantly reduced the abundance of A. actinomycetemcomitans compared with biofilms lacking A. aphrophilus, a reduction that was abolished in T6SS-deficient strains (Δhcp mutant) (Fig. 1A). Interestingly, deletion of Tle5 (Fig. 1B) or Glh (Fig. 1C) alone in A. aphrophilus did not significantly diminish A. actinomycetemcomitans killing. However, the simultaneous deletion of both effectors led to a resurgence in A. actinomycetemcomitans numbers (Fig. 1D). Importantly, neither A. aphrophilus nor its derivative mutants significantly affected the growth of other species present in the biofilm, underscoring the specificity of the T6SS effect.
Role T6SS-Dependent Killing of A. actinomycetemcomitans in Epithelial Cell Responses
The T6SS can also deliver effectors that target several cellular processes in eukaryotic cells, thus facilitating pathogenesis. Therefore, we first sought to determine whether the individual effectors or Hcp of A. aphrophilus exert any effects on epithelial cells, in addition to their competitive activity toward A. actinomycetemcomitans. We used various strains of A. aphrophilus together with A. actinomycetemcomitans to co-infect the cells: the wild type (HK83 + JP2, n = 6), the T6SS-deficient strain (HK83 Δhcp + JP2, n = 6), and the double effector mutants (HK83 Δtle5 Δglh + JP2, n = 6). We also used single inoculations of A. aphrophilus to infect the cells: the wild type (HK83, n = 6), the Δhcp mutant (HK83 Δhcp, n = 6), the Δtle5 Δglh mutant (HK83 Δtle5 Δglh, n = 6), and A. actinomycetemcomitans JP2 (JP2, n = 6). Cells cultured alone without any bacterial challenge served as controls. Epithelial cells expressed 3,189 proteins with a protein false discovery rate of 0.284%. After excluding contaminants and decoys, this included 2,942 human proteins, 46 A. aphrophilus proteins, 125 A. actinomycetemcomitans proteins, and 54 proteins that could not be distinguished between the 2 bacterial species due to shared intergeneric peptides (see deposit data). Nevertheless, because it is difficult to determine whether the detected bacterial proteins originated from within the epithelial cells or were residual contaminants from the co-culture experiment (despite 3 washes with PBS to remove bacteria), only human proteins were analyzed further in this study. Initial analysis using unsupervised clustering (Fig. 2A) and PCA (Fig. 2B) based on human proteome expression failed to separate the groups. We then focused on regulated proteins (P < 0.05, fold change >2, Supplementary Table 4) comparing unchallenged and bacterial-challenged groups to assess inflammatory changes as well as comparing HK83-included groups with the corresponding T6SS- or dual-effector–deficient mutants to evaluate the effects of T6SS on epithelial cells. These analyses are further elaborated below.
Inflammatory changes in co-culture groups
Compared with control, the HK83 + JP2 combination stimulated the fewest regulated human proteins (12), followed by HK83 (32), HK83 Δhcp + JP2 (52), HK83 Δtle5 Δglh + JP2 (85), HK83 Δtle5 Δglh (89), HK83 Δhcp (109), and JP2 (114) (Fig. 3A). Hence, A. actinomycetemcomitans, but not A. aphrophilus alone, causes a pronounced host response, which is in turn ablated by the co-presence of A. aphrophilus.
The “acute inflammatory response” category appeared among the top 10 enriched GO-BPnR functions for nearly all bacterial co-infection–challenge conditions versus control, except in the HK83 + JP2 group (Fig. 3B, Supplementary Table 5). Proteins contributing to this enrichment, including ITIH4, ICAM1, IL1A, IL1B, and S100A8 (Fig. 3C), showed similar abundance in the HK83 + JP2 group compared with control (highlighted in red in Fig. 3D), while their levels were significantly higher in other bacterial challenges. Conversely, the HK83 + JP2 combination elicited the “immune response–regulating signaling pathway,” an immune-related cellular response that was not observed in among other challenge groups (Supplementary Table 5). This pathway involved proteins such as FGB, TNIP1, ACTB, and ACTG1. While most of these proteins were also upregulated in other groups (highlighted in blue, Fig. 3D), their expression levels did not rank among the top 10, due to stronger responses documented in other pathways. Hence, co-infection with HK83 + JP2 triggers a distinct immune-related cellular response, compared with the other groups. The only remaining top immune-related term, “response to interleukin-1,” emerged as an enriched one (Supplementary Table 5), with 4 of 6 contributing proteins also involved in the “acute inflammatory response” and “immune response–regulating signaling pathway” (Fig. 3C). The 2 unique proteins, IL1RN and RBX1, displayed similar expression levels in the HK83 + JP2 group and the untreated control, whereas IL1RN was markedly higher and RBX1 was significantly lower in other groups (highlighted in brown, Fig. 3D), suggesting a less affected interleukin-1 response in the HK83 + JP2 combination compared with the other groups.
In summary, both the regulated protein counts and the enrichment analyses indicate that the co-infection with HK83 + JP2 had the fewest protein expression changes on gingival epithelial cells, likely due to the ability of HK83 to kill JP2. This effect was absent with HK83 strains lacking the core tube protein Hcp or effectors Tle5 and Glh.
Impact of T6SS on epithelial cells
In the absence of JP2, cells monoinfected with A. aphrophilus wild type showed minimal protein regulation compared with its mutants: 15 in HK83 versus HK83 Δhcp and 14 in HK83 versus HK83 Δtle5 Δglh (Fig. 4A). Overrepresentation analysis showed no enrichment for “acute inflammatory response,” “response to interleukin-1” (Fig. 4B and C), or other immune-related functions based on these proteins (Supplementary Table 5), indicating a low inflammatory-inducing potential by A. aphrophilus, in line with its commensal symbiont ecological profile. However, when the cells were co-infected with A. aphrophilus and JP2, more proteins were regulated (49 in HK83 + JP2 vs. HK83 Δhcp + JP2, 67 in HK83 + JP2 vs. HK83 Δtle5 Δglh + JP2) (Fig. 4A), including 4 of the 5 proteins involved in the acute inflammatory response (except from S100A8) (Fig. 4B) and all 6 proteins contributing to “response to interleukin-1” (Fig. 4C). This indicates that neither the core tube protein Hcp nor the effectors Tle5 and Glh appear to have an effect on the key inflammatory pathways of the epithelial cells.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Oral bacteria live within a multispecies, spatially structured biofilm, where they must compete for limited growing space and nutrients. Several major competitive mechanisms are wildly adopted by oral bacteria to defend against eukaryotic cells and other bacterial species. One of the most sophisticated mechanisums is the type VI secretion system (T6SS), a contractile nanomachine that injects a needle into neighboring bacteria to deliver toxic proteins, known as “effectors”. T6SS effector proteins are injected into neighboring cells as a “bullet,” where they target cell wall components such as peptidoglycan and membrane phospholipids. Interestingly, although the T6SS is well-known for targeting other bacteria, it was initially discovered for its antieukaryotic activity, disrupting host cells. Among potential T6SS effector proteins, an ≈80-kDa phospholipase D (Tle5), using Pseudomonas aeruginosa as a model organism, has been shown to play a significant role in T6SS-mediated antagonism by targeting membrane phospholipids, and a glycoside hydrolase (Glh) of P. aeruginosa was found to degrade the glycan backbone of cell walls.
Although the T6SS is estimated to be present in about 25% of gram-negative bacterial species, Aggregatibacter aphrophilus is the only known oral bacterium with a functional T6SS that targets Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, as we recently reported, also assessing mutants lacking the T6SS “tube” core protein, hemolysin co-regulated protein (Hcp), which were deficient in T6SS activity. Comparative genome analyses have revealed the presence of T6SS in oral Campylobacter and Prevotella spp.. A. aphrophilus, although capable of causing infectious endocarditis and brain abscesses, is generally considered a symbiont in the oral cavity and is frequently found in periodontally healthy individuals. In contrast, despite their close relationship and sharing of approximately 80% of their genetic content, A. actinomycetemcomitans is strongly associated with aggressive forms of periodontitis in young individuals. Interestingly, the 2 species rarely coexist in a given oral niche, which suggests a competitive relationship. Driven by these observations, we have recently confirmed that the possession of a T6SS provides A. aphrophilus with a strong ecological advantage over A. actinomycetemcomitans when brought together in the same ecological niche. Whether the T6SS of this species can directly participate in the interaction of A. aphrophilus with eukaryotic cells is yet to be identified. To bridge this knowledge gap, we aimed to conduct an in vitro proteome profiling in oral epithelial cells challenged with A. aphrophilus alone or in competition with A. actinomycetemcomitants and further assessed the involvement of the T6SS effectors Tle5 and Glh by means of deletion mutans.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplemental Material
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work was funded by grants from Swedish Research Council (2017-01198; 2021-03528, to N.B.), strategic funds from Karolinska Institutet (to G.N., and N.B.), and TUA grants from Region Västerbotten, Sweden (7002667; to J.O.) and by funds from Insamlingsstiftelsen, Medical Faculty, Umeå University (to J.O.).
ORCID iDs: K. Bao  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1183-5607
J. Oscarsson  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7948-9464
J. Grossmann  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6899-9020
G.N. Belibasakis  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8164-0653
N. Bostanci  https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6742-3556
Data Availability: The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD057672.
A supplemental appendix to this article is available online.