PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Malignant cell
diseases: Neuroblastoma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; phosphorylated residue; acetylated residue; methylthiolated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Phosphoproteomics; Sh-sy5y; Imr-32; Neuronal differentiation; Tmt

ABSTRACT:
The human neuroblastoma cell lines SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 can be differentiated into neuron-like phenotypes through treatment with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). After differentiation, these cell lines are extensively utilized as in vitro models to study various aspects of neuronal cell biology. However, temporal and quantitative profiling of the proteome and phosphoproteome of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells throughout ATRA-induced differentiation has been limited. Here, we performed relative quantification of the phosphoproteomes of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells at multiple time points during ATRA-induced differentiation. The data presented serve as a valuable resource for investigating temporal protein and phosphoprotein abundance changes in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells during ATRA-induced differentiation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Temporal Quantitative Phosphoproteomic Profiling of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 Neuroblastoma Cells During All-trans Retinoic Acid-Induced Neuronal Differentiation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells were harvested at specified time points. Media was aspirated and cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, supplemented with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Mini Tablets). Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine for 1 hour at 60oC, followed by alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate for 10 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:10 trypsin:protein ratio. Tryptic digested peptides were subsequently purified using C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), then re-suspended in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. For labelling, samples were labelled with TMT10plex label reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the following order: IMR-32 - Control: 126; 12 hours: 127C; 1 day: 128C; 3 days: 129C; 5 days: 130C. SH-SY5Y - Control: 127N; 12 hours: 128N; 1 day: 129N; 3 days: 130N; 5 days: 131. TMT reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with samples. Equal amounts of each sample were mixed and fractionated into 8 fractions by high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit.

DATA PROCESSING:
The mass spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4) with SEQUEST as a search engine. The data were searched against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (Proteome ID UP000005640). The search parameters were as follows: Precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; tryptic cleavage specificity, 2 maximum missed cleavage. For the modification setting: oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) was set as the dynamic modification and methylthiol of cysteine (+45.988 Da), TMT6plex of peptide N-terminal, protein N-terminal and lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as the static modification. In addition, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966) were set as the dynamic modification for the phosphoproteomic analysis. The protein level false discovery rate was estimated by Percolator with an experimental q-value (exp. q-value) threshold set as 0.05.

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Cell Cultures and Treatment
IMR-32 (ATCC CCL-127) and SH-SY5Y (ATCC CRL-2266) cell lines were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). IMR-32 was maintained in ATCC-formulated Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM, ATCC), and SH-SY5Y was maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, Gibco, Waltham, MA, USA). Media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA). All the cell lines were maintained at 37 °C in a 5% humidified CO2 atmosphere in a T-75 flask at a density of 300,000 cells/flask. Cells were passaged when confluency reached approximately 75% using trypsin–EDTA (0.25%) phenol red solution (Gibco, Waltham, MA, USA) for dissociation. For differentiation induction, cells were seeded in a T-25 culture flask at a density of 100,000 cells/flask and treated with ATRA (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) at specified concentrations and durations. The ATRA stock solution was prepared at a concentration of 0.5 μg/μL. The differentiation inducer was replenished every 2 days by changing the media. Differentiation extent was evaluated using the Neurite Outgrowth Staining Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.
4.2. Sample Preparation
After differentiation induction, cells were harvested at specified time points. Samples were collected in four independent experiments. Media were aspirated, and cells were washed twice with PBS. Cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, supplemented with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Mini Tablets (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)). Urea concentration of the samples was diluted to 1 M with 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) at pH 8.5. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) for 1 h at 60 °C, followed by alkylation with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for 10 min at room temperature in the dark. Alkylated proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a 1:10 trypsin:protein ratio. Tryptic digested peptides were subsequently purified using C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), then resuspended in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. For labeling, samples were labeled with TMT10plex label reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in the following order: IMR-32—control, 126; 12 h, 127C; 1 day, 128C; 3 days, 129C; 5 days, 130C. SH-SY5Y—control, 127N; 12 h, 128N; 1 day, 129N; 3 days, 130N; 5 days, 131. TMT reagent was dissolved in acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with samples. Equal amounts of each sample were mixed and fractionated into 8 fractions by High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
4.3. Phosphopeptide Enrichment
After TMT labeling, equivalent amounts of each sample were mixed and vacuum-dried, resulting in 1 mg of peptides. Phosphopeptides were enriched by sequential enrichment using the metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) method. First, phosphopeptides were enriched using the High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Flow-through and wash fractions were retained, pooled, and subjected to ferric nitrilotriacetate (Fe-NTA)-based phosphopeptides enrichment using a High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Eluents were pooled and fractionated with High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
4.4. LC-MS/MS Analysis
Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, the amount of peptides was estimated using a Quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A total of 1 µg of labeled peptide or phosphopeptide fractions were subjected to nano-LC separation utilizing Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system using a 25 cm long, 75 µm i.d. C18 column. The columns were heated to 50 °C for all experiments. Mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and ACN (buffer B). Peptide fractions were loaded onto the trapping column for 5 min at 100% A at 5 µL/min, then eluted through the analytical column at 300 nL/min with the gradient listed in Supplementary Table S9. Eluate was analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS MS3) or pseudoMS3 (multistage activation, MSA) for total proteome and phosphoproteome analysis respectively. Details are provided in the Supplementary Table S9.
4.5. Proteomic Data Analysis
The mass spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with SEQUEST as a search engine. The data were searched against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (Proteome ID UP000005640). The search parameters were as follows: Precursor ion mass tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da; tryptic cleavage specificity, 2 maximum missed cleavages. For the modification setting, oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) was set as the dynamic modification and methylthiol of cysteine (+45.988 Da), TMT6plex of peptide N-terminal, protein N-terminal and lysine (+229.163 Da) were set as the static modification. In addition, the phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine (+79.966) was set as the dynamic modification for the phosphoproteomic analysis. The protein-level false discovery rate was estimated by Percolator with an experimental q-value (exp. q-value) threshold set as 0.05. 
4.6. Statistical Analysis and Data Visualization
Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed in R and visualized with the ggbiplot package. Hierarchical clustering utilized Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Protein quantification relied on the built-in “Reporter ions quantifier” node of Proteome Discoverer. Proteins were considered differentially expressed if the difference was statistically significant (Benjamini-corrected p-values ≤ 0.05). For the total proteomic results, the differentially expressed proteins were subjected to analysis with the DAVID (the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery; version 2021) webware for annotation enrichment analysis.
The quantitative phosphoproteomic information was extracted from the Proteome Discoverer results and uploaded to phosphomatics webware to perform the kinase-substrate enrichment analysis and annotation enrichment analysis. KSEA analysis was performed with the PhosphoSitePlus and NetworKIN datasets, using a NetworKIN score cutoff of 2, a p-value cutoff of 0.05, and a substrate count cutoff of 5. Graphs were plotted using GraphPad Prism (version 9, GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA) unless otherwise specified.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

RESULTS:
2. Results
2.1. Quantitative Proteomic Profiling Reveals Temporal Remodeling of the Proteome during Neuronal Differentiation
To estimate the extent of neuronal differentiation induced by different concentrations of ATRA in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 human neuroblastoma cell lines, we conducted neurite outgrowth staining experiments. Cells were treated with varying concentrations of ATRA, ranging from 1 μM to 16 μM, and the extent of neurite outgrowth was evaluated. The results demonstrated that 8 μM ATRA treatment resulted in significant neurite outgrowth in both SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cell lines, indicating successful neuronal differentiation (Supplementary Figure S1). We then examined the temporal morphological changes induced by 8 μM ATRA treatment over the course of 5 days. As expected, both cell lines displayed significant neurite outgrowth after 5 days of induction with ATRA, demonstrating the progressive neuronal differentiation over time at this concentration (Supplementary Figure S2). Subsequently, quantitative proteomic analyses were conducted to characterize the temporal alterations in the global proteome elicited by ATRA treatment in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 human neuroblastoma cell lines. Cells were treated with ATRA for 12 h, 1 day, 3 days, or 5 days, and quantitative proteomic profiles were acquired at each time point (Figure 1). In total, 3840 and 4361 proteins were identified in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells, respectively (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). Principal component analysis (PCA) of the quantified proteomes showed that the ATRA-treated groups and the control group could be separated from each other and formed five distinct clusters (Figure 2A). For SH-SY5Y, principal component (PC) 1 and PC 2 explained 51.0% and 20.6% of the data variance, respectively (Figure 2A); for IMR-32, PC 1 and PC 2 explained 42.1% and 23.5% of the data variance, respectively (Figure 2A). Hierarchical clustering corroborated these results, affirming the capacity of the quantitative proteomic data to differentiate the control group from the various ATRA-treated groups (Supplementary Figure S3). Collectively, the data highlights considerable time-dependent proteomic shifts induced by ATRA. Specifically, in SH-SY5Y cell lines, 529, 607, 1147, and 1312 proteins were differentially expressed after 12 h, 1 day, 3 days, and 5 days post-ATRA treatment. Similarly, IMR-32 showed 361, 936, 973, and 1135 differentially expressed proteins at the same respective time points (Figure 2B; Supplementary Tables S3 and S4).
2.2. Functional Enrichment Analysis Highlights Biological Processes Altered during Differentiation
To elucidate the biological roles of the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), functional enrichment analysis was conducted. Upregulated and downregulated DEPs were separately subjected to enrichment analysis against the full set of identified proteins as the background in order to identify enriched gene ontology (GO) terms within the biological process domain (Supplementary Table S5). The top 10 most significantly enriched terms are presented in Supplementary Figure S4. Enrichment analysis revealed that upregulated proteins were predominantly associated with neuronal and nervous system development, as well as cytoskeleton organization. In contrast, downregulated proteins were highly enriched in processes related to cell division, chaperone function, protein folding, and translation. Notably, although not within the top 10 enriched terms, analysis also indicated an association between downregulated proteins and the one-carbon metabolic process, including the GO terms: (GO:0006730) one-carbon metabolic process, (GO:0035999) tetrahydrofolate interconversion, (GO:0046654) tetrahydrofolate biosynthetic process, (GO:0046653) tetrahydrofolate metabolic process, (GO:0006760) folic-acid-containing compound metabolic process, and (GO:0046655) folic acid metabolic process (Supplementary Table S5). We subsequently examined the specific proteins related to these biological processes in greater detail.
2.2.1. Differentiation Alters Expression Cytoskeletal Proteins
The GO enrichment analysis revealed an enrichment of several GO terms related to actin and microtubule organization among the upregulated proteins (Supplementary Figure S4). This prompted a detailed investigation into the changes in the abundance of actin-binding proteins and microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) during neuronal differentiation in our proteomic study (Figure 3). Specifically, the actin-binding proteins cofilin-1, neuromodulin, and brain acid soluble protein 1 (BASP1) were upregulated following differentiation in both the SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cell lines. Additionally, MAP1B and MAP2 were upregulated upon differentiation in both cell lines. The proteomic analysis also revealed a general upregulation of eight cytoplasmic dyneins, including dynein light chain 1 (DYNLL1), cytoplasmic dynein 1 heavy chain 1 (DYNC1H1), cytoplasmic dynein 1 intermediate chain 2 (DYNC1I2), dynein light chain Tctex-type 1 (DYNLT1), dynein light chain roadblock-type 1 (DYNLRB1), cytoplasmic dynein 1 light intermediate chain 2 (DYNC1LI2), cytoplasmic dynein 1 light intermediate chain 1 (DYNC1LI1), and dynein light chain 2 (DYNLL2). While DYNC1H1 and DYNLRB1 were significantly upregulated exclusively in the IMR-32 cell line and DYNLL2 only in the SH-SY5Y line. In contrast, KIF11, which counteracts dynein-driven microtubule transport, was downregulated upon differentiation in both cell lines.
2.2.2. DNA Replication and Cell Cycle Proteins Are Downregulated upon Differentiation
The proteomic analysis revealed decreased expression of several proteins involved in cell cycle progression upon differentiation. Specifically, components of the minichromosome maintenance (MCM) 2–7 complex, which functions as the replicative helicase to unwind double-stranded DNA during DNA replication, were downregulated following differentiation in both cell lines, with the exception of MCM5 in the IMR-32 cells (Figure 4). Additionally, proteins involved in lagging strand DNA synthesis exhibited reduced expression after differentiation in the two cell lines examined (Figure 4). These downregulated proteins included DNA ligase 1 (LIG1), flap structure-specific endonuclease 1 (FEN1), replication factor C subunit 4 (RFC4), replication factor C subunit 5 (RFC5), and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) (Figure 4).
2.2.3. Molecular Chaperones Are Downregulated in Differentiated Cells
We examined the protein expression pattern of the four chaperone families (namely small heat shock proteins (sHSPs), HSP60, HSP70, and HSP90) and the co-chaperone (Supplementary Figure S5). We identified 29 chaperones or co-chaperones that exhibited significant changes in their protein expression at at least one time point during the differentiation process. Among these 29 proteins, some did not demonstrate consistent trends across the two cell lines examined. For example, differentiation resulted in an upregulation of PFDN6 and HSPA14 in IMR-32, whereas it led to their downregulation in the SH-SY5Y. While some proteins showed divergent responses to differentiation in the SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cell lines, it is noteworthy that all the eight members of the T-complex protein ring complex/chaperonin containing T-complex protein (TRiC/CCT), a subgroup of HSP60 family, displayed a consistent pattern of downregulation in the differentiated SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells following a 3-day ATRA induction (Figure 5A). In addition, it was observed that the key components of mitochondrial chaperones, HSPD1, HSPA9, HSPE1, and TRAP1, were also downregulated in the differentiated cells (Figure 5B).
2.2.4. Key Enzymes in One-Carbon Metabolism and Purine Synthesis Are Reduced during Differentiation
The interconnected metabolic pathways involved in one-carbon metabolism, specifically the methionine and folate cycles, play a crucial role in cellular function by providing one-carbon units for several biological processes. In our experiments, we identified seven enzymes involved in the folate and methionine cycles that exhibited significant alterations in protein expression upon differentiation. Of these, five enzymes (dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), C-1-tetrahydrofolate synthase (MTHFD1), monofunctional C1-tetrahydrofolate synthase (MTHFD1L), bifunctional methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase/cyclohydrolase (MTHFD2), and serine hydroxymethyltransferase 2 (SHMT2)) participate in the folate cycle, while two enzymes (S-adenosylmethionine synthase isoform type-2 (MAT2A) and adenosylhomocysteinase (AHCY)) are involved in the methionine cycle (Figure 6A). In general, these enzymes displayed downregulation at later time points (days 3 and 5 post-ATRA induction) in both cell lines (Figure 6B). More specifically, the folate cycle enzymes DHFR, MTHFD1L, and MTHFD2 exhibited significant decreases in expression at days 3 and 5 post-ATRA treatment relative to control in both cell lines. MTHFD1 and SHMT2 also showed declines, although to a lesser extent. Regarding the methionine cycle, MAT2A demonstrated significant reductions in expression over time in both cell lines. AHCY exhibited variable expression at early time points (12 h and day 1 post-ATRA induction), with a subsequent downregulation noted at later stages of differentiation.
A key biological process that one-carbon metabolism supports is purine de novo synthesis. Purine can be produced either through salvage pathways, via the recycling of existing nucleosides and nucleobases, or via de novo synthesis pathways, which utilize amino acids, 10-formyltetrahydrofolate, and bicarbonate to construct the purine. In this study, we identified all six enzymes implicated in the synthesis of inosine monophosphate (IMP), the primary nucleotide synthesized in de novo purine synthesis (Figure 6C). These enzymes include amidophosphoribosyltransferase (PPAT), trifunctional purine biosynthetic protein adenosine-3 (GART), phosphoribosylformylglycinamidine synthase (PFAS), bifunctional phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase/phosphoribosylaminoimidazole (PAICS), adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL), and bifunctional purine biosynthesis protein ATIC (ATIC). For both cell lines, most of these proteins show a decreasing trend in expression upon differentiation (Figure 6D). The exception is ADSL, which significantly increases after five days of ATRA induction in SH-SY5Y cells. Notably, despite an observable decrease in PAICS expression in IMR-32 cells, the downregulation did not attain significance at any given time point (Supplementary Table S4).
2.3. Quantitative Phosphoproteomic Profiling Reveals Alterations in Cytoskeletal Regulation and Cell Cycle Processes Following ATRA Treatment
Quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis using sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) enrichment identified 12,505 phosphopeptides from 3039 phosphoproteins across all samples (Supplementary Tables S6 and S7). PCA of the quantified phosphopeptides revealed distinct clustering of the ATRA-treated and control groups, with 43.3% and 8.1% of the variance in SH-SY5Y cells explained by PC1 and PC2, respectively. Similarly, 50.4% and 7.5% of the variance was explained by PC1 and PC2 in IMR-32 cells (Figure 7). Differential expression analysis uncovered 1888, 1746, 2113, and 2291 phosphopeptides in the SH-SY5Y cell line and 2160, 1842, 2016, and 2212 phosphopeptides in the IMR-32 cell line exhibiting significant abundance changes at 12 h, 1 day, 3 days, and 5 days post-ATRA treatment, respectively (Supplementary Table S8). Similar to the proteomic analysis, upregulated and downregulated differentially expressed phosphopeptides were subjected to GO enrichment. The result showed that the upregulated differentially expressed phosphopeptides are associated with the terms related to cytoskeleton organization. while both up- and downregulated phosphopeptides were associated with cell-cycle-related terms (Supplementary Figure S6). Furthermore, kinase-substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) indicated activation of several kinases, including glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta (GSK3B), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5), mitogen-activated protein kinase 12 (MAPK12), protein kinase cAMP-activated catalytic subunit alpha (PRKACA), mitogen-activated protein kinase 11 (MAPK11), inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit alpha (CHUK), and casein kinase 2 alpha 2 (CSNK2A2), in both cell lines following ATRA treatment, while cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1), cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2), and aurora kinase A (AURKA) were inhibited (Figure 8).

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
The SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cell lines are extensively utilized in vitro models for investigating diverse aspects of neuronal cell biology and physiology. As cell lines derived from human neuroblastoma tumors, SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 retain the capacity for proliferation in an undifferentiated state yet can be induced to differentiate into neuron-like phenotypes through treatment with agents such as all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). Compared to primary neurons isolated from animal models, these immortalized human cell lines overcome limitations in the availability and propagation capacity of mature primary neurons. Their human origin also allows for direct study of human molecular mechanisms without potential issues from interspecies variability. Due to these advantages, SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells have proven invaluable for investigating neuronal differentiation, neurotoxicity, and neurodegenerative disease. Although SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells are extensively used as in vitro neuronal models, a systematic comparison of their dynamic proteome and phosphoproteome changes throughout differentiation remains incomplete, hindering a comprehensive understanding of the molecular events underlying their differentiation and function.
Quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of retinoic acid-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 neuroblastoma cells could elucidate associated molecular alterations. While a limited number of transcriptomic studies and analyses of specific protein modulations during IMR-32 differentiation have been conducted, in-depth proteomic profiling throughout the differentiation process remains scarce. On the other hand, multiple quantitative proteomic analyses of SH-SY5Y cells have revealed extensive protein abundance changes during differentiation, consistently showing upregulation of proteins related to neuronal development, extracellular matrix organization, and cytoskeletal reorganization. Conversely, the downregulation of proteins involved in the cell cycle and DNA processing was observed in differentiated cells compared to undifferentiated precursors. However, phosphoproteomic analyses examining retinoic acid-induced differentiation in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells are limited. Given the established role of protein kinases in regulating neurite outgrowth, which implied that protein phosphorylation played an important role in neuronal differentiation, phosphoproteomic analysis may reveal additional regulatory events during neuronal differentiation. While valuable insights have been gained, more in-depth characterization of the dynamic proteome and phosphoproteome changes occurring during retinoic acid-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 cells would further enhance their utility as neuronal models.
In this study, we characterized the temporal proteomic and phosphoproteomic changes arising in SH-SY5Y and IMR-32 human neuroblastoma cells undergoing ATRA-induced neuronal differentiation. Cells were harvested at five time points (before differentiation induction as well as 12 h, 1 day, 3 days, and 5 days post-ATRA treatment), and resulting lysates were analyzed by tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics and phosphopeptide enrichment coupled with liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This comprehensive approach facilitated the identification and relative quantification of differentially expressed proteins and phosphosites during the course of neuronal differentiation. Our data validate previous findings and provide novel insights into the molecular events directing ATRA-induced neurogenesis in vitro.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at .
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD046900 and PXD046871.