PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell suspension culture
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Wnt3a; Rspo1; Ms; Exosome

ABSTRACT:
dual-ligand-carrying exosome (exoWNT3A/RSPO1) hyperactivated the WNT signaling and promoted efficient hepatic organoid growth compared to the small molecule inhibitor CHIR99021. Importantly, the exosome can be efficiently delivered for robust WNT signaling activation in the liver. Remarkably, exoWNT3A/RSPO1 could accelerate liver repair and regeneration under various conditions, including acute and chronic injuries and aging-associated phenotypes. Collectively, our work revealed the broad therapeutic effects of WNT signaling activation in the liver through the dual-ligand-carrying exosomes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
exosome exoWNT3A/RSPO1 mass spectrum data

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
In brief, the collected extracellular vesicles were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min at room temperature), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (30 min at RT in the dark). Subsequently, the protein mixtures were incubated with Lys-C (enzyme/protein, 1:100, w/w) for 4 h and trypsin (enzyme/protein, 1:50, w/w) for 12 h at 37 °C. The resulting peptide mixtures were quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1% and cleaned with home-made C18 StageTips.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw data were processed by Spectronaut v19 (Biognosys) with the “Direct-DIA” mode for protein identification and quantification. All data were searched against a human database downloaded from UniProt (including 20,397 entries, downloaded on 16 October 2022). Trypsin was chosen as an enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was considered as a static modification; Oxidation on methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as dynamic modifications. The other parameters were set as default.