PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Embryonic stem cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Mouse; Lfq; Orbitrap fusion lumos

ABSTRACT:
The SWI/SNF (or BAF) complex is an essential chromatin remodeler that regulates DNA accessibility at developmental genes and enhancers. SWI/SNF subunits are among the most frequently mutated genes in cancer and neurodevelopmental disorders. These mutations are often heterozygous loss-of-function alleles, indicating a dosage-sensitive role for SWI/SNF subunits in chromatin regulation. However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate SWI/SNF subunit dosage to ensure proper complex assembly remain largely unexplored. We performed a genome-wide CRISPR KO screen, using epigenome editing in mouse embryonic stem cells, and identified Mlf2 and Rbm15 as regulators of SWI/SNF complex activity. First, we show that MLF2, a poorly characterized chaperone protein, regulates a subset of SWI/SNF target genes by promoting its chromatin remodeling activity. Rapid degradation of MLF2 reduces chromatin accessibility at sites that depend on high levels of SWI/SNF binding to maintain open chromatin. Next, we find that RBM15, part of the m6A RNA methylation writer complex, controls m6A modifications on specific SWI/SNF mRNAs to regulate protein levels of these subunits. Misregulation of m6A methylation causes overexpression of core SWI/SNF subunits leading to the assembly of incomplete complexes lacking the catalytic ATPase/ARP subunits. These data indicate that targeting modulators of SWI/SNF complex assembly may offer a potent therapeutic strategy for diseases associated with impaired chromatin remodeling.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
CRISPR screen decodes SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex assembly

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Immunoprecipitated samples were treated using iST kits (Preomics) according to manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, beads were re-suspended in 50 μl of provided lysis buffer and proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated during 10 min at 60°C. The resulting slurries (beads and lysis buffer) were transferred to dedicated cartridges and proteins were digested with a Trypsin/LysC mix for 2 hours at 37°C. After two cartridge washes, peptides were eluted with 2 x 100 μL of provided elution buffer. Samples were finally completely dried under speed vacuum and stored at -20°C. For MS analysis, samples were dissolved in 20 μl of loading buffer (5% CH3CN, 0.1% FA) and 4 μl were injected on column. LC-ESI-MSMS was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with Vanquish NEO liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a PepMap NEO, C18, 5μm, 300μm x 5mm trap cartridge (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18 ReproSil-Pur (Dr. Maisch GmBH), 1.9 μm, 100 Å, home-made column. The analytical separation was run for 160 min using a 135 min gradient of H2O/FA 99.9%/0.1% (solvent A) and CH3CN/FA 80%/0.1% (solvent B). The gradient was run as follows: from 95% A and 5% B to 72% A and 28% B in 110 min, then to 58% A and 42% B in 25 min, then to 99% A and 1% B in 5 min, with a stay for 20 min at this composition. Flow rate was of 250 nL/min. Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 4 x 105, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed in the ion-trap with an AGC target at 1 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Isolation windows was set at 1.2 m/z and 30% normalised collision energy was used for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, spectra were extracted and searched against the Mus musculus reference database (Uniprot, 17109 entries) with the native SS18 protein sequence replaced by the bait SS18-V5 protein sequence and an in-house database of common contaminant using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.2). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, with one potential missed cleavage. Precursor ion tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.6 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Variable amino acid modification was oxidized methionine. Peptide-spectrum matches were validated using Percolator a target FDR of 0.01 and a Delta Cn of 0.5. For label-free quantification, features and chromatographic peaks were detected using the “Minora Feature Detector” Node with the default parameters. PSM and peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, and then grouped to proteins with again an FDR of 1% (strict) or 5% (relaxed) and using peptides with high confidence level. Low abundance resampling was used for missing value imputation. Both unique and razor peptides were used for quantitation and protein abundances are calculated as the average of the three most abundant distinct peptide group. The abundances were normalized on the “Total Peptide Amount” and then “Protein abundance based” option was selected for protein ratio calculation and associated p- values were calculated with an ANOVA test (individual proteins).