PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Abdominal aorta
diseases: Abdominal aortic aneurysm
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; methylthiolated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Human; Aorta; Aaa; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is an asymptomatic chronic disease of the aorta and its evolution is unpredictable. Despite the existence of a number of pathological mechanisms contributing to the dilation of the human AAA wall, there is currently no specific therapy to prevent the fatal rupture of the aorta. Our objective was to identify novel mediators and/or biomarkers involved in the instability of the aortic wall that could help to prevent AAA progression.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human adventitial and medial layers from AAA aorta LC-MS/MS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human AAA tissues were subjected to tissue homogenization with ceramic beads (MagNa Lyser Green Beads, Roche, Germany) in CS buffer (Pipes pH6.8, MgCl2, NaCl, EDTA, sucrose, SDS, sodium orthovanadate; Biochain Institute, Inc. #K3013010-5) freshly supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors and in the presence of 50mM Iodoacetamide (IAM). Extracted proteins from tissue samples (~200 μg) were subjected to in-filter reduction and alkylation using 50 mM S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) followed by trypsin digestion (Nanosep Centrifugal Devices with Omega Membrane-10K, PALL), and the resulting peptides were TMT-labeled (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. Labeled peptides were fractionated using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Each fraction of labeled peptide samples was analyzed using an UPLC-Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a PepMap 100 C18 0.3 x 5 mm ID as trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a PepMap RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column 50 cm x 75 mm ID as analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% of formic acid in water (v/v)) and eluted with a 240 min linear gradient of buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) at 200 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS with a “Top-15” method

DATA PROCESSING:
MS/MS spectra were searched using the SEQUEST HT algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Scientific) against a Swiss-Prot database comprising human protein sequences (September 2015). Trypsin digestion was set with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. TMT labeling at the N-terminal end and Lys (229.162932 Da) were set as fixed modifications, and Met oxidation (15.994915 Da), Cys carbamidomethylation (57.021464 Da) or methylthiolation (45.987721 Da) as dynamic modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 800 ppm, fragment mass tolerance at 0.03 Da and precursor charge range to 2-4. A 1% FDR was employed as the criterion for peptide identification. Quantitative information from TMT reporter intensities was integrated from the spectrum level to the peptide level, and then to the protein level based on the weighted spectrum, peptide and protein (WSPP) model using SanXoT software package.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
The study setup aim, design and setting is shown in a schematic diagram in Supp. Figure 1.
Human plasmas
This observational study was conducted as part of a population-based image screening trial for AAA in Danish men aged 65–74 years between October 2008 and October 2010 (VIVA, ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00662480). The design of the protocol has been described in detail previously. In summary, the VIVA AAA cohort comprised cases of AAA diagnosed through population-based screening in the VIVA trial, which randomized more than 50,000 men aged 65–74 1:1 to either vascular screening for AAA, peripheral arterial disease and hypertension, or a control group. Cases with AAA were recommended a daily dose of 40 mg simvastatin and low-dose aspirin and offered AAA repair if their AAA was 55 mm or more in diameter, and annual follow-up if smaller. Blood samples were collected from the patient during a study consultation for information and the initiation of cardiovascular disease (CVD) prevention measures.
A preliminary study was conducted with 22 cases and 22 controls, followed by a validation study involving 64 controls and 189 cases with available blood samples and a 6-year follow-up. No additional exclusion criteria were employed, except in cases where blood sampling could not be performed for logistic reasons, unsuccessful blood sampling, or when samples were exhausted. The study was conducted and reported in accordance with the STROBE recommendations. All subjects provided informed consent, and the study was approved by local ethics committee of the Viborg Hospital (M20080025) and performed in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration.
Human tissues
Abdominal aortas were collected from brain-deceased organ donors during organ removal for therapeutic transplantation (kidney or liver transplantation) with the authorization of the French Biomedicine Agency (PFS 09-007, BBMRI network, BB-0033-00029). Prior to participation, ethical committee advice and patient written informed consent were obtained (RESAA and AMETHYST studies, CPP Paris-Cochin 2095, 1930, and 1931, INSERM Institutional Review Board, IRB0000388). All human studies were conducted in accordance with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. The aortic tissue was washed and preserved in Ringer's lactate solution at 4 °C until required for use. Following a macroscopic examination, the aortas devoid of atheromatous lesions were classified as control aortas. In addition, AAA walls were obtained from patients who were undergoing surgical repair of AAA enrolled in the Reflet Sanguin de l'evolutivite des Anevrysmes de l'Aorte abdominale protocol. A small portion of tissue from each sample was fixed in 3.7% paraformaldehyde for classical histology and immunohistochemistry assessments. Both the AAA and control aortas were incubated in culture medium to obtain tissue-conditioned media or placed in liquid N2 for subsequent protein extraction (homogenates).
For tissue-conditioned media, samples were cut into small pieces (5 mm2) and incubated in RPMI 1640 medium devoid of proteins, containing antibiotics/antimycotic (Gibco) for 24 h at 37 °C (6 mL/g of wet tissue). The conditioned media (supernatants containing proteins released by the tissue samples) were obtained following centrifugation (3000 g, 10 min, 20 °C) and stored at − 80 °C until further processing.
Human cells
The human monocytic THP-1 cell line was purchased from ATCC (TIB-202) and cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10% decomplemented (heat-deactivated) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Sigma), 2 mM L-glutamine and 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL streptomycin (all purchased from Sigma) at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. For experiments, THP-1 monocytes were differentiated into macrophages by incubating them for 24, 48 or 72 h with 100 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA, Sigma, P8139) in medium containing 10% FBS. Following a 72-h differentiation period, macrophages were stimulated with TNF-α (100 ng/mL) for 24 h to test PIGR mRNA expression. In addition, following a 72-h differentiation period, macrophages were polarized into M1 macrophages by incubation with 20 ng/ml of interferon gamma (IFN-γ, 300-02, Peprotech) and 100 ng/ml of Lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 8630, Sigma) or into M2 macrophages by incubation with 20 ng/ml of interleukin-4 (IL-4, 200-04, Peprotech) and 20 ng/ml of IL-13 (200-13, Peprotech) in medium containing 0.5% FBS for 24 (for mRNA analysis) or 48 h (for secretion analysis).
Experimental model
For bone marrow (BM) transplantation experiments, 10-week-old male CD45.1 Ldlr−/− mice (n = 28) were subjected to medullar aplasia with two doses of 5.5 Gy total body irradiation separated by 4 h. The following day, femurs and tibias from 6-week-old female CD45.2 Pigr−/− (30988, MMRRC) or Pigr+/+ mice were harvested and processed to obtain bone marrow cell suspension. 2.5 × 106 bone marrow pooled cells from each genotype donors were injected intravenously into the tail veins of irradiated mice (n = 14 for each group) to rescue their hematopoietic system. Mice were maintained on antibiotic water for 4 weeks after irradiation, then placed on regular water. 4 weeks after transplantation, bone marrow reconstitution was checked in blood using the CD45.1 and CD45.2 haplotypes as markers to monitor the engraftment of donor cells within the chimeric recipient. CD45 allelic variants were detected on blood leukocytes with fluorescence-activated-cell sorter (FACS) using fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies (17–0453-82 for CD45.1 and 45–0454-82 for CD45.2). Samples were acquired on LSR Fortessa instruments (BD Biosciences) and analyzed with FlowJo V10.4.2 software. Then, mice were fed a Western-type diet for 5 weeks. Mini-osmotic pumps (ALZET® 2004) containing Angiotensin II (1000 ng/kg/min) were implanted subcutaneously for 28 days 1 week after the initiation of the diet. Mouse aortic samples were embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (4 μm) of aortas were cut for histomorphometry. Histomorphometry was performed on hematoxylin–eosin stained histological sections. For AAA incidence, changes in suprarenal aortic diameter were calculated as percentage of dilation over baseline at day 28 and AAA incidence was quantified based on a definition of an increase in aortic diameter of more than 50% over the baseline according to previously reported methods. Images were taking using a Leica DMD108 Microscope.
Proteomics
Protein digestion, TMT labeling and peptide fractionation
Human AAA tissues were subjected to tissue homogenization with ceramic beads (MagNa Lyser Green Beads, Roche, Germany) in CS buffer (Pipes pH6.8, MgCl2, NaCl, EDTA, sucrose, SDS, sodium orthovanadate; Biochain Institute, Inc. #K3013010-5) freshly supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors and in the presence of 50 mM Iodoacetamide (IAM). Extracted proteins from tissue samples (~ 200 μg) were subjected to in-filter reduction and alkylation using 50 mM S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) followed by trypsin digestion (Nanosep Centrifugal Devices with Omega Membrane-10 K, PALL), and the resulting peptides were TMT-labeled (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. For the medial layer, we compared nine different samples from healthy walls with nine from AAA walls; the same number of biological replicates were used for the adventitial layer. One channel in each TMT experiment was reserved for reference internal standard, which was created by pooling healthy samples. Labeled peptides were fractionated using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cartridges were washed with 50% and 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 0.1% of TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid). 100 µg of peptides were resuspended in TFA 0.1% and loaded into the cartridges. Peptides were then eluted into five fractions with increasing amounts of ACN: Fr1 (12.5% ACN), Fr2 (15% ACN), Fr3 (17.5% ACN), Fr4 (20% ACN) and Fr5 (50% ACN).
LC–MS/MS analysis
Each fraction of labeled peptide samples was analyzed using an UPLC-Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a PepMap 100 C18 0.3 × 5 mm ID as trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a PepMap RSLC C18 EASY-Spray column 50 cm × 75 mm ID as analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% of formic acid in water (v/v)) and eluted with a 240 min linear gradient of buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (v/v)) at 200 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent manner, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS with a “Top-15” method and 40 s dynamic exclusion. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser using full ion-scan mode with a 390–1700 m/z range and 60,000 FT resolution. The automatic gain control target was set at 1 × 106 with 50 ms maximum injection time. HCD fragmentation was performed at 30% of normalized collision energy and MS/MS spectra were analyzed at a 30,000 resolution in the Orbitrap with automatic gain control target set at 1 × 105 and 100 ms maximum injection time.
Protein identification and quantification
For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were searched using the SEQUEST HT algorithm implemented in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Scientific) against a Swiss-Prot database comprising human protein sequences (September 2015). Trypsin digestion was set with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. TMT labeling at the N-terminal end and Lys (229.162932 Da) were set as fixed modifications, and Met oxidation (15.994915 Da), Cys carbamidomethylation (57.021464 Da) or methylthiolation (45.987721 Da) as dynamic modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 800 ppm, fragment mass tolerance at 0.03 Da and precursor charge range to 2–4. The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the corrected Xcorr score (cXcorr) and the target/decoy competition strategy applying the picked FDR method at the peptide level, with an additional filter for precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm. A 1% FDR was employed as the criterion for peptide identification. Quantitative information from TMT reporter intensities was integrated from the spectrum level to the peptide level, and then to the protein level based on the weighted spectrum, peptide and protein (WSPP) model using SanXoT software package. Quantitative protein values are expressed using the standardized variable Zq (i.e., normalized log2-ratios expressed in units of standard deviation according to the estimated variances). Functional enrichment was performed using DAVID Gene Functional Classification Tool and STRING v12.0, and clusters were drawn with Cytoscape v3.9.1.
Protein extraction and immunoblotting
Human AAA tissues, as well as aortic wall tissues from healthy human donors, were collected and incubated with lysis buffer containing 10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4 buffer, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM NaF, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF and protease and phosphatase inhibitors and pelleted. After determining protein concentration using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equal amounts of protein (20 µg) were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and subsequently transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Bio-Rad). After blocking with 5% BSA in TBS containing 0.1% Tween-20, blots were incubated overnight with one of the following antibodies: anti-human IGA1 and IGA2 (9130-01 and 9140-01, Southern biotech), PIGR (AF2717, R&D) or anti-human GAPDH (MAB374, Sigma) at 4 °C. Blots were then washed and incubated with the appropriate horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody for one hour and visualized using the ECL substrate kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The membranes were then subjected to densitometry (Image J), and values were normalized against GAPDH.
Immunoturbidimetry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
IGA1 and IGA2 levels were quantified in tissue-conditioned media from AAA walls and control aortas and in plasma using commercially available assays (The Binding Site) on the OPTILITE turbidimeter (The Binding Site) following the manufacturer’s recommendations.
PIGR levels were quantified in tissue-conditioned media from AAA walls and control aortas, as well as in the cell-conditioned media, using a commercially available ELISA kit (ab282302, Abcam) according to the manufacturer's protocol. In summary, the plates were coated with the samples or standards, followed by the antibody cocktail (capture and detector antibodies). After incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the wells were washed to remove unbound material and TMB Development Solution was added. The optical density at 450 nm was measured. After factoring sample dilutions, the original PIGR concentrations were finally calculated.
Immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence
For immunohistochemical analysis of IGA1, IGA2 and PIGR and for immunofluorescence analysis of PIGR in aortic paraffin sections, antigen retrieval (0.01 M citrate pH 6, 96 °C, 20 min), blockade of endogenous peroxidase (3% H2O2 in methanol, 30 min) and nonspecific binding (6% host serum, 1 h) was performed prior to incubation with the primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C (anti-human IGA1 and IGA2, 9130–01 and 9140–01, respectively, Southern Biotech, and anti-human PIGR, ab96196, Abcam)Then, samples were rinsed in PBS and incubated 1 h with goat anti-mouse and donkey anti-rabbit (HRP-conjugated, Jackson Immunoresearch) secondary antibodies. Slides were then incubated with 3,3'-diaminobenzidine (DAB) peroxidase substrate, counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, mounted with DPX and examined under a light microscope (Zeiss). For immunofluorescence analysis of CD68 and alpha-smooth muscle active (α-SMA) in mouse aortic paraffin sections, frozen sections were fixed in 10% formalin for 7 min and then washed under running water for 7 min prior to primary antibody incubation (anti-mouse CD68, ab5344, Abcam, and anti-mouse α-SMA Cγ3 conjugated, C6198, Sigma). After the incubation for 1 h away from light with species-specific secondary fluorescent conjugated antibodies, nuclei were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and slides mounted with fluorsave medium.
Computer-assisted morphometric analysis was performed with Image J software and the Image-Pro Plus software. The threshold setting for area measurement was equal for all images. In human samples, three different positive fields were analyzed in each subject and results were expressed as % positive staining/area (IGA1, IGA2, PIGR). In animal samples, slides from each mouse were examined in a blinded manner and results were expressed as % positive area versus total area (CD68 and SMA).
For immunofluorescence, sections were fixed in 10% formalin for 7 min and then washed under running water for 7 min prior to blocking endogenous peroxidase and primary antibody incubation (anti-human PIGR, ab96196, Abcam and anti-human CD68, M0814, Dako). After the incubation for 1 h away from light with species-specific secondary fluorescent conjugated antibodies, nuclei were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) and the slides were mounted with fluorsave medium. Stained tissues were examined using fluorescence microscopy and images were obtained using a Zeiss microscope.
RNA isolation and RT-qPCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from THPs using the TRIzol method (Life Technologies), and its concentration was determined by measuring the absorbance at 260 nm. A total of 1 µg of RNA was used for reverse transcription with the High-Capacity cDNA Archive Kit (Applied Biosystems). Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed on an ABI Prism 7500 sequence detection PCR system (Applied Biosystems), according to the manufacturer's protocol. The expression of the target genes was normalized to that of the housekeeping transcript [glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)]. All measurements were performed in duplicate. The amount of target mRNA in samples was estimated by the 2 ΔCT relative quantification method. The values of each sample were normalized with respect to the basal condition, expressed in arbitrary units. The following PCR primers and TaqMan probes were purchased from Applied Biosystems and optimized according to the manufacturer's protocol: human PIGR (Hs00922561_m1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), human CD68 (Hs02836816_g1, Thermo Fisher Scientific), human TNF-α (Hs00174128_m1) and human GAPDH (4310884E, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as mean ± the standard error of the mean (SEM). In vitro experiments were replicated at least three times and analyzed by Student's t test. For proteomics analysis, adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing was performed by controlling for the False Discovery Rate (FDR). Data from the experimental model were analyzed by comparing groups using the Mann–Whitney test (for AAA size and % of CD68 and α-SMA) or chi-square test (for AAA incidence). For analysis of data from human samples, groups were compared using the Mann Whitney test. The association between IGA2 and maximal anterior–posterior aortic diameter was studied by Spearman correlation analysis. To evaluate the independent association of elevated IGA2 (tertiles 2 and 3) with AAA presence, a multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed adjusted by confounding factors (smoke, body mass index-BMI-, previous CVD and aspirin). Moreover, to test whether elevated IGA2 levels were associated with a higher risk of developing aortic diameter enlargement requiring surgical intervention, a Cox regression analysis was performed. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (version 8.0.2 for Windows, GraphPad Software). Significance was accepted at the level of P < 0.05 (two-tailed).
Availability of data and materials
The main data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this manuscript and its additional files. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD056789.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The protocol of this study was approved by the Ethics Committee of IIS-FUNDACIÓN JIMÉNEZ DÍAZ (PIC140-20_FJD), as well as the corresponding Ethics Committees of France and Denmark as specified in the methods sections. All the participating patients provided written informed consent.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.

RESULTS:
Results
Proteomic analysis of human AAA wall
A hypothesis-free proteomics approach was employed to compare the protein profiles of medial and adventitial layers from human AAA with those from healthy individuals. Among the 3,005 and 3,263 proteins quantified, respectively, in AAA medial and adventitial layers, 115 proteins in the media (55 up and 60 down) and 363 in the adventitia (158 up and 205 down) significantly changed (FDR < 5%) their relative abundance when compared to healthy controls (Fig. 1A, B). Subsequently, a functional analysis with STRING was conducted to elucidate the roles of these proteins in both regions. The biological processes that exhibited the higher increase in the medial layer of AAA were associated with the immune response, in addition to cellular detoxification, platelet degranulation and actin filament organization (Fig. 1A). The proteins that were downregulated in the media were significantly enriched in biological categories mostly related to cell migration and adhesion and regulation of transport (Fig. 1A). Proteins that were upregulated in the adventitial layer of AAA were primarily associated with the immune response and complement activation, as well as negative regulation of proteolysis and lipid transport (apolipoproteins) (Fig. 1B). In contrast, the downregulated processes were related to cytoskeleton organization, cell adhesion and extracellular matrix components (Fig. 1B). Furthermore, functional enrichment analysis of proteins significantly increased (FDR < 0.05) in the medial and adventitial layers of AAA, indicating that these proteins were predominantly involved in adaptive immune responses (Supp. Figure 2). Among them, the most upregulated proteins in both, medial and adventitial layers of AAA, were immunoglobulins from IGA (IGHA1, IGHA2) and IGG (IGHG1-4) subclasses (Fig. 1C).
IGA1 and IGA2 levels are increased in human AAA wall
IGHA1 and IGHA2 protein expression in the medial and adventitial layers of human AAA wall and healthy control aortas was validated by western blot. In accordance with the proteomics analysis, a statistically significant increase of both IGHA1 and IGHA2 expression was observed in the two layers from AAA wall compared to healthy aortas (Fig. 2A). Furthermore, the evaluation of IGA1 and IGA2 expression and localization by immunohistochemistry in human AAA and control aortas revealed a strong staining in the pathological arteries, while only a faint signal was detected in the healthy aortas (Fig. 2B). Additionally, the analysis of IGA1 and IGA2 secretion by immunoturbidimetry in AAA and control tissue-conditioned media from both the media and adventitia further confirmed increased IGA1 and IGA2 levels (Fig. 2C, p < 0.05 in both layers).
IGA2 plasma levels predict AAA evolution
Given the accumulation of IGA1 and IGA2 in the human AAA wall, we wondered whether this accumulation was also reflected in the circulating levels of these proteins in plasma. Thus, we measured IGA1 and IGA2 plasma levels by immunoturbidimetry from a pilot cohort including 22 AAA patients (aortic diameter > 3 cm) and 22 controls (aortic diameter < 3 cm) with no differences in age and sex. The results showed that there was a significant increase of IGA2 levels in AAA patients relative to controls (489 ± 38 vs 344 ± 36 mg/L, p < 0.01), whereas no significant differences were observed for IGA1 (1,788 ± 127 vs 1,974 ± 216 mg/L, p = NS) or IGA (2,277 ± 142 vs 2,319 ± 243 mg/L, p = NS) (Fig. 3A). To further validate the association between IGA2 plasma levels and the occurrence of AAA, we analyzed IGA2 plasma levels in a larger cohort of AAA patients (n = 189) and controls (n = 64) (Table 1). Again, IGA2 plasma levels were significantly increased when compared to controls (551 ± 21 vs 411 ± 26 mg/L, p < 0.001, Fig. 3B). The association between elevated IGA2 levels (medium + high tertiles) and AAA presence was found to be independent of risk factors and treatments [OR = 2.140 (1.109–4.130), p < 0.05, Table 2]. Furthermore, IGA2 was correlated with AAA diameter, a surrogate marker of AAA growth, independently of potential confounding factors (r = 0.13, p < 0.05, Supp. Table 1). Finally, we assess the potential association of IGA2 with AAA progression, showing that elevated IGA2 levels in AAA patients were found to be independently associated with an increased risk of AAA surgery [HR = 1.941 (1.108–3.399), p < 0.05, Table 2, Fig. 3C].
Polymeric immunoglobulin receptor levels are increased in human AAA wall
To ascertain the presence of IGA receptors in the AAA wall of the aorta, we made used of our proteomics data. We observed an increase of polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) expression in the medial layer (Supp. Table 2), while PIGR was not detected in the adventitia (Supp. Table 3). Western blot analysis of AAA tissue-homogenates confirmed the significant increase in PIGR levels in the medial layer, while PIGR levels were not significantly changed in the AAA adventitial layer (Fig. 4A). PIGR mRNA expression was significantly elevated in both the AAA medial and adventitial layers (Supp. Figure 3). Moreover, PIGR levels were increased in AAA tissue-conditioned media, both in medial and adventitial layers as analyzed by ELISA (Fig. 4B). In addition, immunohistochemistry of PIGR in human AAA tissues revealed a higher expression in the AAA wall compared to healthy aortas (Fig. 4C). Given that PIGR expression has been predominantly observed in epithelial cells, we sought to identify the potential cell types involved in PIGR expression in the human aortic wall. As human AAA medial layer is characterized by an increase in macrophage infiltration and proinflammatory cytokine expression (as observed by increased CD68 and TNF-α mRNA expression, Supp. Figure 3), we tested whether macrophages could contribute to PIGR expression in human AAA. Colocalization studies revealed that PIGR is expressed in CD68+ cells within the human AAA wall (Fig. 4D).
PIGR is expressed and released by human macrophages
To further confirm the expression of PIGR by macrophages, we tested PIGR mRNA expression and PIGR release by human THP-1-derived macrophages in vitro. THP-1 monocyte differentiation into macrophages with PMA for 24 to 48 h resulted in an increase in PIGR mRNA expression (Fig. 5A), as well as PIGR release at 48 h (Fig. 5B). We stimulated THP-1-derived macrophages with different doses of IGA (IHUIGA5MG Innovative Research, 1,10 and 100 ug/mL) during 24 h. However, we did not observe any effect on PIGR mRNA expression at any of the doses tested (not shown). In contrast, TNF-α induced PIGR mRNA expression in THP-1-derived macrophages (Supp. Figure 3). To test whether PIGR expression could be associated with different polarization states, mainly M1 and M2, THP-1 monocytes were differentiated into macrophages with PMA for 72 h and then incubated with IFN-γ and LPS for M1 polarization or with IL-4 and IL-13 for M2 polarization. We found that PIGR mRNA expression and release were decreased in M2 macrophages compared to M1 macrophages at 24 and 48 h, respectively (Fig. 5C and D), indicating that PIGR expression is regulated during macrophage polarization.
Pigr deficiency in the hematopoietic compartment decreases AAA incidence, size and macrophage infiltration.
To assess the hematopoietic involvement of PIGR in AAA, a BM transplantation model was then carried out in the AngII model of AAA. In this respect, Ldlr−/− mice (n = 28) mice were irradiated and transplanted with BM cells from Pigr−/− (n = 14) or Pigr+/+ mice (n = 14) (Fig. 6A). After 4 weeks, flow cytometry analysis of CD45 allelic variants confirmed the successful BM reconstitution (Supp. Figure 4). Mice then were fed a Western-type diet and infused with AngII for 28 days. No differences were found in body weight nor in serum lipid concentrations between genotypes (Supp. Figure 4). Interestingly, only 2/14 (14%) Ldlr−/− Pigr−/− chimeras developed AAA compared to 8/14 (57%) Ldlr−/− Pigr+/+ chimeras (p < 0.05, Fig. 6B). The maximal abdominal aortic diameter on day 28 in Ldlr−/− Pigr−/− chimeras was significantly lower than that in Ldlr−/− Pigr+/+ chimeras (0.91 ± 0.05 vs 1.13 ± 0.07 mm, p < 0.05, Fig. 6C). Regarding macrophage infiltration, there was a prominent decrease in CD68+ cells in Ldlr−/− Pigr−/− chimeras (3.5 ± 0.5 vs 5.6 ± 0.7%, p < 0.05, Fig. 6D). In contrast, we did not observe significant differences α-SMA staining between Pigr+/+ and Pigr−/− chimeras (8.2 ± 1.1 vs 10.8 ± 1.1, p = ns). Overall, these data suggest that Pigr deficiency in the hematopoietic lineage decreases AAA formation and incidence associated with a lesser wall macrophage infiltration.

INTRODUCTION:
Background
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a life-threatening disease that results from the chronic dilation of the abdominal aorta when it exceeds 50% of its diameter. The prevalence of AAA is highest among men aged 65 to 75 years who have ever smoked, occurring in approximately 7% of this population. Other risk factors for AAA include having high blood pressure or a family history of AAA. The majority of AAAs are asymptomatic until rupture occurs. Consequently, only those incidentally identified (or screened) by imaging techniques are diagnosed in the early stages (3–5 cm). In such cases, follow-up by ultrasound is the strategy recommended. Currently, surgical repair of AAAs is only advised when the aortic size is higher than 5 or 5.5 cm, either through open surgery or endovascular repair. However, AAA evolution is unpredictable given that it comprises periods of growth and stability. This, coupled with the dearth of efficacious therapeutic strategies for AAA, underscores the imperative for a more comprehensive understanding of AAA pathology to identify novel diagnostic, prognostic and/or therapeutic targets.
The vascular remodelling process involved in the pathogenesis of AAA is characterized by the interaction of resident cells (endothelial and vascular smooth muscle cells -VSMC-) and circulating cells (monocytes, platelets, neutrophils and erythrocytes), along with systemic/blood components retained in AAA. Specifically, interactions between cells with proteases and cytokines result in a proteolytic and oxidative injury to the aortic wall, which favours the phenotypic switch and eventual disappearance of VSMC in the medial layer, along with an immune-inflammatory response in the adventitial layer. Despite the extensive description of these processes in human AAA, their counterparts in experimental models remains limited, hindering the translation of findings into clinical applications. As an alternative to research using experimental models, some studies have applied non-hypothesis-driven high-throughput proteomic approaches to human AAA samples, including plasma, circulating cells or tissue-secretome with the aim to search for novel biomarkers of AAA. Similarly, proteomic studies of AAA wall homogenates have also been employed to identify novel mechanisms involved in AAA pathogenesis. However, while these studies on AAA tissues yielded valuable insights, they all analyzed full-thickness samples, thereby failing to distinguish between medial and adventitial processes. In this respect, the media layer of AAA involves processes mainly related to VSMC metabolism, while the adventitial layer of AAA is much more complex due to the involvement of different types of cells, such as T- and B-cell aggregates, macrophages, adipocytes, fibroblasts, along with nerves and neovessels. Thus, the novelty of this paper lies in the approach, which aims to analyze the medial and adventitial layers separately, attempting to distinguish between processes related to AAA dilation (mainly involving the media) and/or instability (mainly involving the adventitia). Consequently, in this work, mass spectrometry-based proteomics was used to compare aorta homogenates from the medial and adventitial layers of human AAA and healthy individuals to identify novel mediators involved in the progression and/or rupture of AAA.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information