PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive; Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Peptide counting
keywords: Akkermansia muciniphila，mass spectrometry

ABSTRACT:
Akkermansia muciniphila is recognized as a promising probiotic that improves the symptoms of a variety of diseases. However, the role and mechanism of A. muciniphila in regulating intestinal homeostasis remain to be explored. Here, we discovered that A. muciniphila was dramatically increased during colitis recovery, and its colonization greatly increased goblet cells to protect the intestinal barrier in mice. Amuc_0904, a previously uncharacterized A. muciniphila outer membrane protein, was identified to induce goblet cell differentiation.We want to find the receptors that 904 interacts with cells to explore the detailed mechanism.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mass spectrometry identification of Akkermansia muciniphila -Caco2 cells interaction proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The sample preparation: The cells surface proteins of Caco2 cells were extracted using Member and Cytosol Protein Extraction Kit, then separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto a PVDF membrane. The PVDF membrane was blocked and incubated with FLAG-tagged Amuc_0904 protein or buffer overnight. FLAG was detected using Immobilon Western Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate. The corresponding differenced bands from buffer and Amuc_0904 on SDS-PAGE were excised for mass spectrometry protein identification. In-Gel Digestion： Briefly, the gel band was cut into small pieces (1 mm3) and destained with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate in ethanol/water (1:1, v/v). The destained gel pieces were washed with an acidic buffer (acetic acid/ethanol/water, 1:5:4, v/v/v) twice, and then washed with water twice. The gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher). Then, the gel pieces were treated with 10mM dithiothreitol at 56°C for 1h, followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. After being washed twice with water, the gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher). Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) (10 ng/μL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to the dehydrated gel pieces and proteolysis proceeded overnight at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were sequentially extracted from the gel pieces with 50% acetonitrile (acetonitrile/water/TFA, 50:45:5, v/v/v), 75% acetonitrile (acetonitrile/water/TFA, 75:25:0.1, v/v/v) and acetonitrile. Finally, the peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, and desalted using a μ-C18 Ziptip.  MS Analysis： After desalting, each tryptic digest was redissolved in HPLC buffer A and injected into a nano-LC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each sample was separated by a C18 column (75μm inner-diameter×15 cm, 3 μm C18) with a 50 min HPLC gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The HPLC elute was electrosprayed directly into an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spray voltage was set to 2.4 kV and ion transfer tube temperature at 320°C. The orbitrap mass analyzer was used as the MS1 detector with 70,000 resolution and scan range 350–1750 m/z. The AGC target and maximum injection time were set at 3e6/80 ms for MS1, and 5e4/200 ms for MS2. The orbitrap mass analyzer was used as the MS2 detector with 17500 resolution. Precursor ions with charges of +2 to +5 were isolated for MS2, and dynamic exclusion time was set at 30s. The MS2 isolation window was 2.2Da, and (N)CE was set 27% for precursor fragmentation.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data files were analysed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 3.0 with an overall false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides of less than 1%. The SwissProt human proteome database in fasta format excluding protein isoforms (downloaded on 11.06.2023, 20,462 sequences) was used. Peptide sequences were searched using trypsin specificity and allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation on N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Mass tolerances for precursor ions were set at ±10 ppm for precursor ions and ± 0.02 Da for MS/MS.