PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver; Fibroblast
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Lc-ms/ms based proteomics; Tandem mass tag (tmt); Senescence; Extracellular matrix

ABSTRACT:
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex network comprising hundreds of proteins, serving not only a structural role in shaping multicellular organisms but also participating in signaling processes. Moreover, the ECM exhibits high tissue specificity and undergoes significant alterations with aging progression. We analyzed the proteome of ECM produced by liver aging-specific fibrotic niche cells in old mice to obtain an age-related proteome profile. Our analysis revealed the identification of 714 quantifiable proteins, with 126 classified as matrisome proteins according to the matrisome database. Notably, proteins significantly upregulated in the ECM of liver aging-specific fibrotic niche cells indicated characteristics reminiscent of ECM formation (Eln, Mfap4, Lox, Tgfb2, Thbs2) and immune cell recruitment (Cxcl12), akin to those originating from fibrotic regions. Our findings suggest that this study may contribute to elucidating heightened fibrotic characteristics associated with the aging process.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Extracellular Matrix Proteome of Aging-Specific Fibrotic Niche Cells in Mouse Liver Tissue

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The isolated ECM samples in lysis buffer (80 mM Tris pH 6.8, 3 % SDS, 5 % 2-mercaptoethanol and 1X Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, EDTA-free) were disrupted on ice using a probe sonicator. The ECM proteins were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, and the supernatants were transferred to a new tube. Then, the procedure was continued from protein reduction/alkylation to the digestion step as previously described87, with slight modification of the digestion step (10ug trypsin/lys-C Mix, 47 °C, 1.5 h). The dried peptides were reconstituted by 0.1 M TEAB, and the peptide concentration was determined using a colorimetric peptide assay.  We used TMT 10-plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for quantitation of proteins. For TMT labeling, each sample was aliquoted in equal proportions, corresponding to 9/20 of the total volume. The final volume of each aliquot was then adjusted to 100 µL with 0.1 M TEAB.TMT labeling and desalting were carried out according to the protocol provided by the supplier. The mixed sample was dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid and injected to LC-MS/MS analysis using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides underwent separation on an EASY-Spray (50 cm × 75 μm I.D, C18, particle size of 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, while mobile phase B comprised 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient ranging from 2 % to 40 % mobile phase B over a 140-minute period, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The parameters of the mass spectrometer remained consistent with those described previously88 for the 50 cm column conditions, with the exception of the following conditions. MS1 spectra, 300-1800 m/z; spray voltage, 2.5 kV.

DATA PROCESSING:
The LC-MS/MS data analysis utilized the SEQUEST-HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was conducted against the mouse proteome database downloaded from Uniprot (21,816 entries, Release 2023_03), augmented by the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) (downloaded from thegpm.org/crap/), which comprises known laboratory contaminants. Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. The following were the search parameters utilized: full tryptic specificity, two maximum missed cleavage sites; dynamic modifications, oxidation of methionine and proline (+15.9949 Da); protein N-term dynamic modifications, acetylation (+42.0106 Da), Met-loss (-131.040 Da), and Met-loss+acetylation (-89.030 Da); ); peptide N-term dynamic modifications, TMT 10plex (+229.163 Da), Gln to Pyro-Glu (-18.011 Da); static modification, carbamidomethyl of cysteine (+57.021464 Da), TMT 10plex of lysine (+229.163 Da). Additionally, in the configuration of the Consensus method, default TMT parameters were employed, except following parameters: peptides to use, unique; co-isolation threshold, 25. The search result was further analyzed by using the Perseus tool (v1.6.14.0). To ensure an equal amount of ECM proteins per channel, the TMT reporter-ion intensities of the proteins were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the median of each sample. Additionally, to compare the amounts of key proteins involved in fibrosis across ECMs derived from the same number of cells, short LC-MS runs were performed with aliquots of TMT-labeled ECM proteins derived from the same number of cells. TMT reporter intensities of each channel were summed and used as an estimate of total ECM expression. Subsequently, a two-sample t-test was conducted using the intensity values of the two groups.