PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Liquid chromatography; mass spectrometry; human immunoglobulin; n-glycosylation; antibody profiling

ABSTRACT:
In this study, we used proteomics analysis to confirm the immunoglobulin purification efficiency from human plasma samples. Protein components of plasma, supernatant fraction after affinity purification, and the on bead digestion fraction were performed.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Multiplexed Antibody Glycosylation Profiling Using Dual Enzyme Digestion and Liquid Chromatography-Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry Method

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The samples were reduced by using dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin.

DATA PROCESSING:
We used Maxquant to do the label free quantitative protein analysis, and used the LFQ intensities to calculated major components of the samples.

METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Reagents and Materials
Human IgM standards were purchased from Abcam. Winged stable isotope-labeled ISs for IgG, IgA, and IgM peptides and glycopeptides were synthesized and confirmed with ESI-MS by Genomics. Affinity beads, CaptureSelect KappaXL Affinity Matrix, CaptureSelect LC-lambda (Hu) Affinity Matrix, and IgM Human Uncoated enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay Kit were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Ammonium bicarbonate, dithiothreitol, iodoacetamide, and formic acid were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) was obtained from VWR International. Digestion enzymes trypsin and Glu-C were purchased from Promega. Peptide N-glycosidase F (PNGase F) was purchased from New England Biolabs. Protein LoBind tubes were purchased from Eppendorf. Plasma samples (n = 19) were collected from the Taipei Medical University Hospital and Wan Fang Hospital. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, and the study was approved by the ethics committee of Taipei Medical University (N20174064, N201903025), in accordance with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. Blood samples were collected using 10 mL BD Vacutainer blood collection tubes with sodium heparin as an anticoagulant (BD). After collection, the tube was centrifuged at 2000 RPM for 10 min to get the plasma fraction (4 °C, HITACHI Himac CR21G, Rotor-R3S). Aliquots of plasma were transferred to 1.5 mL microtubes for −80 °C storage (Axygen). The plasma samples used in this study were within three freeze-and thaw cycles.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
Our goal is to establish a workflow capable of analyzing human IgG, IgA, IgM, and their glycosylation for future applications. To achieve this, we compared various sample preparation factors, including the volume of Ig purification beads, sample incubation time, and enzyme digestion time, to determine the optimal conditions. Pooled plasma samples were utilized, with technical replicates set at n = 6, n = 3, and n = 3 for bead volume, incubation time, and digestion time comparisons, respectively. Statistical analysis was conducted using Ordinary One-Way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons test. Additionally, this study performed proteomics analysis to assess Ig enrichment efficiency. Three replicates were carried out to compare protein profiles in plasma, supernatant following purification, and purified fractions. The results were visualized through SDS-PAGE image, heatmap, principal component scores plot, and protein percentage bar charts. After confirming suitable UHPLC-MS/MS parameters and reliable Ig-related signals, the workflow was applied to 19 plasma samples from different individuals. The results of Ig glycosylation profiles were presented as scatter plots to illustrate variations among different samples.
Ig Purification and On-Bead Digestion
To purify all Igs from the human plasma, CaptureSelect KappaXL and CaptureSelect LC-lambda (Hu) Affinity Matrix were used to capture the light-chain constant region of the Ig superfamily. The two affinity bead slurries were mixed at a 1:1 ratio. After being vortexed, 40 L of mixed affinity beads were conditioned with 150 μL PBS two times, and then 16 L of human pooled plasma of six healthy controls (3 males and 3 females) in 184 L PBS (200 μL volume in total) was added. After incubation, the supernatants were removed, and the beads were washed with 150  L PBS twice to prevent nonspecific binding of molecules.
We synthesized four stable isotope-labeled peptides as ISs to compensate for the analytical bias of IgG, IgA, and IgM and their glycopeptides. The IS numbers and peptide sequences are listed in Supplemental Table S1. A total volume of 50 μL ammonium bicarbonate solution (50 mM) containing 24 ng IS-1, 10 ng IS-2, 20 ng IS-3, and 1 ng IS-4 was added to microtubes containing the purified Igs. One microliter of 550 mM dithiothreitol was added to the sample solution to reduce the disulfide bonds (56 °C for 45 min). Then, 2 L of 450 mM iodoacetamide was added into the solution for alkylation at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. Before enzymatic digestion, the samples were divided into two fractions. One fraction was treated with 5 μL Glu-C (0.1 g/ L, 1 h), followed by trypsin digestion (0.2 g/ L, overnight). The other fraction was only treated with 5 μL trypsin (0.2 g/ L, overnight). Digestion was conducted at 37 °C. At the end of on-bead digestion, 6 μL of 10% formic acid was added to stop the enzyme digestion. The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min, and the supernatants of the two fractions were mixed equally for further dilution. The supernatant was diluted five times for IgG and IgG glycopeptide analyses and diluted two times for IgA and IgM panel analyses using 0.1% formic acid. The workflow of the experimental procedure is shown in Figure 1B.
UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS Tier 2 Measurement
Our previous studies have developed methods for investigating IgG and IgA glycopeptides, and these methods have been applied to pancreatic and kidney diseases in our laboratory. Therefore, in the present study, we focused on exploring the glycosylation patterns of IgM and integrated the parameters of all three isotypes.
We used a Waters ACQUITY UPLC system with quaternary pumps coupled with a Xevo TQ-XS tandem quadrupole mass spectrometry (Waters Corporation) to analyze our target molecules. To perform reversed-phase chromatographic separation, we used a Core-Shell C18 Kinetex column (50 . The mobile phase was comprised of 0.1% formic acid in water as solvent A and 0.1% formic acid in ACN as solvent B at a flow rate of 0.3 mL min−1. To integrate IgA and IgM analyses, we chose the gradient which was developed in our previous work: 2% B was set for 0.5 min. The organic phase increased to 30% B at 9 min, enhanced to 35% B at 9.5 min, and went up to 100% at 10 min. After maintaining the mobile phase at 100% for 1 min, the gradient was returned to 2% B at 11.5 min and maintained for 2.5 min. The samples were stored in an autosampler at 4 °C, and the LC column was set at 40 °C.
To characterize the glycosylation traits of IgM glycopeptides, we collected 162 theoretical Fc-glycopeptides from the literature, as well as from the UniprotKB database: IGHM_HUMAN (P01871) and IGJ_HUMAN (P01591). Additionally, Glyco Mass Calculator was used to calculate the parent ion of each glycopeptide with two to four charges, and the ion with the highest peak intensity was selected. The m/z values of the daughter ions for each N-glycopeptide were 204.1, 274.1, and 366.1 m/z, which were signals from the N-acetylglucosamine, N-acetylneuraminic acid, and hexose-N-acetylglucosamine fragments, respectively.
Multiple reaction monitoring and positive electrospray ionization modes were used. The source parameters were as follows: the capillary voltage was 3 kV, source offset was 30 V, source temperature was 150 °C, desolvation temperature was 550 °C, collision gas flow was set at 0.15 ml/min, and nebulizer gas flow was 7 bar. UHPLC-MS/MS conditions for IgG glycopeptide/peptide analysis were adapted from a previously published method. The optimal multiple reaction monitoring transitions, cone voltages, and collision energies for the target IgG, IgA, IgM peptides, and glycopeptides are listed in Supplemental Table S1.
Performance of Analytical Method in Relative Quantification
Calibration Curves
We used pooled plasma from six healthy individuals to generate calibration curves. The concentrations of IgG and IgA subclasses and IgM were determined using previously developed LC-MS methods and commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits. As our target plasma volume was 16 μL, we spiked 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, and 32 μL of plasma into PBS to simulate six calibrators with low to high concentrations of IgG, IgA, and IgM. The detailed concentrations for each calibrator are summarized in Supplemental Table S2; the concentrations were used as the x-axis for the respective Ig and derived glycopeptides. A calibration curve for each target was generated using six calibrators and a blank sample. The correlation coefficient of the linear or quadratic regression of each glycopeptide was calculated and summarized in the result.
Precision
We selected three different concentrations containing high (Cali 1), medium (Cali 4), and low (Cali 6) glycopeptide levels of the calibrator samples to investigate the precision of our method for relative quantification. Intrabatch (n = 5) and interbatch (n = 3, three different batches) precision values were evaluated using the responses (peak area ratio of the analyte to the IS), and the results are presented as relative standard deviation (% RSD).
Data Analysis and Software
UHPLC-MS/MS Tier 2 data processing and glycosylation trait calculations were performed using the TargetLynx software (MassLynx V4.2, Waters Corporation) and Microsoft Excel (2016 MSO 16.0.4266.1001). Integration values and peak area ratios (target/IS response) can be manually exported from TargetLynx software to Excel. In the previous software, an annotation of the Primary flag indicated the condition of the integration baseline. The glycosylation traits are summarized in Supplemental Table S3. Column bar graph and statistical analysis for sample preparation parameter comparison were conducted in GraphPad Prism. Scatter plots for clinical application were also generated using GraphPad Prism, version 8.0, for Windows (GraphPad Software).

RESULTS:
Results
Optimization of Volume for Lambda and Kappa Affinity Beads
In this study, the targeted plasma volume was 16 μL for future applications, and we therefore used a 2-fold plasma volume (32 μL) from healthy volunteers, which simulated samples with high concentrations of IgM or other Igs, to optimize the bead volume. Lambda and kappa LC affinity bead slurries were mixed in a 1:1 ratio, and 20 to 60 μL of the mixed bead slurry were incubated with 32 μL plasma overnight to tune the best purification efficiency (n = 6). Theoretically, a greater bead volume should provide a higher antibody binding capability. We observed that the abundance of IgG subclasses, IgA1, and IgM reached the highest peak area at 30∼40 μL bead volume. A decrease in the signals was observed for IgM with a further increase in the bead volume. This may be due to a decrease in the efficiency of on-bead digestion. Additionally, for IgA2, the signals increased further until 60 μL of bead slurry was used. Considering the results of the different Ig isotypes, 40 μL of mixed lambda and kappa affinity beads was selected as the optimal volume for Ig purification (Fig. 2A, Supplemental Table S4).
Optimization of Incubation Time
In addition to the volume of lambda and kappa LC affinity beads, the incubation time is also a critical factor influencing Ig purification performance. A sufficient incubation time increases the number of captured antibodies and stabilizes the on-bead digestion process. To determine the appropriate time point for incubation, 32 μL of plasma samples were incubated with 40 μL bead slurry for 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 20 h (n = 3). The incubation of samples from 0.5 to 4 h was conducted at room temperature, whereas the 20 h incubation was at 4 °C. The representative peptides, IgG1, IgG3, IgA1, and IgM, showed the highest peak areas after 4 to 20 h of incubation. The purified amounts of total IgG and IgG4 reached their highest binding efficiencies at 1 to 2 h of incubation, whereas no significant difference was observed for IgG2 across incubation times ranging from 0.5 to 20 h. Consequently, 20 h was selected as the optimal incubation time because most Ig isotypes and subclasses showed large peak areas after 20 h of incubation (Fig. 2B, Supplemental Table S5).
Evaluation of the Ig Enrichment Process
We also evaluated the efficiency of Ig enrichment through proteomic analysis, in which we examined the protein content present in the plasma, protein composition in the supernatant following affinity purification, and protein profiles in the eluted fractions. As shown in Supplemental Fig. S1A, the protein band profiles in the supernatant closely resembled those of the original plasma sample when analyzed using SDS-PAGE. However, the eluted fraction obtained from the affinity beads demonstrated substantial enrichment of Ig, as indicated by the presence of a heavy chain at 50 kDa and a light chain at 25 kDa. Supplemental Fig. S1B provides insights into the protein profile differences among the plasma, supernatant, and eluate samples using principal component analysis score plot and heatmap. These results corroborate the findings of the SDS-PAGE analysis. To further elucidate these differences, we calculated the percentages of the top 20 proteins identified in both the supernatant and purified samples (n = 3). As shown in Supplemental Fig. S1C, albumin, apolipoprotein, transferrin, and alpha-1-antitrypsin were the major proteins present in the supernatant. Conversely, the purified samples predominantly contained immunoglobulins, with minimal presence of fibrinogen, albumin, and complement proteins within the top 20 list. These results provide compelling evidence of the effectiveness of this study’s optimized Ig enrichment process.
Optimization of Enzymatic Digestion Time for Trypsin and Glu-C
Among the target glycosylation sites, glycopeptides from N171, N332, N563, and J chain N71 were collected after trypsin digestion. However, the glycopeptides from N395 and N402 could only be obtained by digestion with both Glu-C and trypsin. Therefore, we separated our samples into two groups: one for trypsin digestion alone, and the other for Glu-C digestion followed by trypsin digestion. The supernatants were combined for UHPLC-MS/MS analysis to monitor all the glycopeptides. Furthermore, 5 μL of trypsin (0.2 μg/μL) was added into samples, and the digestion was allowed to proceed for 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 20 h at 37 °C with shaking (300 rpm, n = 3). As illustrated in Figure 3A and Supplemental Table S6, the glycopeptides on N171 and N563 reached their highest peak areas at 2 h. However, the glycopeptides on N395 and N71 required longer trypsin digestion times to obtain larger peak areas. To ensure that the maximum number of IgM glycopeptides exhibited satisfactory responses, we chose 20 h as the final time point to detect all the targets with appropriate signal levels.
Glu-C is a serine protease that specifically cleaves aspartic or glutamic acid residues at the C terminus. This was used to separate N395 and N402 glycopeptides from the trypsin-digested peptides. Next, we digested samples using 5 μL Glu-C (0.1 μg/μL) for 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 20 h at 37 °C with shaking (300 rpm, n = 3) followed by digestion with trypsin overnight. As shown in Figure 3B and Supplemental Table S7, the representative glycopeptides did not show a significant increase in peak area with an increase in Glu-C digestion time from 0.5 to 4 h. However, an increase in response was observed when the digestion time was increased to 20 h. As a compromise, we decided to select 1 h for Glu-C digestion, when considering that 1-h digestion of Glu-C had already achieved a satisfactory peak area and could accelerate the subsequent experimental process.
UHPLC-MS/MS Conditions and Signal Validation of IgM Glycopeptides
As we mentioned in the section of Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale regarding the setting of UHPLC-MS/MS parameters for 162 possible glycopeptides, we used both human IgM standards and pooled plasma samples to verify reliable signals. Theoretical targets not detected in the standard or plasma samples were removed from the list. Only 117 glycopeptides were retained for further confirmation.
We used a liquid chromatography gradient that was originally used for IgA glycopeptide analysis. This approach benefits from the integration of the IgA and IgM glycopeptides into the same sample. The retention time of the IgM surrogate peptide was 5.5 min. The Asn 171 glycopeptides were clustered around 2.1 to 2.7 min, Asn 332 glycopeptides were around 5.6 to 6.0 min, Asn 395 glycopeptides were around 2.1 to 2.6 min, Asn 402 glycopeptides were around 3.6 to 3.8 min, Asn 563 glycopeptides were around 6.4 to 6.8 min, and J chain Asn 71 glycopeptides were around 4.3 to 4.4 min (Fig. 4, left panel).
In addition to confirming signals by checking their presence in standard and pooled plasma, two approaches were applied to substantiate glycopeptide identification: comparison of the target signals with and without PNGase F treatment and mass spectrum confirmation by product ion scanning. PNGase F is an N-glycosidase that cleaves N-linked oligosaccharides from peptides to remove N-glycans. The disappearance of these signals indicated that the targeted glycopeptides were N-glycans. Only 82 glycopeptides were retained after enzymatic evaluation. The results of PNGase F treatment are illustrated in Figure 4 (right panel). The product ion scan spectra are shown in Supplemental Fig. S2. Glycopeptides with at least five matched fragments were kept in the analysis. We further investigated the reliability of glycopeptides in relative quantification by generating calibration curves and monitoring the repeatability at different levels. During this screening step, analytes with satisfactory curve fitting and a repeatability RSD below 30% were retained. Some glycopeptides with lower signal responses were excluded from the analysis during this screening step. The results are described in the following section, which includes 26 IgG, 33 IgA, 36 IgM glycopeptides, and eight surrogate peptides for Ig proteins that were included in our final target panel list.
Performance of the Developed Method: Calibration Curves and Precision
A reliable quantification platform should be established and carefully verified to quantify human Ig profiles in different clinical samples. Therefore, pooled plasma samples from six healthy volunteers were used to generate a calibration curve for each analyte. The range of our calibration curves covered normal amounts of IgG, IgA, and IgM (Supplemental Table S2), according to the literature. In this study, 17 targets were fitted with quadratic equations, and the remaining targets were fitted with linear equations. The regression form of the calibration curves was based on the best-fitting circumstances for each glycopeptide and surrogate peptide. The coefficients of determination (R2) for all of the calibration curves ranged from 0.959 to 0.998 (Table 1). We also evaluated the intrabatch and interbatch precision of the peak area ratios of all the target analytes to those of the IS at low, medium, and high concentrations. As shown in Table 2, the intrabatch precision of all target glycopeptides ranged from 1.4% to 29.6% RSD, and the interbatch precision ranged from 2.3% to 29.6% RSD.
Application to Plasma Samples
We applied our workflow to analyze 19 plasma samples, and the glycosylation profiles were calculated, as shown in Figure 5. The results indicated that all of the IgG glycans predominantly exhibited complex types, whereas the sialylation traits across all subclasses showed low percentages among the 19 individuals. Conversely, IgG1, IgG2, and IgG3/4 exhibit high levels of fucosylation with one or two galactose residues. Regarding IgA complex-type glycosylation, we have observed an increased presence of digalactosylated glycans when compared to monogalactosylated glycans at specific sites, including IgA1/2 N144/131, N340/327, and IgA2 N205. When comparing IgA to IgG isotypes, IgAs were found to exhibit higher levels of sialylation and galactosylation, along with significant fucosylation, except for IgA1/2 N144/131. For IgM, we summarized the glycosylation profiles at six glycosylation sites. Notably, N171, N332, N395, and J chain N71 displayed more complex glycosylation than N402 and N563. Among these complex-type glycans, the majority were digalactosylated rather than monogalactosylated. Moreover, most glycans at the four sites exhibited sialylation, fucosylation, and bisection (except for N71). N402 and N563, on the other hand, had a higher presence of oligo-mannosidic glycans in our application results.

INTRODUCTION:
Immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA, and IgM are the dominant immunoglobulin isotypes in human plasma. They are involved in the defense against antimicrobial infection and play vital roles in the humoral immune system. Moreover, IgG can be further classified into IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4, whereas IgA also includes IgA1 and IgA2 subclasses. The capability and function of an antibody are determined by various characteristics, including not only isotypes and subclasses but also the complex modified during post-translation.
Glycosylation is a post-translational modification that affects the conformation and stability of proteins. Furthermore, Igs encompass multiple glycosylation sites, and the primary N-glycoforms can be categorized as hybrid-type, bisection, fucosylation, galactosylation, oligomannose, or sialylation forms (Fig. 1A). Glycosylation occurring at the antibody Fc region has the potential to modify its binding affinity to innate immune receptors, thereby initiating signaling cascades that give rise to various antibody-dependent responses, such as inflammation, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, and antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis. Given the critical biological functions associated with these responses, extensive studies have explored the association between Ig glycosylation and various diseases. Consequently, the development of sensitive and specific analytical methods for studying Ig glycopeptides has tremendous potential to uncover their biomedical impacts.
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a standard tool that is used to characterize the structure of antibodies and their glycoproteomic composition. Incorporating methods such as nanoliquid chromatography-high-resolution MS and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry remain popular. Ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography coupled with triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS) has also been used for antibody glycosylation profiling. However, most studies did not incorporate any internal standards (ISs) during sample preparation, or they only used trypsin for Ig digestion. The latter might have resulted in the challenge of detecting some glycosylation sites, as tryptic peptides do not always contain a single glycosylation site. This was observed for IgM N395 and N402, which are two glycosylation sites on the same tryptic peptide. Additionally, not all glycopeptides were evaluated for repeatability and relative quantification performance, which are important for clinical sample comparisons.
In this study, we developed and validated an analytical workflow to monitor 95 glycopeptides of human IgG, IgA, and IgM using UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS. Eight peptides representing the total IgG, four IgG subclasses, two IgA subclasses, and IgM were also included in the target list. Extended stable isotope-labeled peptide ISs were used in the analytical process, and calibration curves for all targets were generated to confirm the reliability of relative quantification. The platform was applied to clinical samples to evaluate its applicability.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability
Chromatograms of the UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS analysis are provided as supplemental data (Supplementary Data - exported chromatograms). Proteomics analysis data for Ig enrichment efficiency evaluation are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD047040.
Supplemental data
This article contains supplemental data.
Supplementary Data