PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
diseases: Lemierre's syndrome
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Coagulation; Proteomics; Extracellular glycoproteins

ABSTRACT:
The plasma of the sepsis patient survivors and non-survivors (n=10/group) were analyzed using glycoproteomics approach.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Sepsis related glycopeptides -  Plasma Glycoproteomics Reveals Sepsis Outcomes Linked to Distinct Proteins in Common Pathways

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Extraction and identification of N-glycopeptides was achieved by SPEG, as described previously [1, 2].   [1] Zhang, H., Li, X.J., Martin, D.B., and Aebersold, R. (2003). Identification and quantification of N-linked glycoproteins using hydrazide chemistry, stable isotope labeling and mass spectrometry. Nat Biotechnol 21, 660-666. [2] Tian, Y., Zhou, Y., Elliott, S., Aebersold, R., and Zhang, H. (2007). Solid-phase extraction of N-linked glycopeptides. Nature protocols 2, 334-339.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (11/20/2013). For this database search, the precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set at 15 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as the protease. The fixed modification was set as carbamidomethylation (C), and other modifications were set as flexible modification as follows: deamidation (N) and oxidation (M).  Full-tryptic end and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. A decoy version of the IPI mouse database was used to estimate peptide and protein false discovery rate. The False Discovery Rate was set at 0.01 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications.

METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Cohort
The LactATEs cohort was a randomized controlled noninferiority trial comparing resuscitation protocols for treating early septic shock. Patients admitted to the emergency department were enrolled in the study when the diagnosis of sepsis was made, within 6 hours of presentation. Inclusion criteria have been reported previously. Blood samples were collected into EDTA tubes and placed immediately on ice. Samples were centrifuged within 30 minutes of blood collection, the plasma layer was removed to cryovials, and plasma samples were stored at −80°C prior to use. Excessive freeze-thawing of the samples was avoided to maintain plasma integrity. The study was approved by the institutional review board at each institution and performed in accordance with Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice. Informed consent was obtained from all patients. From this cohort, plasma samples from 20 patients (10 survivors and 10 matched nonsurvivors) were obtained. Patients in each group were matched 1:1 for sex, race, age (± 10 yr), and severity of illness (as measured by Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score).
Solid-Phase Extraction of Glycopeptides and
MS Analysis
The glycopeptides were isolated using a label-free method as described previously, with 96% specificity for glycopep-tide isolation. Briefly, plasma proteins were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides. The glycopeptides were oxidized and conjugated to a solid support using hydrazide chemistry, and glycopeptides that were previously N-linked were released by PNGase F. Peptides were cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed label-free by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size). A nano UPLC at 300 nL/min with a 90-minute linear acetonitrile gradient (from 5% to 35% B over 90 min; A = 0.2% formic acid in water, B = 0.2% formic acid in 90% acetonitrile) was used. A top 20 data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) with exclusion for 25 seconds was set. The samples were run with higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 30 and an isolation width of 2 m/z. A lock mass of the polysiloxane peak at 371.10123 was used to correct the mass in MS and MS/MS. Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500.
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (November 3, 2013) containing 53,918 sequences. For this database search, the precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as the protease. The fixed modification was set as carbamidomethylation (C), and other modifications were set as flexible modification as follows: deamidation (N) and oxidation (M). Full-tryptic end and two missed cleavage sites were allowed. A decoy version of the human RefSeq database was used to estimate peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR). The FDR was set at 0.01 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications.
The identified peptides were quantified using spectral counting. The total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization. Missing values were replaced with a small value (0.01) in order to calculate the ratio and p value.
Proteomic Data Repository
The MS proteomics data have been converted using PRIDE Converter 2 and deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) with the dataset identifier PXD001425.
Protein Quantitation Using Immunoblotting
Total protein immunoblotting was performed to validate selected glycopeptide levels measured by MS, as previously described. A total of 22 proteins were selected for immunoblotting and included both those differentially expressed at the glycopeptide level and several that showed no change but had previously been associated with sepsis. Primary antibodies are listed in Supplemental Digital Content 1 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/B334).
Equal total protein concentrations (5 μg) or equal volumes (100 nL) of plasma samples were run on 26-well, 4–12% Criterion XT Bis–Tris gels (Bio-Rad, Cat. # 345-0125) and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad). A reversible protein staining kit (Thermo Scientific) was used to confirm transfer efficiency and calculate total protein levels per sample. The membrane was cut at approximately 50 kDa and the upper section discarded prior to addition of the primary antibody, to eliminate nonspecific binding of primary antibodies to albumin. Membranes were blocked with 5% blotting grade buffer (Bio-Rad, Cat. # 170–6404) and incubated with primary antibodies (1:1,000 dilution) overnight at 4°C. Antibodies used for immunoblotting are listed in Supplemental Digital Content 1 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/B334). Membranes were incubated with a peroxidase-labeled goat-anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Vector Laboratories, Cat. # PI-1000) for 1 hour at room temperature, and chemiluminescence was detected using Amersham ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI Cat. # RPN2236). Densitometry was measured using the IQ-TL image analysis software (GE Healthcare). The densitometric units were normalized to that of the total protein stain for the entire lane for each sample.
Lectin precipitation coupled with immunoblotting was used to determine if glycosylated levels of four selected proteins matched glycopeptide levels. Agarose-bound concanavalin A (ConA) (Vector Laboratories, Cat. # AL-1003) was washed five times with 500 μL of binding buffer (10 mM HEPES, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl, 0.01 mM MnCl2). Plasma (2 μL) was diluted in 100 μL of binding buffer, and the diluted plasma was incubated with Con A-lectin for 1 hour at room temperature with gentle shaking. The samples were centrifuged to collect lectin-bound and unbound fractions, and immunoblotting was performed to measure differences in glycosylated proteins, as described above.
Bioinformatics Analysis
Glycopeptide levels in plasma of patients with sepsis were visualized using a heat map. Pairwise distances between peptide sequences in both survivor and nonsurvivor groups were evaluated using Euclidean metric on the log10-transformed peptide expression values. The peptide sequences were clustered based on pairwise distances. Because of the low absolute expression values with large variances, we used the log10 transformation of expression values to focus on the significantly differentially expressed peptide sequences among survivor and nonsurvivor groups. Because we want to focus on the differences between survivor and nonsurvivor groups among all peptides, we did not perform principle component analysis to reduce the data dimension at this step. The heat map was generated using Matlab R2012. Proteins corresponding to the glycopeptides identified in patient plasma were aligned with their official names based on the UniProt database. Gene Ontology (GO) was used to identify intracellular and extracellular proteins. Proteins that had been reviewed in UniProt were analyzed by GO enrichment to identify enriched Gene Ontology Biological Processes (GOBPs) and to create a list of annotated proteins. The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery for involved GOBPs was used to generate a list of annotated proteins and construct a functional network (threshold set at p < 0.05). Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis to determine specific pathways involved in the sepsis response.
Statistical Analysis
All analyses were performed blinded to groups. Patient characteristics described by binary variables were assessed using Fisher exact test, whereas continuous variables were first assessed for normality. Differences between groups were assessed using Student t test or Mann-Whitney U test, as appropriate. The 501 glycopeptides identified by MS were analyzed by Student t test. Because multiple testing analysis increases the chance of type II errors, due to the large number of peptides identified relative to sample size, we did not perform correction for multiple testing. There were 126 peptides identified only in survivors (a total of 66 peptides) or nonsurvivors (a total of 60 peptides). These peptides were tested for normality and none passed. For this reason, a Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to determine significance, setting the comparison to 0. Arbitrary units of normalized values for immunoblots and lectin immunoblots were analyzed by one-sample t test, setting the survivor group equal to 1.0 for proteins increased only in the nonsurvivor group. Graphpad Prism was used for all analyses, and p value less than 0.05 was set as the significance level.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Patient Characteristics
The survivor and nonsurvivor groups did not differ significantly in regard to age, sex, race, days in the ICU or hospital, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score, IV fluids over the first 6 hours, history of diabetes, WBC and platelet counts, or hemoglobin, creatinine, and bilirubin levels (Table 1). Thus, patient outcomes were not predicted by these factors individually.
Glycoproteomic Analysis
MS identified 501 glycopeptides in plasma from patients with sepsis, representative of 234 distinct proteins. Complete glycoproteomic results for the 501 peptides are shown in Supplemental Digital Content 2 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/B335). For each individual peptide identified, the annotated MS/MS spectra are provided in Supplemental Digital Content 3 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/B336). The top 20 glycopeptides uniquely identified in survivors and nonsurvivors are summarized in Table 2. The chromatography profiles showed tight alignment, indicating high consistency in the biological replicates within the groups (Fig. 1A). As expected, glycopeptide isolation enriched for extracellular proteins, as 74% of the peptides mapped to the extracellular compartment (Fig. 1B).
Determination of Potential Effector Glycopeptides
Expression levels of 501 glycopeptides identified by MS were visualized in a heat map, with red representing high expression and blue representing low expression. No change was seen for 375 of the peptides, demonstrating that many aspects of the sepsis response were in common between the two groups. One group of peptides (n = 66 peptides) was identified only in survivors, whereas another group (n = 60 peptides) was identified only in nonsurvivors (Fig. 2). Of note, one of the patients in the survivor group showed low levels for all visualized glycopeptides. This could be caused by overall low glycoprotein expression in this particular patient or inefficient capture of the glycopeptides.
Validating Glycoprotein Expression
MS is not readily available in many clinical laboratories. To determine whether the proteins of interest could be quantified by immunoblotting, we evaluated 23 proteins (Table 3). We selected 16 proteins that were significantly different at the glycopeptide level to validate. We also selected eight proteins that were not different at the glycopeptide level as additional controls are known to be associated with sepsis. Of the 22 proteins analyzed, five proteins showed differences at the total level by immunoblotting (Fig. 3), whereas 17 proteins showed no differences. All immunoblot data are shown in Supplemental Digital Content 4 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/B337). Compared with survivors, cathepsin L-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM), periostin, and neutrophil gelatinase–associated lipocalin (NGAL) were decreased at the protein level in nonsurvivors (all p < 0.05) (Fig. 3). Conversely, kininogen was increased in nonsurvivors compared with survivors (p < 0.05). Of these six proteins, only VCAM was decreased at both the glycopeptide and protein levels.
Lectin precipitation coupled with immunoblotting was used to determine whether glycosylated protein levels matched glycopeptide levels for four proteins (α-1-antichymotrypsin, attractin, clusterin, and tenascin-C), with all immunoblot data shown in Supplemental Digital Content 5 (http://links.lww.com/CCM/B338). Only glycosylated clusterin was different between survivors and nonsurvivors (Fig. 3B). However, the clusterin glycopeptide identified by MS was decreased in non-survivors, whereas total clusterin glycoprotein levels increased in nonsurvivors.
Gene Ontology and Pathway Analysis
The UniProt database provides information on protein sequence and function and is divided into entries that have been reviewed (in which the sequence and functional information are manually updated) or unreviewed (in which the sequence and functional information are automatically annotated). UniProt identified 66 peptides in survivors that correlated with 54 reviewed proteins and 60 peptides in non-survivors that correlated with 43 reviewed proteins. Proteins overlapping between either survivors and common response or nonsurvivors and common response were used to identify enriched biological processes (Supplemental Digital Content 6, http://links.lww.com/CCM/B339; Supplemental Digital Content 7, http://links.lww.com/CCM/B340). A network of enriched GOBPs was constructed, with GO shared terms in yellow, distinct survivor terms in blue, and distinct nonsurvivor terms in red (Fig. 4). The survivor and common response GOBPs have overlapping pathways, including cell adhesion and complement activation using the classical pathway. Pathways that overlap between nonsurvivor and common response GOBPs include lipid transport, regulation of leukocyte activation, and chemical homeostasis.
KEGG analysis was used to determine pathways associated with sepsis survival and revealed six pathways (complement cascades, coagulation cascade, cell adhesion molecules, ECM-receptor interaction, focal adhesion, and prion diseases) enriched in survivors and one pathway (systemic lupus erythematosus) enriched in nonsurvivors (Supplemental Digital Content 8, http://links.lww.com/CCM/B341). Interestingly, both survivors and nonsurvivors used complement and coagulation cascades, but the proteins identified within that pathway were different between groups. For example, anti-thrombin-III and complement factor VIII were both increased in nonsurvivors and are part of the intrinsic pathway. By contrast, tissue factor pathway inhibitor and complement factor V were both increased in survivors and are part of the extrinsic pathway (Fig. 5). This suggests that sepsis survivors and nonsurvivors use different proteins within common pathways to direct outcomes.

INTRODUCTION:
Severe sepsis is a clinical syndrome in which organ dysfunction or hypoperfusion occurs as a result of a robust immune response to infection. If sepsis progresses to septic shock, blood pressure decreases dramatically and multiple organ failure may occur. Septic shock is a leading cause of death in patients who are admitted to the ICU, with a mortality rate approximating 30–50%, which results in about 750,000 annual deaths. Treatment strategies aim to maintain blood pressure using IV fluids, sustain adequate oxygen levels by administration of supplemental oxygen, and target the bacterial load using broad-range antibiotics, all improve overall patient outcome. However, mortality remains high, and therapeutic strategies that further improve survival rates have yet to be elucidated. Thus, additional molecular targets for improved prognosis and therapeutics are needed for resolution of sepsis in the early phase, before the patient progresses to septic shock.
A high-throughput proteomic evaluation of plasma proteins can provide mechanistic insight and identify biomarkers for improved diagnostics. A current limitation of well-established proteomic techniques, such as 2D gel electrophoresis, is that albumin, a high-abundance plasma protein, limits identification and measurement of changes in low-abundance plasma proteins. Albumin depletion protocols have been developed, and currently, several commercial kits are available; however, low-abundance proteins can generate complexes with albumin and be removed through this process, making depletion protocols problematic. Additionally, depletion protocols can remove other proteins, resulting in a low extraction yield. Because albumin is not glycosylated, a plasma glycoproteomic evaluation allows for analysis of low-abundance plasma proteins, without requiring the potentially problematic process of albumin depletion.
N-linked glycosylation is the most common glycan modification on human proteins. Extracellular proteins, including cell membrane proteins and secreted proteins, are accessible drug targets that hold high potential for diagnosis and therapeutics. Extracellular proteins are more often modified with carbohydrates than intracellular proteins, allowing N-linked glycoproteomic analysis to greatly enrich for the extracellular proteome. Because plasma is composed of extracellular proteins, a glycoproteomics approach also lends itself to plasma analysis.
The goal of this study, accordingly, was to identify early changes in N-linked plasma glycoproteins that predict later mortality in patients with sepsis. Plasma samples from sepsis survivors and nonsurvivors were analyzed by solid-phase extraction of glycopeptides using hydrazide chemistry, followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Computational tools were used to map glycoprotein expression to cellular functions, and the pathways involved with these glycoproteins were mapped.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
This work was performed at University of Mississippi Medical Center and University of Texas San Antonio.
Drs. DeCoux, Tian, Nguyen, Flynn, Cannon, Griswold, Jin, and Lindsey contributed to data collection, analysis, and interpretation. Drs. Griswold, Jin, Puskarich, Jones, and Lindsey contributed to formulation of hypothesis and experimental design. All authors contributed to writing and revision of the article.
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's website (http://journals.lww.com/ccmjournal).
The remaining authors have disclosed that they do not have any potential conflicts of interest.