PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Tumor metabolic reprogramming; ferroptosis; creatine; immunotherapy

ABSTRACT:
To explore whether creatine regulates iron death sensitivity in colorectal cancer by modulating the function of certain proteins, we performed immunoprecipitation experiments with biotin-labelled creatine and conducted proteomics studies on these IP-down proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
SLC6A8-mediated creatine uptake suppresses ERK2-FSP1 signaling and induces ferroptosis in colorectal cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
1) Extraction of proteins from tissue or body fluid samples; 2) Digestion of the obtained proteins into peptides using trypsin; 3 Desalting of the peptides for DIA (data independent acquisition) on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer; 4) Importation of all DIA raw data obtained from all LC-MSMS assays into the DIA-NN for analysis.5) Bioinformatic analysis process based on the protein quantification results output from DIA-NN.

DATA PROCESSING:
Based on the Raw files obtained by mass spectrometry, 1) construct a sample-specific protein database according to the origin of the sample, and then use the DIA data analysis software, DIA-NN, to conduct a protein database search; 2) conduct quality control analysis at the peptide and protein levels based on the results of the database search; 3) perform common functional annotations on the identified proteins, including GO, KEGG, Protein domain, COG/KOG, STRING database annotations, etc.; 4) quantitative analysis of proteins: including quantitative distribution statistics and repeatability analysis.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Tumor metabolic reprogramming is critical for providing energy to support proliferation and resistance to stress-induced cell death. However, the regulatory mechanisms linking these processes remain incompletely understood. Here, using untargeted metabolomics, we demonstrate that creatine potently induces ferroptosis in colorectal cancer (CRC). Mechanistically, creatine binds extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2), impairing its activation by mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (MEK1). Inhibiting the creatine transporter SLC6A8 reduces creatine uptake and activates ERK2. Activated ERK2 then binds, phosphorylates ferroptosis suppressor protein 1 (FSP1) at Thr109, and stabilizes it to inhibit ferroptosis. Creatine supplementation suppresses tumor growth, enhances CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell infiltration, and sensitizes tumors to anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) immunotherapy. Our study identifies ERK2 as a creatine sensor regulating FSP1 stability and ferroptosis resistance, highlighting the therapeutic potential of creatine supplementation in combination cancer immunotherapy.