PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Skin
diseases: Melanoma
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Melanoma; Silver nanoparticles (agnps); Dia ms; Nanomedicine; Swath ms; Proteomics; Green nanoparticles; Anti-cancer

ABSTRACT:
Addressing the challenges of melanoma, including its aggressive nature and treatment resistance. This study explores the application of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) synthesized via conventional and green methods. By examining proteomic changes in A375 melanoma cells, we identify key disruptions in cell viability and gene activity. The DIA MS/SWATH MS analysis generates a set of differentially expressed proteins with respect to AgNPs. This allows us to identify new potential regulatory mechanisms and molecular pathways. AgNP exposure leads to oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and activation of apoptosis pathways, revealing the potential of AgNPs in melanoma treatment. This comprehensive analysis highlights the promise of eco-friendly nanoparticle synthesis in developing effective anti-cancer therapies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Revealing Melanoma Cell Proteome Transformations with Silver Nanoparticles: An Innovative Comparative Study

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Label free data independent acquisition (DIA) quantitative proteomics method was employed to study the proteotype changes triggered by AgNPs. A375 melanoma cancer cells were exposed to 3 μM colloidal and green AgNPs for 24 and 48 hours, subsequently, their impact on the differential regulation of proteins was studied. Control samples (WT cells) consisted of A375 melanoma cells in DMEM medium with no nanoparticle treatment. All the timepoints and treatments, beside control samples, were prepared in three discrete wells in a six well cell culture plate (SARSTEDT, DE) yielding three biological repetitions. Next, cultured cells were three times washed on cell culture plate with PBS (phosphate buffered saline) and scraped into the lysis buffer consisting 8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 (Urea buffer). Samples were then two times snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, 5 min sonicated in the sonication bath (ELMA, CH) and left on ice for 30 min. Protein lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14000 g/ 30 min/ 8°C. Clean supernatants were transferred into the clean low binding tubes. The protein concentration in the samples was determined by BCA protein assay according to manufacturer’s recommendations (Thermo, MA, USA). Approximately 50 µg of protein from each sample was taken for digestion using a modified Filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP). Microcon 10 kDa cut-off filter units (Millipore, USA) were used for tryptic digestion. Briefly, 200 μl of Urea buffer and a volume of lysate corresponding to 50 μg of protein were added to the filter unit. Filter units were centrifuged at 17 000 g/ 30 min/ 20°C. For protein reduction, 100 μl of Urea buffer and 20 μl of 100 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) was added to the filter unit, and incubated for 30 min on a thermoblock set at 37°C/ 600 rpm. The filter unit was then centrifuged at 17 000 g/ 20 min/ 20°C. Protein alkylation, was initiated by adding 20 μl of 300 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich,MO, USA) in 100 μl of Urea buffer and incubated in the darkness for 20 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation at 17 000 g/ 20 min/ 20°C. Next, filter units were washed three times with 100 μl of 100 mM NH4HCO3, proceeding by centrifugation at 17 000 g/ 30 min/ 20°C , the step was repeated three times in total. After changing collection tubes, 100 μl of 50mM NH4HCO3 and 1.5 μl of 0.5 μg/ μl trypsin solution in ddH2O (Promega, WI, USA), were added for the overnight digestion at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were next day collected by centrifugation at 17 000 g/ 15 min/ 20°C . Filter units were washed with additional 50 μl of 0.5 M NaCl in LC-MS water, through spin down at 17 000 g/ 15 min/ 20°C. Then, the peptide desalting on MicroSpin C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, MA, USA) was performed. Briefly, MicroSpin C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, MA, USA) were twice conditioned with 200 μl of acetonitrile (ACN) + 0.1% formic acid (FA) while trying to avoid any bubbles formation on the frit surface, and subsequently spun down at 200 rpm/ 2 min. The step was repeated 2 more times. Next, column equilibration required 200 μl of ddH2O + 0.1% FA followed by a centrifugation step at 300 rpm/ 2 min. The step was repeated two times in total. The C18 slurry was then hydrated by adding 200 μl of ddH2O + 0.1% FA, leaving it hydrating for 15 min followed by centrifugation at 300 rpm/ 2 min. Tryptic peptides were then transferred onto the activated C18 column, and centrifuged at 500 rpm/ 2 min. Subsequent desalting step was repeated 3 times in total by adding 200 μl of ddH2O + 0.1% FA followed by a centrifugation at 500 rpm/ 2 min. Afterwards, C18 columns were transferred to a new low binding collection tubes, and peptides were first eluted by 200 μl of 50% ACN + 0.1% FA followed by a centrifugation at 500 rpm/ 2 min. Next, elution steps were done two times by adding 200 μl of 80% ACN + 0.1% FA each time followed by centrifugation at 500 rpm/ 2 min. Desalted peptide eluates were dried by a vacuum centrifugation for 3 hours at 30°C in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, DE). Dry samples were stored at -80°C until the LC-MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Samples were dissolved in 50 μl of 0.08% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2.5% ACN in LC-MS water and approximately 1 μg of peptides were loaded into the fluidic system of liquid chromatograph UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). Identical liquid chromatography conditions were used for both data dependent (DDA) and data independent (DIA) acquisition. Peptides were trapped on Acclaim PepMap 100, 5 µm particle size, 1 mm inner diameter, 5 mm length C18 pre-column and. Analytical peptide separation was done on an analytical PepMap™ 100, 2 µm particle size, 1 mm inner diameter, 5 mm length C18 analytical column. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 0.1% FA in ACN (v/v) (B) and 0.1% FA in water (v/v) (A). Analytical peptide separation has been started at 2.5% B followed by increasing its proportion up to 40% B in A over 90 min. A column flush at 95% B was performed over next 8 min. Nano-electrospray was used to ionize the peptides, followed by their introduction into the Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA). One technical replicate was acquired by a DDA method. The resolution for full scan operated in a profile mode was set to 120,000. Full scan scanned through a mass range spanning from m/z 350 Th up to m/z 1200 Th. Normalized AGC target was set to 300% with auto setting on maximum injection time. MS/MS scans were performed on the top 15 most intense precursor ions selected from the full scan. Once fragmented precursor ions were excluded for 20 sec with precursor exclusion mass tolerance set to 10 ppm. Minimum precursors with ion intensity below 5.0e3, and precursors outside of charge states range of +2 to +6 were suspended from the experiment. The precursor isolation window width was  2 Th. The collision energy was set to 30% and normalized collision energy type was selected. The MS/MS scan was operated in a centroid mode and the resolution was set to 120,000. Standard setting for normalized AGC target and 40 msec maximum injection time was set. Two technical replicates of each biological replicate were measured in DIA acquisition mode accompanied by a full scan at 60,000 resolution with a mass range from m/z 350 Th up to m/z 1450 Th. Full scan normalized AGC target was set to 300% and maximum injection time was 100 msec. DIA method cycled in a precursor mass range spanning from m/z 350 Th up to m/z 1100 Th which was divided into 12 Th wide windows with 1 Th overlap. Therefore, a single DIA cycle consisted of 62 MS/MS scans. For each MS/MS scan a normalized collision energy type with collision energy set to 30% was set. Orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000. Normalized AGC target was set to 1000% with automatic setting on the maximum injection time parameter. Data type was profile. A MaxQuant search engine was implemented to search raw unprocessed DDA files. Homo sapiens SwissProt+UniProt search database (06_2023) and a reverse decoy database harboring equal amount of decoy sequences and common contaminant protein sequences was used to perform database search. Enzyme digestion was set to trypsin with allowance of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as a fixed modification. List of variable modifications harbored methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation. Other processing settings were left default. MaxQuant output files (MSMS file) were further used in Skyline-daily (64-bit, 20.1.9.234) software which transformed them into a spectral library .blib file. The “Score Threshold” was left default at 0.05 MaxQuant PEPscore. The FASTA file used for search was set for Skyline target generation background proteome. Peptides from .blib file were associated to proteins in Skyline target panel. Protein intensity extraction was performed in Skyline-daily (64-bit, 20.1.9.234). Ion match tolerance was set to 0.05 m/z. Peptides defined by at least 4 product ions were kept in the experiment, while up to 6 most intense product ions were selected for precursors where more product ions were available. Reversed decoy sequences were created from target sequences which were subsequently used for training mProphet peak scoring model. R (version 4.0.0) package MSstats 4.0.1. was used for statistical analysis of extracted intensities. mProphet q-value threshold was set to qvalue < 0.01. After summing the transition intensities the resulting peptide intensities were log2 transformed and quantile normalized. Protein quantitation was performed pairwise via mixed-effect models implemented in MSstats groupComparison function. T-test p-values were Benjamini Hochberg adjusted.

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Synthesis of AgNPs
AgNPs were synthesized using an eco-friendly approach outlined in. Leaves of Laurus nobilis were gathered, cleansed with MilliQ water to eliminate impurities, and air-dried at ambient temperature for 24 h. Subsequently, 10 g of these leaves were immersed in a glass flask containing 100 mL of MilliQ water (in a 1:10 ratio) and boiled at 100 °C for 20 min. After cooling, the extract was filtered to prepare it for nanoparticle synthesis. Five mL of the purified extract was added to a solution containing AgNO3 dissolved in MilliQ water. The mixture was stirred at 400 rpm for 1 h at room temperature until the color of the solution turned from yellow to brown. Upon this color change, the solution underwent centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 1 h to gather the nanoparticles in the pellet, which were then purified with MilliQ water through three cycles of centrifugation at 13,000 rpm.
4.2. Nanoparticles Characterization
The shape and spread of the magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) were analyzed using a JEOL JEM-1011 transmission electron microscope (TEM, Jeol LTD., Tokyo, Japan) running at 100 kV. To prepare the nanoparticles, a few microliters of the nanoparticle solution were dropped onto a copper grid coated with formvar. The images of the free MNPs presented were taken with grids that were prepared immediately after the synthesis process, using a few microliters of highly concentrated final suspensions diluted in an appropriate buffer or water, depending on the surface coating. For DLS and ζ-potential measurements of AgNPs in aqueous solutions (at 25 °C and pH 7), a Zetasizer Nano-ZS equipped with a HeNe laser (633 nm, 4.0 mW) and a detector (ZEN3600, Malvern Instruments Ltd., Malvern, UK) was employed.
UV-vis analysis spanning the spectral range of 300 ÷ 800 nm was conducted at room temperature using a Varian Cary 5 spectrophotometer (ZEN3600, Malvern Instruments Ltd., Malvern, UK) equipped with a quartz cuvette that had a 10 mm path length.
The Raman spectra of Ag-NPs and Green Ag-NPs were obtained using a MicroRaman Xplora (Horiba, Bhamboli, Maharashtra, India) with a laser source at 532 nm.
4.3. Determination of AgNPs Concentration
The concentrations of colloidal AgNPs and green AgNPs were determined through elemental analyses employing ICP-OES Perkin Elmer AVIO 500. In this process, 150 μL of the NP solutions were digested overnight by adding 1.5 mL of HNO3, followed by dilution with MilliQ water (at a 1:10 ratio).
4.4. Cell Culture
Human melanoma cells (A375) and human epidermal keratinocyte line (HaCaT) were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) enriched with 2 mM glutamine, penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) and 15% of Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK). Cells were grown in a humidified controlled atmosphere with a 95 to 5% ratio of air/CO2, at 37 °C, and to 97% confluence prior to treatment with nanoparticles.
A375 and HaCaT cells were seeded starting from a 97% of confluence, with 5.27 × 105 cells for 1 mL; thus, an initial number of cells in 7 mL (3.689 × 106) were counted using a T20 Automated cell counter (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
In each well, we seeded 400 µL of cells in 1.6 mL DMEM, thus having 1.85 × 106 cells at a concentration of 5 × 103 cells per well in 6-well plates and stabilized in a humidified controlled atmosphere with a 95 to 5% ratio of air/CO2, at 37 °C for 24 h.
4.5. Cell Viability Assessment and Uptake
A375 and HaCaT were seeded at a concentration of 5 × 103 cells per well in 96-well plates and stabilized in a humidified controlled atmosphere with a 95 to 5% ratio of air/CO2, at 37 °C for 24 h. Subsequently, green and colloidal AgNPs at three different concentrations (1 µM, 3 µM, and 5 µM) were added to cell media. After incubation times of 24 and 48 h, a standard WST-8 assay (96992, Sigma Aldrich, Dorset, UK) was used. WST-8 is a water-soluble tetrazolium salt (WST) [2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium. The control tests were performed on cells incubated with equivalent volumes grown solution of 10% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich, Dorset, UK) in Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS). Samples were measured using a Fluo Star Optima (BMG LABTECH, Ortenberg, Germany) microplate reader at a wavelength of 460 nm. Values were collected and elaborated with MARS Data Analysis Software (BMG LABTECH), OPTIMA series V3.01 R220.12.2013. The data, obtained on 8 different viability experiments, were expressed as mean ± SD. The concentrations of the internalized colloidal and green AgNPs were calculated by elemental analyses using an Avio® ICP-OES 500 (PerkinElmer Inc. Waltham, MA, USA). To estimate the intracellular NPs uptake, 105 cells were seeded in 1 mL of medium in each well (3.5 cm diameter) of a 6-well plate. After 24 h, the medium was replaced with fresh medium containing the AgNPs (colloidal and green) at a concentration of 5 µM for 48 h. After this time, the medium was removed, and the cells were washed three times with PBS (pH 7.4) to remove non-internalized, membrane-bound NPs. Then, cells were trypsinized and counted using a cell-counting chamber. Next, the cell suspensions were digested using 1 mL of concentrated HNO3 10% (v/v), and the intracellular Ag concentration was measured by elemental analysis. The Ag content was measured in 360,000 cells (ng Ag) for the two cell lines.
4.6. Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry
Human melanoma cells (A375) and human epidermal keratinocyte line (HaCaT) were grown as described in Section 4.4. The label free data independent acquisition (DIA) quantitative proteomics method was employed to study the proteotype changes triggered by AgNPs. A375 melanoma cancer cells were exposed to 3 μM colloidal and green AgNPs for 24 and 48 h, and subsequently, their impact on the differential regulation of proteins was studied. Control samples (WT cells) consisted of A375 melanoma cells in DMEM medium with no nanoparticle treatment. Other than the control samples, all the timepoints and treatments were prepared in three discrete wells in a 6-well cell culture plate (Sarstedt, Germany) and grown up to 97% cell confluency yielding three biological repetitions. Next, cultured cells were washed three times on the cell culture plate with PBS (phosphate buffered saline) and scraped into the lysis buffer consisting of 8 M Urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 (Urea buffer). Samples were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen two times, sonicated in the sonication bath (ELMA, Pforzheim, Germany) for 5 min, and left on ice for 30 min. Protein lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 30 min/14,000× g at 8 °C. Clean supernatants were transferred into the clean low binding tubes. The protein concentration in the sample was determined by BCA protein assay according to the manufacturer’s recommendations (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). Approximately 50 µg of protein from each sample was taken for digestion using a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP).
Microcon 10 kDa cut-off filter units (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) were used for tryptic digestion. Briefly, 200 μL of Urea buffer and a volume of lysate corresponding to 50 μg of protein were added to the filter unit. Filter units were centrifuged at 17,000× g at 20 °C for 30 min. For protein reduction, 100 μL of Urea buffer and 20 μL of 100 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) were added to the filter unit, and the mixture was incubated for 30 min on a thermoblock set at 37 °C/600 rpm. The filter unit was then centrifuged at 17,000× g for 20 min. Protein alkylation was initiated by adding 20 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in 100 μL of Urea buffer and incubated in the darkness for 20 min at room temperature, followed by centrifugation at 17,000× g for 20 min. Next, filter units were washed three times with 100 μL of 100 mM NH4HCO3, then centrifuged at 17,000× g for 30 min; the step was repeated three times in total. After changing collection tubes, 100 μL of 50mM NH4HCO3 and 1.5 μL of 0.5 μg/μL trypsin solution in ddH2O (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), were added for the overnight digestion at 37 °C. Tryptic peptides were collected the next day by centrifugation at 17,000× g for 15 min. Filter units were washed with an additional 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl in LC-MS water, through spin down at 17,000× g/15 min.
Then, the peptide desalting on MicroSpin C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) was performed via a modified protocol by Bouchal et al.. The presence of excessive salts interferes with peptide ionization and contributes to the compromised mass spectrometry analysis. Briefly, MicroSpin C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) were twice conditioned with 200 μL of acetonitrile (ACN) + 0.1% formic acid (FA) while trying to avoid any bubbles formation on the frit surface, and subsequent spinning down at 200 rpm/2 min. The step was repeated 2 more times. Next, column equilibration required 200 μL of ddH2O + 0.1% FA followed by a centrifugation step at 300 rpm/2 min. The step was repeated two times in total. The C18 slurry was then hydrated by adding 200 μL of ddH2O + 0.1% FA, leaving it hydrating for 15 min followed by centrifugation at 300 rpm/2 min. Tryptic peptides were then transferred onto the activated C18 column and centrifuged at 500 rpm/2 min. Following desalting was repeated 3 times in total by adding 200 μL of ddH2O + 0.1% FA, followed by a centrifugation at 500 rpm/2 min. Afterwards, C18 columns were transferred to a new low binding collection tube, and peptides were first eluted by 200 μL of 50% ACN + 0.1% FA, then centrifuged at 500 rpm/2 min. Next, elution steps were done two times by adding 200 μL of 80% ACN + 0.1% FA each time, followed by centrifugation at 500 rpm/2 min. Desalted peptide eluates were dried by vacuum centrifugation for 3 h at 30 °C in a speedvac concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Dry samples were stored at −80 °C until the LC-MS analysis.
4.7. Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Analysis
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry were performed based on a method described in our previous publication. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 50 μL of 0.08% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2.5% ACN in LC-MS water, and approximately 1 μg of peptides were loaded into the fluidic system of liquid chromatograph UltiMate™ 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Identical liquid chromatography conditions were used for both data dependent (DDA) and data independent (DIA) acquisition. Peptides were trapped on Acclaim PepMap 100, 5 µm particle size, 1 mm inner diameter, 5 mm length C18 pre-column (cat. no: 16045, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Loading pump flow was kept at 5 µL/min with an isocratic mobile phase composition of 0.08% TFA, 2.5% ACN in LC-MS water. Analytical peptide separation was done on an analytical PepMap™ 100, 2 µm particle size, 1 mm inner diameter, 5 mm length C18 analytical column (cat.no: 164534, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 0.1% FA in ACN (v/v) (B) and 0.1% FA in water (v/v) (A). Analytical peptide separation was started at 2.5% B, followed by increasing its proportion up to 40% B in A over 90 min. A column flush at 95% B was performed over the next 8 min, and the final 8 min were left for column equilibration at 2.5% B. Nano-electrospray was used to ionize the peptides, followed by their introduction into the Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
One technical replicate was acquired by a DDA method. The resolution for full scan operated in a profile mode was set to 120,000. Full scan scanned through a mass range spanning from m/z 350 Th up to m/z 1200 Th. Normalized AGC target was set to 300% with the auto setting on maximum injection time. MS/MS scans were performed on the top 15 most intense precursor ions selected from the full scan. Once fragmented precursor ions were excluded for 20 s with precursor exclusion mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, minimum precursors with ion intensity below 5.0 × 103, and precursors outside of charge states range of +2 to +6 were suspended from the experiment. The precursor isolation window width was 2 Th. The collision energy was set to 30%, and the normalized collision energy type was selected. The MS/MS scan was operated in a centroid mode, and the resolution was set to 120,000. Standard setting for normalized AGC target and 40 ms maximum injection time was set.
4.8. Data Independent Acquisition
Two technical replicates of each biological replicate were measured. DIA acquisition was accompanied by a full scan at 60,000 resolutions, and a mass range from m/z 350 Th up to m/z 1450 Th was considered. The normalized AGC target was set to 300%, and maximum injection time was 100 s. The DIA method cycled in a precursor mass range spanning from m/z 350 Th up to m/z 1100 Th, which was divided into 12 Th wide windows with 1 Th overlap. Therefore, a single DIA cycle consisted of 62 MS/MS scans. For each MS/MS scan, a normalized collision energy type was set to 30%. Orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000. Normalized AGC target was set to 1000%, with an automatic setting on the maximum injection time parameter. The data type was profile.
4.9. Proteomics Data Analysis
Applying quantitative proteomics and data-independent acquisition (DIA) methodology enables the evaluation of the proteome landscape after different types of AgNPs treatments on melanoma cancer cells in different timepoints. Quantitative analysis is an essential aspect of biomarker discovery, and therefore, we have performed a comparative bioinformatic evaluation of proteomic landscapes upon the colloidal and green AgNPs at 24- and 48-h timepoint treatments, as described below.
4.10. Spectral Library Generation and DIA Data Extraction
A MaxQuant search engine was implemented to search raw unprocessed DDA files. Homo sapiens SwissProt + UniProt search database (06_2023) and a reverse decoy database harboring an equal number of decoy sequences and common contaminant protein sequences were used to perform database search. Enzyme digestion was set to trypsin with allowance of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was considered as a fixed modification. The list of variable modifications harbored methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation. Other processing settings were left as default. MaxQuant output files (MSMS file) were further used in Skyline-daily (64-bit, 20.1.9.234) software which transformed them into a spectral library .blib file. The “Score Threshold” was left as default at 0.05 MaxQuant PEPscore. The FASTA file used for search was set for Skyline target generation background proteome. Peptides from .blib file were associated with proteins in Skyline target panel. Protein intensity extraction was performed in Skyline-daily (64-bit, 20.1.9.234) with identical settings to those described in Faktor et al.. Briefly, zero missed cleavages were allowed in the Peptide settings tab. Maximum peptide length was set from 2 to 60 amino acids, and modified peptides were suspended from experiment. The precursor ion in a charge state from +1 to +5 and y and b product ions with +1 and +2 charges were included in the experiment. Product ion higher than the ion 4 up to the last product ion in series were included in the experiment. Ion match tolerance was set to 0.05 m/z. Peptides defined by at least 4 product ions were kept in the experiment, while up to the 6 most intense product ions were selected for precursors where more product ions were available. The DIA isolation scheme was auto-imported from the raw DIA file. Orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000 at 200 m/z. Reversed decoy sequences were created from target sequences, which were subsequently used for training the mProphet peak scoring model.
4.11. Statistical Analysis of Skyline Extracted DIA Data
R (version 4.0.0) package MSstats 4.0.1. was used for statistical analysis of extracted intensities. mProphet q-value threshold was set to q value < 0.01. After summing the transition intensities, the resulting peptide intensities were log2 transformed and quantile normalized. Protein quantitation was performed pairwise via mixed-effect models implemented in the MS stats group Comparison function. T-test p-values were Benjamini Hochberg adjusted. The full protein comparison matrix is available in the dataset, as described in the data availability section.
4.12. Data Visualization
Data were preprocessed using Python 3.9 and RStudio 2023.06.01. Volcano plots were generated in Enhanced Volcano 1.10.0. Inkcape 1.2 was used to process the graphics to final figures and to generate svg images.

RESULTS:
2. Results
By utilizing eco-friendly AgNPs derived from Laurus nobilis leaf extract and colloidal AgNPs, our results indicate that AgNPs exposure impairs gene activity, decreasing cell viability in cancer cells while preserving healthy HaCaT keratinocytes. Proteomic analysis revealed significant changes indicative of the activation or suppression of key biological pathways. Notably, the proteins altered in response to AgNPs treatment were linked to critical processes such as the cell cycle, cell morphology, cellular functions, endoplasmic reticulum stress, oxidative stress, and mitochondrial dysfunction, ultimately leading to cell death through apoptosis and/or autophagy activation. Specifically, green AgNPs induced dysregulation of key proteins involved in essential pathways, resulting in the inhibition of oncogene expression, modulation of carbohydrate metabolism, and disruption of copper homeostasis.
2.1. Physicochemical Characterization of AgNPs
2.1.1. Morphology and Size Analysis
The morphology and size of the two types of AgNPs were analyzed by TEM (Figure 1a,b). Colloidal AgNPs had a size of (20 ± 3) nm (Figure 1a), whereas the green AgNPs were bigger, showing a diameter of (35 ± 7) nm (Figure 1b). Shape was nearly comparable between the AgNPs derived from the two synthetic routes, confirming an almost spherical morphology, although it was more defined in the case of colloidal AgNPs. Overall, these nanostructures appeared to be generally monodispersed, and slightly tended to aggregate into small clusters.
2.1.2. Hydrodynamic Size and Stability in Cell Culture Medium
The size of the AgNPs was further confirmed through DLS analysis. DLS measurements conducted in water provided evidence of compatibility between the measured hydrodynamic radius of the AgNPs and the average size values detected in the TEM acquisitions. In particular, the hydrodynamic radius recorded for the green and colloidal AgNPs is (36 ± 8) nm and (21 ± 3) nm, respectively. These measurements align closely with the TEM analysis. To evaluate the stability of AgNPs in cell culture medium, DLS measurements were performed in DMEM. The peculiar formation of the protein corona on the NP surface led to an enhanced size value of (38 ± 7) nm for green AgNPs and (28 ± 3) for the colloidal ones (Table 1).
2.1.3. Surface Charge and Zeta Potential
Moreover, assuming the dual functionality of polyphenols extracted from plants as both natural reducing and capping agents, the surface charge was found to be negative (−30 ± 6 mV) and (−23 ± 2 mV) for green and colloidal AgNPs, respectively. Furthermore, the ζ-potential underwent a change due to the significant presence of serum proteins on the surface, becoming more negative (−41 ± 6 mV) and (−32 ± 5 mV). Additionally, an observed shift in the ζ-potential was noted, likely attributed to the substantial abundance of serum proteins on the surface, resulting in a more negative charge of (−41 ± 6 mV) (Table 1).
2.1.4. Optical Properties: UV-Vis Analysis and Raman Spectroscopy
The UV-Vis absorption spectra of NPs were recorded in the range of 300–800 nm and compared with the spectrum of the corresponding Laurus nobilis leaf extract (Figure 2). The analysis was conducted using the leaf extract, revealing the presence of a peak in the UV region at around 280 nm, likely stemming from the presence of aromatic compounds. Within the wavelength range of 300–800 nm, no absorption signal was detected. The spectrum of AgNPs obtained through the green approach showed a slightly broader peak compared to the peak of colloidal AgNPs, which was perfectly centered at 400 nm (typical value of absorption for spherical AgNPs).
The Raman spectrum of colloidal AgNPs (Figure 3a) shows several weak and shouldered signals ascribed to the citrate used as a reducing agent in nanoparticle synthesis. The weak band at 225 cm−1 could be assigned to the Ag–O stretching mode, which indicates the formation of a chemical bond between silver and carboxylate groups of citrate molecules. The low and wider signal at about 660 cm−1 and the bands between 756-842 cm−1 could be assigned to the COO bending mode, while the shoulder at 1575 cm−1 could instead be ascribed to symmetric stretching vibrations of COO. The intense and sharp signals at 1372 and 1600 cm−1 could be attributed to the vibrational mode of C=O. On the contrary, the Raman spectrum of green AgNPs (Figure 3b) showed only two intense and broad peaks at about 1375 and 1596 cm−1 due to the overlapping of different bands, which could be attributed to the vibrational mode of C=O or to symmetric stretching vibrations of COO− and C–C stretching vibrations of aromatic ring present in the molecular structure of polyphenols.
2.2. Biological Assessment of AgNPs
2.2.1. Cytotoxicity in A375 Melanoma Cells
Following the physico-chemical characterization of both types of AgNPs, we evaluated their impact on A375 cells in terms of viability using 1, 3, and 5 µM of AgNPs, for 24 and 48 h. The results obtained through WST-8 assay (Figure 4) showed that the colloidal AgNPs were more toxic than green AgNPs. We demonstrated that, after 48 h using the higher concentration, 53% of the cells remained viable. In contrast, when the cells were treated with green AgNPs, 78% of the cells were vital. Thus, the anticancer effect was visible for both types of NPs, even if the effect was stronger for colloidal AgNPs in a time and concentration dependent manner.
2.2.2. Cytotoxicity in HaCaT Keratinocytes
To assess the impact on healthy cell lines, a viability assay was also conducted on HaCaT cells, which serve as the non-tumoral counterpart to melanoma cells (Figure 5).
The results demonstrated that green AgNPs did not induce a significant reduction in viability compared to colloidal AgNPs. In detail, colloidal AgNPs at a concentration of 5 µM induced a 40% reduction in cell viability after 48 h. Conversely, cells exposed to green AgNPs at the same concentration remained 88% viable. This finding is important in the context of using this type of AgNP as an antitumor agent.
To determine whether there were differences in uptake between the two cell lines, silver concentration was measured after incubating HaCaT and A375 cells with the higher concentration used for viability tests for 48 h. The results show that there were no substantial differences in uptake between the two cell lines, regardless of the type of AgNPs used. This indicates that the selective cytotoxic effect of the green AgNPs on melanoma cells is indeed due to their surface chemical composition, which, in contrast, spares non-tumorigenic cells from mortality. The data obtained from ICP analysis are reported in Table 2.
2.3. Mass Spectrometry Benchmark of the Effect of Green AgNPs and Colloidal AgNPs on Proteotype of A375 Melanoma Cells
2.3.1. Mass Spectrometry Approach and Experimental Setup
To elucidate the molecular mechanisms driving the selective properties of green AgNPs over melanoma cells, we implemented DIA/SWATH quantitative mass spectrometry. This is a well-established method for comparing proteotypes or evaluating the impact of treatment on protein level. In our mass spectrometry screen, we compared the proteotypes of both green AgNPs and colloidal AgNPs treated cells harvested at two timepoints, 24 h and 48 h after treatment. Three biological replicates measured in a technical duplicate yielding six MS runs per condition were acquired. Initially, we examined the variability in our mass spectrometry data by evaluating the protein intensities, proving relative consistency of the dataset with only minor effects of sample preparation and/or mass spectrometry contributing to variability. Particularly, we detected a slightly greater extent of 0 or N/A values in two technical replicates of GreenAgNPs_48h, one replicate of WTCellsAgNPs_24h, and one replicate of WTCellsAgNPs_48h (Supplementary Figure S1, protein intensity QC plot).
2.3.2. PCA Analysis of Proteotype Variability
To further determine variability among induced proteotypes, we performed two PCA analyses (Figure 6a,b). Initially, proteotypes of colloidal and green AgNPs in both timepoints were investigated using principal component analysis (PCA). PCA analysis in Figure 6a highlights that the A375 cells treated with green AgNPs or colloidal AgNPs are exhibiting almost distinct protein intensity profiles compared to control/wild type counterparts (WT) as there is a visible trend in separation along PC1, reflecting relative proteotype dissimilarity. However, a deeper insight into the global differences of green AgNPs and WT proteotypes (Figure 6b) provides even clearer separation, particularly of control cells and green AgNPs treated melanoma cells. Proteotypes of WT and green AgNPs treated cells (both at 24 and 48 h) profile are positioned farther apart, displaying higher proteotype dissimilarity. This observation is in concert with viability assay, if we extrapolate it to the selective green AgNPs effect over A375 cells. In addition, the PCA in Figure 6b shows temporal classification of the proteotypes along PC2, distinguishing the timepoints of green AgNPs treatment of A375 cells.
Nevertheless, we consider these observations, which rely on global proteome changes, to be imprecise but promising, as the separation along PC1 and PC2 might be driven by the proteins related to the selective mechanism of green AgNPs acting over melanoma A375 cells. Therefore, we further thoroughly examined the expression values of discrete proteins across conditions.
2.3.3. Differential Proteome Response and Key Molecular Insights
Delving into the changes of discrete proteins (Supplementary Table S1, DIA Quantitation results from all comparisons) and comparing them as a function of time in both green and colloidal AgNPs to the WT cells reveals a remarkable difference in responses to the treatments on proteome level, which are apparently in concert with observations from cellular viability assay and from PCA. Assuming that the effect of the decrease in the A375 cell viability will be reflected into dysregulation of proteins, we see a larger pool of dysregulated proteins (Figure 7c,d) upon green AgNPs treatment at any point if compared to colloidal AgNPs (Figure 7a,b), respectively.
To uncover the molecular essence of more potent green AgNPs action, we thoroughly inspected the protein roles and their involvement in key biochemical processes. The exposure of melanoma cells to green AgNPs for 24 h predominantly resulted in the downregulation of cellular proliferation, survival, and differentiation compared to WT cells (Please refer to Section 3). This reflects the cellular response primarily to DNA damage, programmed cell death, and autophagy. Moreover, proteins involved in motility, mitochondrial protein transport and stress response, DNA repair, autophagy, cell cycle regulation, and chromatin organization were further decreased over the next 24 h of green AgNPs action (Figure 7c,d). Knowingly, many of revealed processes might be involved in an antioncogenic effect; however, some these processes have already been described as a general effect of NP treatment. In addition, some of the proteins from which we inferred the shift in processes/pathways might be involved in multiple processes; thus, the interpretation of the meaning of change in the protein level this way might not be accurate.
2.4. Focusing on Revealing the Anti-Oncogenic Effect of Green AgNPs Using DIA/SWATH Mass Spectrometry Data
We further examined the dysregulated protein pool in green AgNPs treated A375 cells, focusing on subtle shifts in processes/pathways involving multiple proteins (Gene ontology—GO) and providing rather cumulative evidence of green AgNPs antioncogenic effect/s (Figure 8a,b).
The most notable effects of green AgNPs on A375 melanoma cells could be represented by key proteins that were either down- or upregulated upon green AgNPs treatment, and that are linked by GO-terms or common function providing cumulative evidence in their role, such as driving oncogenic transformation/processes (Figure 8a,b, Table 3). In addition, our dataset allows us to screen the evolution of this effect in a time-sensitive manner, i.e., in two timepoints (Figure 8a,b, Table 2). Initially, exposure to green AgNPs (24 h) reveals (Figure 8a and Table 3) a downregulation of several oncogenes known for their involvement in the tumorigenesis, cell proliferation, cell invasion, and metastasis: PTBP3, SP1, DSG2, and YME1L.
Extending the incubation time of melanoma cells with nanoparticles to 48 h (Figure 8b, Table 3), which can lead to even more significant decrease in the expression level and number of oncoproteins, clearly amplifies the cancer cell growth inhibition as a function of the treatment time. Also peculiar is the profound onset of carboxylic acids in the metabolism after longer incubations (48 h) with nanoparticles, which might indicate an increase in aerobic glycolysis and Krebs cycle rather than cancer-related anaerobic glycolysis, which is a prominent feature of cancer cells’ metabolism (Warburg effect). In addition, as clearly shown in the volcano plot (Figure 8b, Table 3), the presence of dysregulated genes required in copper homeostasis (MT1X, MT2A) might reflect the cancer cell’s response to AgNPs. On the other hand, copper is a crucial element in all solid tumors for the induction of angiogenesis, which is fundamental for the supply of oxygen and nutrients to the tumor. However, this point needs further clarifications.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Melanoma, a multifactorial disorder, is a significant global health issue due to its rising incidence, aggressive nature, and the high costs associated with its prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. Its propensity for advanced metastasis and chemotherapy resistance contributes to high mortality rates. Melanoma incidence has rapidly increased globally, especially in light-skinned populations in regions like North America, Northern Europe, Australia, and New Zealand, with annual rates rising by 4–6%. In 2020, there were approximately 325,000 new cases and 57,000 deaths, making melanoma one of the most common cancers worldwide. Projections indicate a 57% increase in new cases and a 68% increase in deaths by 2040.
At the molecular level, dysregulation of intracellular signaling pathways, driven by autocrine growth factor secretion, mutations in regulatory genes, and loss of adhesion receptors, plays a critical role in melanoma progression. Considering this, the need for therapeutic tools based on a deeper understanding of melanoma pathology has led researchers to explore innovative nanotechnology solutions for this pressing public health issue. Malignant melanoma, the most lethal form of skin cancer, shows resistance to drug-induced apoptosis. These proteins prevent the activation of caspases, which are essential for programmed cell death, by inhibiting the mitochondrial and death receptor signaling pathways. The combination of understanding the role of apoptotic regulators, alongside targeting alternative cell death pathways and using novel treatment strategies, could improve the treatment of melanoma and overcome resistance to conventional therapies. Melanoma resistance to targeted therapies involves re-activation of the MAPK pathway and activation of the PI3K-mTOR pathway. The tumor microenvironment, including stromal cells, also plays a key role in supporting resistance. Additionally, melanoma cells upregulate autophagy in response to drug-induced stress, a process driven by ER stress and TAM receptor activation. miRNA-mediated mechanisms further contribute to therapeutic resistance.
Nanotechnology offers a range of tools for cancer treatment, particularly metal nanoparticles (NPs). Among these, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) stand out for their ability to induce toxicity in cancer cells by altering cellular morphology, reducing cell viability, and triggering oxidative stress. Although several physical and chemical synthetics method for AgNPs are discussed in the literature, the bio-mediated approach has gained attention due to the demand for eco-friendly (“green”) technologies. Green synthesis methods use polyphenols from leaf extracts as reducing and stabilizing agents for metallic ions like silver, avoiding toxic and time-consuming approaches. These methods typically produce NPs ranging from 10 to 100 nm, which is crucial for their anti-tumor properties. The cytotoxic effects of AgNPs on cancer cells include generating reactive oxygen species (ROS), cell cycle disruption, and genotoxic impacts, leading to inflammation, apoptosis, and cell death. Additionally, specific protein expression can be altered.
Here, we present a comprehensive label free Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA)/Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Fragment Ion Spectra (SWATH) quantitative proteomics analysis for determining the global proteomic changes in the human A375 melanoma cell line upon exposure to AgNPs synthesized via conventional and green routes at two time points (24 and 48 h). The selected time points, commonly used in nanoparticle studies, enable the assessment of cellular responses over short- and mid-term exposure periods, capturing both early molecular changes and cellular adaptations. This approach also aligns with previous studies, ensuring comparability and relevance within the field. Together, DIA/SWATH is a quantitative proteomic mass spectrometry method combining deep proteome coverage with accuracy and consistency. Following an LC-MS method described in our previous publication, SWATH/DIA MS acquisition measures all ionized peptides in each sample that fall within a specified m/z precursor range by splitting it into isolation windows. The precursors in each window are simultaneously fragmented, and their spectra are recorded consecutively. By doing so, thousands of proteins could be reproducibly quantified in across multiple samples, making this process an appropriate tool for up-to-date proteomic research.
Prior to cell experiments, AgNPs were fully characterized by Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS), and zeta potential. Raman Spectroscopy was used to assess the organic vibration related to organic compounds on the surface. This study seeks to unveil the precise proteins and cellular networks influenced by AgNPs treatments, highlighting key shifts in the proteomic landscape of human melanoma cells. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the effects of differently synthesized AgNPs on melanoma cells using an integrated DIA/SWATH-MS quantitative proteomics approach.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: .
Data Availability Statement
The data presented in this study are available in this article. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange via the PRIDE partner repository with identifier PXD058049.