PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Breast cancer; Proteomics; Emt; Her2; Acquired resistance

ABSTRACT:
Resistance to Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (HER)-targeted cancer therapies appear to be occurring via common pathways, despite differences in their mechanism of action. This suggests that combination therapies targeting alternative pathways will be needed to overcome resistance. We have used a global proteomics approach to identify common signaling nodes that are required for driving HER2-independent resistance mechanisms to the pan-HER family kinase inhibitors AZD8931 and lapatinib. A novel set of epithelial–to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) associated proteins linked to resistance to pan-HER family targeted therapy was identified. We demonstrate that a sub-set of these genes are predictive of prognosis within the ERBB2 subtype of breast cancers and are worthy of further study in the context of preventing resistance to anti-HER family agents. Furthermore, targeting these pathways, perhaps via combination with galectin-1 or Axl inhibitors may provide additional strategies for the treatment of resistant tumours.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic analysis identifies novel pathways linking epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition with resistance to HER2-targeted therapy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Parental SKBR3 and AZ8931 R-SKBR3c cell pellets (i.e. 1mg protein extract equivalent) were reconstituted in 8 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) to denature and reduce the samples (30 minutes), followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (1 hour). Samples were digested with 10 µg trypsin overnight at room temperature. Peptide extracts were then cleaned on an SPE reverse-phase Bond Elut LMS cartridge (Agilent) and evaporated to dryness. Peptides were re-suspended in 2.5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water to give a final concentration of 1 µg/µL. 4 µg peptides were subjected to nano-scale high-performance liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (nano-HPLC-MS) using a nano-pump (Dionex Ultimate 3000; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 300 µm x 5 mm pre-column (5 µm particle size, Acclaim PepMap; Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a 75 µm x 50 cm column (3 µm particle size, Acclaim PepMap; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HPLC is coupled on-line to a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were analyzed on a two-hour gradient using data-dependent analysis with one 70-k–resolution survey scan followed by the top five MS/MS scans at 17.5 k resolution.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data were searched against the Uniprot protein database (Homo sapiens and Mus musculus) using MASCOT software (version 2.4; Matrix Science). Up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites per peptide were permitted. Variable methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation modifications were allowed. Precursor and product ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 amu, respectively. The significance threshold (p) was below 0.05 (MudPIT scoring), and a final peptide score of at least 20 was required. Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis (version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics). Only MS peaks with a charge of 2+, 3+ or 4+ and the five most intense spectra within each feature were included in the analysis.

METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Human breast cancer cell lines SKBR3 and BT474 were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection. SKBR3 cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% penicillin-streptomycin and 10% FCS (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). BT474 cells were grown in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 1% penicillin-streptomycin and 10% FCS. Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. A Leica DM IL LED microscope in conjunction with a QImaging Retiga EXi Fast 1394 camera was used to capture phase-contrast images of cells.
Generation of resistant cell lines
Lapatinib-resistant cells were established by culturing cells in complete medium supplemented with escalating concentrations of lapatinib (0.04–5 μM; SelleckChem). Cells were then maintained in 5 μM lapatinib. AZD8931-resistant cells were established by culturing cells in complete medium supplemented with escalating concentrations of AZD8931 (0.0067–0.67 μM; provided by AstraZeneca) and maintained in 0.67 μM AZD8931. Prior to drug treatment studies, the cells were grown for one week in the absence of drug.
Cell viability assays
Cells were seeded in 96-well plates and allowed to attach for 24 hours. Escalating doses of lapatinib, AZD8931, dasatinib (Synkinase), foretinib (SelleckChem) or eCF506 (Footnote 1) prepared in DMSO were then added. After 72 hours, alamarBlue or PrestoBlue (Thermo Fisher Scientific) cell viability reagent was added and fluorescence measured after a further 60 minutes. Mean values were calculated from six replicate wells and normalized against the mean value of the vehicle (DMSO)-treated wells, and IC50 values were generated using Prism (GraphPad).
Western blotting
Cells were washed with PBS and then lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche). Cleared lysates were resolved by SDS-PAGE. Primary antibodies used for western blotting were as follows: phospho-HER2/EGFR (phospho-tyrosine (pTyr)-1248/1273), phospho-HER2 (pTyr1221/1222), HER2, phospho-HER3 (pTyr1289), HER3, phospho-EGFR (pTyr992), EGFR, phospho-Akt (phospho-serine (pSer)-473), Akt, phospho-p44/42 MAPK (phospho-threonine (pThr)-202, pTyr204), p44/42 MAPK, E-cadherin, Slug, vimentin, YAP1 (all 1:1000; Cell Signaling Technologies), BAG3, CLIC4, fibronectin (all 1:1000; Abcam), Zeb1 (1:2000; Abcam), galectin-1, N-cadherin (all 1:1000; BD Biosciences), fascin-1 (1:1000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology), α-tubulin (1:3000; Sigma-Aldrich), GAPDH (1:2500; Thermo Fisher Scientific).
RPPA analysis
Cells, in biological triplicate, were washed with PBS and lysed in 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 150 mM sodium chloride, 1.5 mM magnesium chloride, 1 mM EGTA, 100 mM sodium fluoride, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM sodium vanadate, 10% glycerol, supplemented with cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Cleared lysates were serially diluted to produce a dilution series comprising four serial two-fold dilutions of each sample, which were spotted onto nitrocellulose-coated slides (Grace Bio-Labs) in technical triplicate under conditions of constant 70% humidity using the Aushon 2470 array platform (Aushon Biosystems). Slides were hydrated in blocking buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then incubated with validated primary antibodies (all 1:250; Supplementary Table S1). Bound antibodies were detected by incubation with anti-rabbit DyLight 800-conjugated secondary antibody (New England BioLabs). An InnoScan 710-IR scanner (Innopsys) was used to read the slides, and images were acquired at the highest gain without saturation of the fluorescence signal. The relative fluorescence intensity of each sample spot was quantified using Mapix software (Innopsys).
The linear fit of the dilution series of each sample was determined for each primary antibody, from which median relative fluorescence intensities were calculated. Signal intensities were normalized by global sample median normalization. Only primary antibodies with normalized signal intensities at least 1.5 times the value of the secondary antibody alone in at least one sample were included in the analysis to exclude data derived from weak or non-specific signals.
MS analysis
Parental SKBR3 and AZD8931-resistant SKBR3-AZDRc cell pellets (1 mg protein equivalent), in biological triplicate, were reconstituted in 8 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 20 mM dithiothreitol to denature and reduce the samples (30 minutes), followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (1 hour). Samples were digested with 10 μg trypsin overnight at room temperature. Peptide extracts were then cleaned on an SPE reverse-phase Bond Elut LMS cartridge (Agilent) and evaporated to dryness. Peptides were re-suspended in 2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water to give a final concentration of 1 μg/μL.
Peptides (4 μg) were subjected to nano-scale high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-MS using a nano-pump (Dionex Ultimate 3000; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 300 μm × 5 mm pre-column (5 μm particle size, Acclaim PepMap; Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a 75 μm × 50 cm column (3 μm particle size, Acclaim PepMap; Thermo Fisher Scientific). HPLC was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) controlled by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 3.0.63) using Tune (version 2.3, build 1765). Samples were analyzed on a two-hour gradient using data-dependent analysis with one 70 k-resolution survey scan followed by the top five MS/MS scans at 17.5 k resolution.
Peak lists were generated using MSConvert (ProteoWizard; version 3.0.4462). MS data were searched against the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) protein database (Homo sapiens; 34,284 sequences; downloaded 12 January 2011) using Mascot software (version 2.4; Matrix Science). Up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites per peptide were permitted. Variable methionine oxidation and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation modifications were allowed. Precursor and product ion mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 amu, respectively. A final peptide score of at least 20 and p < 0.05 (MudPIT scoring) were required, which resulted in a global false discovery rate of less than 1%.
Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis LC-MS (version 4.1; Nonlinear Dynamics). Only MS peaks with a charge of 2+, 3+ or 4+ and the five most intense spectra within each feature were extracted from each LC-MS run for analysis. Normalization was first performed based on the sum of the ion intensities of these sets of multi-charged ions (2+, 3+, 4+). The associated unique peptide ion intensities for a specific protein were then summed to generate an abundance value, which was transformed using an ArcSinH function. The within-group means were calculated to determine the fold change between conditions, and the transformed data were used to calculate the p-values using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
MS data were deposited in ProteomeXchange (http://www.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride) with the dataset identifier PXD002057 (DOI: 10.6019/PXD002057).
Hierarchical clustering analysis
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of normalized protein expression was performed on the basis of Pearson correlation using Cluster 3.0 (C Clustering Library, version 1.37), computing distances using a complete-linkage matrix. Clustering results were visualized using Java TreeView (version 1.1.1) and MultiExperiment Viewer (version 4.1.01).
Network analyses
Functional enrichment analysis was performed using BiNGO, assessing over-representation of GO terms describing biological processes using a hypergeometric test with Benjamini–Hochberg post hoc correction. Network clusters were generated from over-represented GO terms using Enrichment Map in Cytoscape (version 3.0.2), with a Jaccard coefficient cutoff of 0.25, and manually annotated. Interaction networks were constructed using GeneMania, clustered using the yFiles Organic algorithm in Cytoscape, and network topology was analyzed from undirected graphs using NetworkAnalyzer.
Cell migration assay
Cells were plated in duplicate at 3 × 103 cells per well in a 12-well plate in DMEM containing 10% FCS and 10 mM HEPES. Random migration was monitored by time-lapse video microscopy over 16 hours on an Olympus scan^R screening station. Total path length (accumulated distance) and net displacement (Euclidean distance) of individual cells were calculated using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health). Directional persistence of cell migration was calculated by dividing net displacement by total path length.
Survival analysis of gene expression data
Gene expression levels of the EMT-associated proteins that were over-expressed in the resistant cells were assessed in 289 ERBB2-subtype primary breast tumors from a compendium of 2999 tumors integrated from 17 studies, as previously described. Briefly, raw Affymetrix U133A/plus 2 .cel files were downloaded from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE12276, GSE21653, GSE3744, GSE5460, GSE2109, GSE1561, GSE17907, GSE2990, GSE7390, GSE11121, GSE16716, GSE2034, GSE1456, GSE6532, GSE3494, GSE19615) and cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid (geral-00143) repositories, summarized with Ensembl alternative CDF, normalized with RMA and integrated using ComBat to remove dataset-specific bias, as previously described. The intrinsic molecular subtypes were assigned based upon the highest correlation to the intrinsic subtype centroids. Survival analysis was performed using the survival R package.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Generation of AZD8931- and lapatinib-resistant breast cancer cell lines
We generated SKBR3 and BT474 cell lines that were resistant to AZD8931 or lapatinib by maintenance in increasing concentrations of either drug. Three AZD8931-resistant SKBR3 clones (SKBR3-AZDRa, SKBR3-AZDRb and SKBR3-AZDRc), two lapatinib-resistant SKBR3 clones (SKBR3-LAPRa and SKBR3-LAPRb) and two lapatinib-resistant BT474 clones (BT474-LAPRa and BT474-LAPRb) were selected. Despite increasing the maximum concentration of AZD8931 or lapatinib to 20 μM, the IC50 of the drugs in the respective resistant cell lines was not reached (Table 1). In addition, short-term treatment of the lapatinib-resistant cell lines with AZD8931 had no effect on their proliferation, and short-term treatment of the AZD8931-resistant cell lines with lapatinib had no effect on their proliferation, demonstrating cross-resistance between the two drugs (Table 1).
Resistance to both lapatinib and AZD8931 was associated with reduced expression and phosphorylation of HER2 and HER3 (Figure 1A). Both parental cell lines expressed very low levels of EGFR, and resistance to AZD8931 was associated with increased EGFR expression, which was not observed in the lapatinib-resistant cell lines. Furthermore, increased expression of EGFR in the AZD8931-resistant cell lines was not associated with increased phosphorylation on Tyr992, a recognized autophosphorylation site (Figure 1A).
Activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways are major downstream read-outs of HER family activity. Although HER family signaling was compromised in the resistant cell lines, there was a marked increase in Akt signaling in the AZD8931- and lapatinib-resistant cell lines, while more modest and varied effects were seen on MAPK signaling in the different cell lines (Figure 1B). Treatment with AZD8931 or lapatinib inhibited the activation of Akt in the parental cells, but sustained activation of the pathway was seen in the respective resistant cell lines, even at high concentrations of either AZD8931 or lapatinib (Figure 1C). Thus, the resistant cells have acquired the ability to activate the PI3K/Akt pathway in a HER family-independent manner.
Multiple signaling pathways are altered in HER2-targeted drug-resistant cells
To explore further the signaling changes associated with the development of resistance, we carried out reverse phase protein array (RPPA) analysis on the parental and resistant cells using a panel of antibodies covering a number of signaling pathways linked to cancer phenotypes (Supplementary Table S1). This revealed several changes in protein expression and phosphorylation in the resistant cell lines (Figure 2). Most notably, there was a striking reduction in expression of PTEN, Stat3 and survivin in all the resistant cell lines, with more modest and varied reductions in PLC-γ1 Tyr783 phosphorylation and Cdc25c Ser216 phosphorylation. There were also both cell line-specific and drug-specific changes in the resistant cells. For example, a reduction in phosphorylation of GSK3-β, p70 S6 kinase and S6 ribosomal protein was only seen in the lapatinib-resistant BT474 lines and not the lapatinib-resistant SKBR3 lines. In contrast, lapatinib resistance was associated with decreased expression of Bim and Met, while moderate increases in both these proteins were observed in the AZD8931-resistant cells. In addition, up-regulation of Stat5 and PKC Ser660 phosphorylation in the lapatinib-resistant cells was accompanied by slight down-regulation in the AZD8931-resistant cells. Such analysis provides insights into the complexities of signaling pathway deregulation in the resistant cells but also highlights common changes such as loss of PTEN, indicating that, as previously described, the PI3K/Akt pathway may be a common driver in resistance to HER2-targeted therapies.
Resistance to AZD8931 and lapatinib is associated with an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
One striking feature of both the AZD8931- and lapatinib-resistant cells was their distinctive mesenchymal appearance. The resistant cells had lost cell-cell contacts and acquired a spindle-like morphology (Figure 3A). In support of the resistant cells having undergone an EMT, we saw expression of the mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and vimentin in the AZD8931- and lapatinib-resistant SKBR3 cells but not the parental SKBR3 cells (Figure 3B). Loss of E-cadherin is also considered a hallmark of EMT, but SKBR3 cells contain a genetic deletion in CDH1, the E-cadherin-encoding gene, resulting in absent expression. In the BT474 cells, however, lapatinib resistance was associated with a loss of E-cadherin and concomitant expression of both N-cadherin and vimentin (Figure 3B). To understand potential drivers of the EMT phenotype, we analyzed the expression of key transcriptional regulators of EMT, Slug and Zeb1. Slug was over-expressed only in the AZD8931-resistant SKBR3 cells, whereas Zeb1 was expressed in all the AZD8931- and lapatinib-resistant BT474 and SKBR3 cells (Figure 3C). Thus, increased expression of Zeb1 provides a potential common mechanism whereby EMT is induced in the resistant cells.
The phenotypic change in the resistant cells was accompanied by a dramatic acceleration in the growth rate of the resistant cell lines compared to the parental line. The cell doubling time was significantly longer in the parental SKBR3 cell line compared to all three AZD8931-resistant cell lines. A similar reduction in doubling time was seen in the lapatinib-resistant SKBR3 and BT474 lines (Figure 3D).
Induction of EMT is associated with a more motile phenotype, and cell migration assays revealed that the distance travelled by individual cells was increased in all three AZD8931-resistant cell lines, with SKBR3-AZDRa being the most motile of the resistant cell lines (Figure 3E, 3F). Persistence of cell migration was reduced in the resistant cell lines, although this only reached statistical significance for SKBR3-AZDRb cells, suggesting a less directional mode of migration than the parental cells (Figure 3F).
Global proteomic analysis identifies regulators of EMT in AZD8931-resistant cells
To identify possible regulators and markers of EMT that may be linked to resistance, we carried out label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of parental and AZD8931-resistant SKBR3 cell lysates. We quantified 615 proteins (with at least two peptides) that were significantly differentially regulated between cell lines (p < 0.05) (Supplementary Table S2). Comparisons of the measured protein abundances showed a high positive correlation between all three biological replicates (ρ ≥ 0.99), indicating reproducible protein quantification by MS (Supplementary Figure S1). To interrogate the functional landscape of protein expression in parental and resistant cells, we analyzed the enrichment of cellular functions associated with the differentially regulated proteins (Supplementary Table S3). Over-represented gene ontology (GO) terms describing biological processes were mapped onto a functional network that connected and clustered biological processes associated with shared proteins (Figure 4). The network revealed several clusters of GO terms over-represented in the set of proteins up-regulated in resistant cells. A proteolysis-related cluster contained a number of resistant-enriched terms and included sequestersome 1 (SQSTM1) and the E3 ubiquitin ligase NEDD4 (Figure 4, Supplementary Table S3), proteins that are known to play roles in EMT. A large number of clusters contained parental-enriched terms, such as an actin polymerization cluster, which included LIM domain and actin binding 1 (LIMA1; EPLIN), whose down-regulation leads to EMT (Figure 4, Supplementary Table S3).
Of the identified actin polymerization-associated proteins, 17 (59%) have been previously implicated in EMT (Figure 5A). Seven out of the eight proteins reported to be down-regulated in EMT were enriched in parental cells, whereas eight out of the nine proteins reported to be up-regulated in EMT were enriched in resistant cells, suggesting a link between EMT and AZD8931 resistance. Further analysis of the proteins most enriched in resistant cells showed that many of these (56% of proteins up-regulated by at least four-fold; p < 0.05) have previously been linked to EMT (Figure 5B). Interaction network analysis revealed that, of these resistant-enriched proteins, a highly interconnected core subnetwork was composed predominantly of EMT-associated proteins (Figure 5C). Importantly, western blotting confirmed up-regulation of a number of these proteins in both the AZD8931- and lapatinib-resistant SKBR3 and BT474 cell lines, including vimentin (VIM; Figure 3B), BAG3, YAP1, galectin-1 (LGALS1), fascin-1 (FSCN1), fibronectin (FN1) and CLIC4 (Figure 5D).
Expression of EMT markers is associated with poor prognosis in HER2-positive tumors
Although we were not able to assess whether the EMT-associated proteins over-expressed in the resistant cells represent markers of resistance for patients, we found that high gene expression of BAG3 and YAP1, but not LGALS1, were significantly associated with poor prognosis in ERBB2-subtype tumors (Figure 6A). The expression of these genes was correlated across samples, and we found the sum of the three genes to be a predictor (Figure 6B). These samples were collected at diagnosis, so it seems that these EMT markers may identify a subset of patients whose tumors have de novo resistance to HER2-targeted therapy. Although LGALS1 gene expression alone was not significantly associated with prognosis, immunohistochemical analysis of galectin-1 expression in human breast cancer has shown that it is expressed in both tumor cells and tumor-associated fibroblasts. Further analysis of tumor cell-associated galectin-1 expression in ERBB2 tumors is therefore required to determine whether this is associated with poor prognosis.
Targeting EMT-associated drug resistance
Although our proteomic analysis identified potential markers of resistance, it did not identify actionable kinases that could provide potential treatment options for the resistant cells. However, we have previously reported increased expression and/or activity of a number of EMT-associated tyrosine kinases, including Src and Axl, in both lapatinib- and AZD8931-resistant cells. As both Src and Axl inhibitors are under clinical development, we asked whether these kinases were important for the EMT-associated drug resistance. Treatment with the Src family kinase inhibitor dasatinib potently inhibited the proliferation of the AZD8931-resistant but not the parental SKBR3 cells (Table 2). We also used eCF506, which is a highly selective Src family inhibitor with selectivity over other kinases such as c-Abl, PDGFRα and c-Kit (Footnote 1). eCF506 inhibited the growth of the resistant but not the parental SKBR3 cells (Table 2). Treatment with the Axl inhibitor foretinib also potently inhibited the proliferation of the resistant but not the parental SKBR3 cells (Table 3). Thus, both Src and Axl kinase activities are important for the EMT-associated drug resistance, and inhibitors to these kinases may provide alternative treatment options in tumors that are resistant to HER2-targeted therapies that have undergone EMT.

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
The outlook for HER2-positive breast cancer patients has been revolutionized by the introduction of HER2-targeted agents, such as trastuzumab, pertuzumab and lapatinib. However, both inherent and acquired resistance to these agents is a major clinical problem. Evidence from the Neo-ALTTO trial suggests that combined trastuzumab and lapatinib treatment is superior to use of either drug alone, and this, coupled with the almost universal development of acquired resistance, has driven efforts to develop novel therapies targeting this pathway. One approach has been the development of tyrosine kinase inhibitors that provide more effective inhibition of HER family signaling. One such drug is AZD8931, which is an equipotent, reversible inhibitor of signaling by EGFR, HER2 and HER3, having a unique and more potent profile of activity than lapatinib.
Numerous different mechanisms of acquired resistance to HER2-directed therapy have been identified. They frequently involve changes in HER2 expression or structure, but the development of HER2-independent strategies for activating survival pathways have also been widely reported. These pathways likely represent clinically relevant resistance mechanisms and suggest that novel methods of targeting the HER receptor family alone may not be sufficient to overcome resistance.
Using AZD8931- and lapatinib-resistant HER2-over-expressing breast cancer cell lines, we have identified that an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is commonly associated with resistance. EMT is the name given to an evolutionarily conserved process in which epithelial cells lose cell-cell contacts and acquire a migratory mesenchymal phenotype accompanied by distinct changes in gene expression. EMT has been linked to both chemo- and radio-resistance and resistance to targeted agents. In this study, we identified a common set of EMT-associated proteins that were linked to HER2-independent mechanisms of resistance to the HER2-directed drugs, and we provide evidence that targeting EMT-associated kinases Src and Axl may provide additional options for the treatment of resistant tumors.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES AND TABLES
Footnote
Fraser C, Carragher NO and Unciti-Broceta A. UK Patent Application GB1508747.1. 2015.
GRANT SUPPORT
This work was supported by Cancer Research UK grants (C157/A15703 and C6088/A12063). The mass spectrometer was funded by a Wellcome Trust Institutional Strategic Support Fund award and a Wellcome Trust Strategic Award to the University of Edinburgh Centre for Immunity, Infection and Evolution. SynthSys is a Centre for Integrative Systems Biology funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council and Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (reference BB/D019621/1).
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
T. K. is an employee of AstraZeneca. The other authors have no conflicts of interest.