PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Liver; Lipogenesis

ABSTRACT:
De novo lipogenesis (DNL) has been implicated in the development and progression of hepatic liver steatosis. Hepatic DNL is strongly influenced by dietary macronutrient composition with diets high in carbohydrate increasing DNL and diets high in fat decreasing DNL. The enzymes in the core DNL pathway have been well characterised however less is known about proteins that play accessory or regulatory roles in DNL. In the current study, we associate measured rates of hepatic DNL and liver fat content with abundance of liver proteins from liquid chromatography mass spectrometry in mice to identify known and uncharacterised proteins that may have a role in DNL. Male C57BL/6J mice were fed either a standard chow diet a semi-purified high starch diet or a high fat diet. Both semi-purified diets resulted in increased body weight, fat mass and liver triglyceride content compared to chow-fed mice while hepatic DNL was increased in the high starch fed mice and decreased in the high fat fed mice. Proteomic analysis was carried out on the livers of these mice and proteins were identified that associated with either the rate of DNL or triglyceride content in the liver. There was no overlap between DNL and triglyceride associated proteins. We identify novel proteins associated with DNL that are involved in taurine metabolism, which suggests a link between these pathways. Further analysis identified proteins that are differentially regulated when comparing a non-purified chow diet to either of the semi-purified diets to provide a set of proteins that are regulated by the degree of dietary complexity alone. Finally, we compared the liver proteome between 4 week-fed and 30-week diet-fed mice and found remarkable similarity suggesting that the majority of diet-regulated proteins change early in response to differing dietary components.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Liver proteomic assessment of mice fed high carbohydrate and high fat diets identify a disconnect between proteins associated with de novo lipogenesis and fat

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
50 mg of frozen liver tissue was weighed out and lysed in 1 mL of 4% SDS, 100 mM NaCl, 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 6.0, 10 mM NaF, 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 2 mM Sodium orthovanadate and 60 mM sodium β-glycerophosphate containing Complete protease inhibitor EDTA-free (Roche), using an Ultra-Turrax T8 stick homogeniser (IKA® – Werke) to blend tissue before heating lysates to 65°C for 10 minutes (REF PMID: 32160557). Lysates were then sonicated at 80% amplitude for 15:15 second pulses with 10 minutes total on-time at 20°C (QSONICA) before centrifugation at 18,000 x g for 10 minutes at room temperature. The lipid layer was aspirated from the clarified lysate and protein concentration was determined by BCA Total protein assay (Pierce). 100µg of protein was subjected to reduction with TCEP for 10 minutes at 65°C and alkylated with NEM for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were then processed for trypsin digestion and cleanup using the SP3 method (REF PMID: 25358341). After SP3 peptide eluates were additionally cleaned using  SDB-RPS StageTips as described previously (REF PMID: 30892045). Peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid and stored at 4°C until acquired by LC-MS. Using a Thermo Fisher Scientific U3000 nano-UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (injection volume 3 μL) were directly injected onto a 45 cm x 75 um C18 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9 μm) fused silica analytical column with a ~10 μm pulled tip, coupled online to a nanospray ESI source. Peptides were resolved over gradient from 5% acetonitrile to 40% acetonitrile over 120 min with a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

DATA PROCESSING:
RAW data were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.0). This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda. Peptide and protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications contained both the mouse UniProt database downloaded on the 14th June 2017, containing 59,594 protein sequence entries and the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to Lys and Arg) with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages permitted. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln) and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. We used the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantitation, integrated into the MaxQuant environment.