PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Liver; Hepatocyte
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Ontogeny; Human liver; Hydrolytic drug-metabolizing enzymes

ABSTRACT:
Drug dosing for children is frequently suboptimal when relying on the traditional approach of normalizing doses based on body weight or surface area. Thus, the ontogeny profiling of drug-metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) is important to help develop physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models for predicting safer pediatric dosing. In particular interest are hydrolases are one of the most diverse classes of DMEs and catalyze reactions containing esters, amides, phosphates, etc. in both drugs and prodrugs. Hydrolases such as carboxyl esterases, cathepsins, and arylacetamide deacetylase have been studied for their involvement in drug metabolism. However, a significant number of hydrolases have not yet been appropriately characterized, and as such their influence on drug metabolism remains unknown. Moreover, there is a lack of comprehensive data on the ontogeny and inter-individual variability in expression of these enzymes. Here a characterization of the age-dependent protein abundance of hydrolases in viable primary human hepatocytes isolated from pediatric (n=50) and adult (n=8) donors (Female=28; Male=30) using quantitative global proteomics-based total protein approach was performed.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The ontogeny and inter-individual variability of drug- metabolizing enzymes and transporters in human liver.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
An optimized trypsin digestion protocol was deployed for sample preparation (PMID: 39160670)

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteomics data were acquired using nano-liquid chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometer and analyzed using DIA-NN software (PMID: 39160670)

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Around 50% of the drugs used in children have never been tested for safety and efficacy in this vulnerable population. Immature drug elimination pathways can lead to drug toxicity when pediatric doses are determined using empirical methods such as body-surface area or body-weight-normalized adult dosing. In the absence of clinical data, physiologically-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling has emerged as a useful tool to predict drug pharmacokinetics in children. These models utilize developmental physiological data, including age-dependent differences in the abundance of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters (DMET), to mechanistically extrapolate adult pharmacokinetic data to children. The reported abundance data of hepatic DMET proteins in subcellular fractions isolated from frozen tissue are prone to high technical variability. Therefore, we carried out the proteomics-based quantification of hepatic drug transporters and conjugating enzymes in 50 pediatric and 8 adult human hepatocyte samples. Out of the 34 studied proteins, 28 showed a significant increase or decrease with age. While MRP6, OAT7, and SULT1E1 were highest in < 1-year-old samples, the abundance of P-gp and UGT1A4 was negligible in < 1-year-old samples and increased significantly after 1 year of age. Incorporation of the age-dependent abundance data in PBPK models can help improve pediatric dose prediction, leading to safer drug pharmacotherapy in children.