PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Fibroblast
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Redox proteomics; mass spectrometry; oxidative signaling; fibroblasts; cancer; obesity; redox stress.

ABSTRACT:
Cysteine oxidative modifications are fundamental signaling events that regulate cellular functions under both physiological and pathological conditions. However, our understanding of these modifications is limited by their low abundance and the technical challenges associated with studying their dynamics in a comprehensive and unbiased manner. Here, we developed the SICyLIA-TMT workflow, which uses light and heavy iodoacetamide (IAA) to sequentially label reduced and reversibly oxidized cysteine residues within the same sample. By applying tandem mass tags (TMTs) to differentially label peptides of each experimental conditions, our strategy allows simultaneous analysis of both oxidative modification dynamics and protein levels across multiple experimental conditions from only micrograms of starting material. Furthermore, to enhance the detection of low-abundance, cysteine residues carrying oxidative modifications, we dedicated a TMT channel as carrier for heavy IAA-labelled peptides (SICyLIA-cTMT). This strategy remarkably increased the quantification of reversibly oxidized cysteine residues and enabled precise stoichiometry calculations. Last, combining SICyLIA-TMT with the latest generation of MS instruments, Orbitrap Astral, we halved the measuring time in the mass spectrometer without impacting the depth of the redox proteome. We showed the applicability of SICyLIA-TMT to both cells in culture and full organs under stress condition. Hence, SICyLIA-cTMT is a versatile method that achieves unparalleled quantification accuracy and depth of the redox proteome while significantly reducing MS analysis time, making a significant step change in the study of oxidative signaling.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
SICyLIA-cTMT enables dissecting redox proteome dynamics with high accuracy and depth at micrograms scale (PART 5 =  Human mammary breast cancer associated fibroblasts)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cysteine oxidative modifications are fundamental signaling events that regulate cellular functions under both physiological and pathological conditions. However, our understanding of these modifications is limited by their low abundance and the technical challenges associated with studying their dynamics in a comprehensive and unbiased manner. Here, we developed the SICyLIA-TMT workflow, which uses light and heavy iodoacetamide (IAA) to sequentially label reduced and reversibly oxidized cysteine residues within the same sample. By applying tandem mass tags (TMTs) to differentially label peptides of each experimental conditions, our strategy allows simultaneous analysis of both oxidative modification dynamics and protein levels across multiple experimental conditions from only micrograms of starting material. Furthermore, to enhance the detection of low-abundance, cysteine residues carrying oxidative modifications, we dedicated a TMT channel as carrier for heavy IAA-labelled peptides (SICyLIA-cTMT). This strategy remarkably increased the quantification of reversibly oxidized cysteine residues and enabled precise stoichiometry calculations. Last, combining SICyLIA-TMT with the latest generation of MS instruments, Orbitrap Astral, we halved the measuring time in the mass spectrometer without impacting the depth of the redox proteome. We showed the applicability of SICyLIA-TMT to both cells in culture and full organs under stress condition. Hence, SICyLIA-cTMT is a versatile method that achieves unparalleled quantification accuracy and depth of the redox proteome while significantly reducing MS analysis time, making a significant step change in the study of oxidative signaling.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.14.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine, querying SwissProt Homo sapiens (42,438 entries) or Mus musculus (25,198 entries) database. First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. MaxQuant was set to quantify on “Reporter ion MS2”, and TMT10 or 16 plex was chose as Isobaric label. Interference between TMT channels were corrected by MaxQuant using the correction factors provided by the manufacturer. The “Filter by PIF” option was activated and a “Reporter ion tolerance” of 0.003 Da was used. Modification by Iodoacetamide heavy or light on Cysteine residues (Carbamidomethylation), Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. No fixed modification was used in the search. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. The files from MaxQuant output: “proteinGroups.txt”, “modificationSpecificPeptides.txt”, “peptides.txt” and both heavy and light “Carbamidomethyl (C)Sites.txt” were used for the analysis in Perseus version 1.6.15.0. The “proteinGroups.txt” file was used for proteome analysis and for normalization of cysteine containing peptides. The modificationSpecificPeptides.txt file was used as main table for peptide quantification. The columns with headers “C count”, “Start/End position”, “Length”, “Leading razor protein” from the peptides.txt file, and the columns with headers “Sequence Features”, “Score diff”, “Localisation prob”, “Position” and “Fasta” from the heavy and light Carbamidomethyl (C)Sites.txt files were merged to the modificationSpecificPeptides.txt file using the corresponding id and “Matching by row” tool in Perseus. The protein or peptides specified in MaxQuant as “Reverse” and “Potential Contaminants” were removed from all tables. For protein quantification, protein groups indicated as “Only identified by site” and those identified with zero unique peptides were removed from the table. Peptides with “Cys count” lower than 1 were excluded from analysis, and only cysteine containing peptides robustly quantified in all the replicate experiments were normalized to the total protein levels and included in the quantification analysis. The annotation of the cysteine residues was based on the sequence features database of UniProt using the Site Annotation built-in tool in Perseus. Gene Ontology annotation analysis was also performed using the built-in tool in Perseus. To assess the significance of regulated cysteine residues between experimental conditions, Student’s t-test or ANOVA test were used with a permutation-based FDR below 5%.