PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Amniotic fluid
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Human; Extracellular vesicles; Amniotic fluid

ABSTRACT:
This study isolated and analysed extracellular vesicles from human amniotic fluid derived from routine second-trimester amniocentesis and elective Caesarean section at term. Label-free proteomics identified 4137 proteins with high confidence.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Gestational age-dependent proteome changes in amniotic fluid extracellular vesicles

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
EV proteins (30 µg) were lysed in 2X lysis buffer (10% SDS, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5) and were prepared using S-Trap™ micro spin columns (ProtiFi, USA) according to manufacturer instructions. Liquid chromatography (LC) based tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was carried out using an Orbitrap Ascend mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex), fitted with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex—C18, 100 Å, 75 µm× 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm× 50 cm), at the Melbourne Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility (The University of Melbourne). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid, for 5 min before the enrichment column was switched in line with the analytical column. The eluents for LC were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v CH3CN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was, i) 3% B for 0-6 min, ii) 3-4% B for 6-7min, (ii) 4-25% B for 7-82 min, (iii) 25-40% B for 82-86min, (iv) 40-80% B for 86-87min, (v) 80-80% B for 87-90min and (vi) 80-3% for 90-91min. The column was equilibrated at 3% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection. For DIA experiments, full MS resolutions were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and scanning from 350-1400 m/z in the profile mode. Full MS Automatic Gain Control target was 250% with an injection time (IT) of 50 ms. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 2000%. Fifty windows of 13.7 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 30,000 and maximum IT to 55 ms. The normalised collision energy was set at 30%. All data were acquired in centroid mode using positive polarity.

DATA PROCESSING:
DIA data were analysed using the direct DIA analysis workflow with default settings on the Spectronaut® software (v. 17.5.230413.55965) and against the UniProt Homo Sapiens database (updated Sep 2023). Trypsin specificity was set to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was defined as the fixed modification, while acetylation (protein N-term) and oxidation (Met) were defined as variable modifications. Results are filtered at a protein and peptide spectrum matched with a false discovery rate of 1%. Precursor filtering used the Q value, and quantification was done at the MS2 level. The cross-run normalisation strategy was set to automatic. Quantitative data (PG.results) were exported for statistical analyses onto MaxQuant Perseus (Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry).

METHODS:
Methods
Amniotic Fluid Sample Collection
AF samples were collected prospectively at Mercy Hospital for Women in Melbourne, Australia, following written informed participant consent. Second‐trimester samples were collected from clinically indicated amniocentesis due to abnormal prenatal screening or sonography results (Table 1). Term samples were collected from pre‐labour Caesarean sections of uncomplicated pregnancies, after the uterine incision prior to membrane rupture, as previously described (Hui et al.). All samples were free from contamination, including maternal blood and meconium. The AF samples were centrifuged at 300 × g for 10 min to remove cells and debris before being stored at −80°C until EV isolation. This study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee of Mercy Health (2023‐014).
EV Isolation
AF‐EVs were isolated using differential centrifugation, filtration and ultracentrifugation. EVs were characterised according to MISEV23 guidelines (Welsh et al.).
AF samples were thawed overnight at 4°C and centrifuged at 5000 × g for 20 min at 4°C to remove vernix caseosa and other debris. Supernatant was centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C, then filtered through a 0.22‐µm filter. The resulting supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 120,000 × g for 2 h at 4°C to pellet small EVs. EV pellet was then washed with 0.22 µm‐filtered Dulbecco's phosphate‐buffered saline (DPBS; Gibco) and centrifuged at 120,000 × g for 2 h at 4°C. The resulting EV pellet was resuspended in filtered DPBS and stored at −80°C until further analysis.
EV Protein Quantification
EV proteins (2 µg) of each sample immobilised on a polyacrylamide gel were fixed with fixer buffer (50% methanol, 7% acetic acid) and stained with Sypro Ruby gel stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 24 h. After washing the gel with wash buffer (10% methanol, 7% acetic acid), the gel was scanned using Chemidoc (Bio‐Rad) and the lanes were quantified against the Benchmark protein ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
EV size range and concentration were determined using NanoSight NS300 (Malvern Panalytical; NanoSight NTA 3.2 software). Samples were diluted 400‐fold with 0.22 µm‐filtered PBS and injected at an infusion rate of 50. Each sample was captured in 3 rounds of 30 s, with camera level and detection threshold set at 11 and 5, respectively, at 25°C.
Western Blotting
EVs corresponding to 15 µg of protein were lysed in 4x Laemmli buffer (8% (w/v) SDS, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 200 mM Tris‐HCL, pH 6.8 and a trace of bromophenol blue) and 2 M DTT, heated at 95°C for 2 min and separated on 4%–15% polyacrylamide gels (Bio‐Rad). Gels were electrophoresed at 120 V for ∼90 min. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a wet electroblotting system (Bio‐Rad), 100 V, 1 h and blocked with 5% (w/v) skim milk in Tris‐buffered saline with Tween 20 (TBST) for 1 h. After washing the membranes 3 times, 10 min each in TTBS, they were incubated with primary antibodies for Alix (Catalogue # E6P9B, 1:1000, Cell Signalling), CD9 (Catalogue # 10626D, 1:500, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and CD63 (Catalogue # 10628D, 1:500, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 4°C overnight. After washing the membranes 3 times, 10 min each in TBST, they were incubated with the relevant fluorescent‐conjugated secondary antibodies (IRDye 680RD Goat anti‐Rabbit IgG or IRDye 800CW Goat anti‐Mouse IgG) (LICORbio) in a 1:10,000 dilution for 1 h at room temperature. Following washing the membranes three times, 10 min each in TBST, they were imaged using ChemiDoc (Bio‐Rad).
Cryo‐Electron Microscopy and Image Analysis
Cryo‐electron microscopy was used to visualise vesicles. Gold 300 mesh, lacey carbon film‐coated EM grids (ProSciTech, Australia) were glow‐discharged (15 mA, 30 s) using the GloQube Plus Glow Discharge System. A sample (3 µL of initial EV preparation) was applied onto the carbon side of the grid, which was then blotted for 4.0 s (−1 bolt force) with Whatman filter paper #1 and plunge‐frozen into liquid ethane using a Thermo Fisher Vitrobot Mark IV. The climate chamber was maintained at 90% humidity, 4°C. EM grids containing frozen samples were stored in liquid nitrogen until imaging. EVs were visualised using a Thermo Fisher TECNAI F30 cryo‐electron microscope, equipped with a Ceta electron camera, at the Ian Holmes Imaging Centre (The University of Melbourne). Images were recorded at x2400 magnification with a defocus of −5 µm and 10 Ȧ pixel size.
Image analysis tool Fiji ImageJ (Schindelin et al.) was used to measure the diameter of EVs. First, the scale bar of each image was defined by the number of pixels under the ’set scale’ function. The average of the major (largest) and minor (shortest) EV axes was used as the measure of EV size, in keeping with common practice in the field (Emelyanov et al., Noble et al.).
Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry
EV proteins (30 µg) were lysed in 2X lysis buffer (10% SDS, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5). Disulphide bonds of the proteins were reduced using tris‐(2‐carboxyethyl)phosphine (final concentration 5 mM) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and alkylated using Methyl methanethiosulfonate (final concentration 20 mM). Samples were acidified with a final concentration of ∼2.5% phosphoric acid. The samples were loaded onto S‐Trap micro spin columns (ProtiFi, USA) with binding/wash buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate in 90% methanol) and centrifuged at 4000 × g for 30 s to trap proteins. After washing the columns 3 times with 150 µL binding/wash buffer, proteins were digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (Promega) at a ratio of 1:10 (w/w) trypsin:protein for 2 h at 47°C. Peptides were collected consecutively in 3 elution steps with 50 mM TEAB in water, 0.2% formic acid in water and 50% acetonitrile in water. Eluted peptides were lyophilised using a vacuum concentrator (Savant SpeedVac) and reconstituted in mass spectrometry sample buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) to a final peptide concentration of 0.5 µg/µL.
Data‐Independent Acquisition (DIA) Mass Spectrometry (MS)
Liquid chromatography (LC)‐based tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was carried out using an Orbitrap Ascend mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoflow reversed‐phase HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex), fitted with an Acclaim Pepmap nano‐trap column (Dionex—C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex‐C18, 100 Å, 75 µm × 50 cm), at the Melbourne Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility (The University of Melbourne). The tryptic peptides (0.5 µg) were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.1% v/v formic acid for 5 min before the enrichment column was switched in line with the analytical column. The eluents for LC were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v CH3CN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 3% B for 0–6 min, (ii) 3%–4% B for 6–7 min, (ii) 4%–25% B for 7–82 min, (iii) 25%–40% B for 82–86 min, (iv) 40%–80% B for 86–87 min, (v) 80%–80% B for 87–90 min and (vi) 80%–3% for 90–91 min. The column was equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before the next sample injection.
For DIA experiments, full MS resolutions were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and scanning from 350–1400 m/z in the profile mode. Full MS Automatic Gain Control target was 250% with an injection time (IT) of 50 ms. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 2000%. Fifty windows of 13.7 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 30,000 and maximum IT to 55 ms. The normalised collision energy was set at 30%. All data were acquired in centroid mode using positive polarity.
Proteomics Data Analysis
DIA data were analysed using the direct DIA analysis workflow with default settings on the Spectronaut software (v. 17.5.230413.55965) and against the UniProt Homo Sapiens database (updated September 2023). Trypsin specificity was set to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was defined as the fixed modification, while acetylation (protein N‐term) and oxidation (Met) were defined as variable modifications. Results were filtered at a protein and peptide level, and spectra were matched with a false discovery rate of 1%. Precursor filtering used the Q value, and quantification was done at the MS2 level. The cross‐run normalisation strategy was set to automatic. Pre‐ and post‐normalisation plots are provided in Figure S1. Quantitative data were exported (Spectronaut output at 1% FDR is available as Supporting Information, File 1) for statistical analyses onto MaxQuant Perseus (Max‐Planck‐Institute of Biochemistry) (Tyanova and Perseus). The data were log2‐transformed and annotated into two groups: second trimester and full‐term. The rows were filtered to include the proteins identified in all 12 samples. Ubiquitously detected peptides in all samples were subjected to the Student's t‐test (with a false discovery rate of 0.05 and S0 filter set to 0.1) to determine significantly differentially abundant proteins between groups.
For the proteins uniquely detected at the two gestational time points, a PubMed search was conducted to identify their role in fetal growth and development. FunRich version 3.1.4 was used to perform the enrichment analysis. It is a functional enrichment analysis tool that integrates multiple databases, including UniProt, Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) and Human Protein Atlas (Pathan et al.). To keep the interpretation relevant to our fetal samples (Hui et al.), enrichment results specific to adult pathologies and transformed cell lines were excluded.
All experimental details are available on the EV‐TRACK database (Van Deun et al.) with the identifier EV250076.
Statistical Analysis
The statistical analysis for all experiments except proteomics was conducted using GraphPad Prism 10.1.0 (GraphPad Software). We determined the normal distribution of the data using the Shapiro–Wilk test. Unpaired two‐tailed Student's t‐test and the Mann–Whitney U test were used for parametric and nonparametric datasets, respectively.

RESULTS:
Results
Clinical Characteristics of the Samples
Twelve AF samples were analysed: six from second‐trimester amniocenteses and six from term prelabour Caesarean sections. Each group comprised three female and three male fetuses. Of the second‐trimester group, three underwent amniocentesis for an increased chance of trisomy 21 on prenatal screening and others due to fetal ultrasound anomalies. One 23‐week male fetus with mild bilateral ventriculomegaly had no additional findings on fetal brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), resolution of the ventriculomegaly by the third trimester, and no abnormalities on newborn cranial ultrasound. One fetus had an isolated increased nuchal translucency measurement of 4.5 mm that resolved by the second trimester. The third fetus with an ultrasound abnormality had an isolated cleft lip and palate. All fetuses in the amniocentesis group had normal molecular karyotypes. The full‐term group underwent elective Caesarean sections due to their history of previous Caesarean sections (Table 1).
Amniotic Fluid EVs in the Second Trimester and Term Differ in Size and Biogenesis
Western blotting confirmed the presence of EV‐enriched protein markers Alix, CD9 and CD63 in the isolated EV samples (Figure 1A). Alix is a protein associated with the EV biogenesis pathway (ESCRT), while CD9 and CD63 are tetraspanins (Welsh et al., Mathieu et al.). The relative quantities of Alix and CD9 (normalised to the total blot stain in Figure S2A) were significantly higher in the term AF‐EVs (Figure 1B). Complete blots for Alix, CD63 and CD9 are in Figure S2B,C. The enrichment of Alix suggests a greater fraction of endosomal origin EVs (exosomes) in term AF‐EVs compared to that of the second trimester.
The mode diameter identified by nanoparticle tracking analysis for the second trimester (151.3 nm) was significantly higher compared to that of term AF‐EVs (122.3 nm) (Figure 1C,D). The EV concentration of AF stayed unchanged between the two gestation time points (Figure 1E). Quantification of EV proteins revealed that neither the EV protein concentration in AF (Figure 1F) nor the protein amount (µg) per vesicle (Figure 1G) changed according to gestational age. We confirmed the purity of the EV preparations by analysing the particle‐to‐protein ratio (Figure 1H). The ratios were in the range of 5.89 × 1010 to 3.12 × 1011 particles/µg, above the accepted threshold for high vesicular purity (Webber and Clayton). Also, there was no significant difference in the level of purity between the two groups.
Amniotic Fluid EVs Are Highly Heterogeneous in Morphology
We visualised three AF‐EV samples from each group using cryo‐electron microscopy and identified different morphologies. Structures with a well‐defined dark line, indicating the lipid bilayer membrane, were considered as EVs (Emelyanov et al., Parra et al.), to rule out reporting non‐vesicular extracellular particles (NVEPs) in our analyses (Welsh et al.). Most EVs were simple, with the conventional morphology of single‐membrane‐bound round (yellow arrows) or elongated shapes (green arrows) (Figure 2A). EV corona was visible on some vesicles (pink arrows) (Figure 2A). This layer on the outside of the EV membrane represents the collection of proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and nucleic acids a vesicle acquires from its environment (Welsh et al., Yerneni et al., Wolf et al.). While some EVs had multiple membranes (blue arrows), others had multiple compartments (purple arrows) (Figure 2B), which are relatively under‐represented EV morphologies in the literature (Broad et al.). Orange arrows point to the NVEPs (Figure 2A,B), which are likely lipoprotein particles (Yuana et al.). We also observed multiple EVs attached with presumed membrane proteins (yellow arrows) (Figure 2C), likely side effects of ultracentrifugation (Broad et al., Issman et al.).
EV size is represented as the average measurement of the major and minor axes (Figure 2D). Figure 2E represents the number of EVs for each gestational age, categorised into two groups based on size: smaller than 150 nm and larger than 150 nm. The significant difference in the number of EVs smaller than 150 nm between gestation time points complemented the pattern observed in nanoparticle tracking analysis (Figure 1C,D).
We manually curated and counted the EVs with different features. Approximately 15% of all EVs had single or multiple compartments internal to the lipid bilayer membrane (Figure 2F). Approximately 25% of 2nd‐trimester and 10% of term EVs had a corona (Figure 2G).
Amniotic Fluid EV Proteome Varies in a Gestational Age‐Dependent Manner
Using a label‐free proteomics approach, we identified a total of 4137 proteins (Figure 3A). There were 64 proteins uniquely detected (present in all 6 replicates) in the second trimester and 13 in the term AF‐EVs. Tables 2, 3, and Table S1 represent these proteins and their potential involvement in fetal growth, according to published literature available on PubMed. Some common functions implicated with second‐trimester enriched proteins were cell proliferation, differentiation, angiogenesis and neurodevelopment. These proteins were also involved in cell signalling pathways associated with development, such as MAPK, PI3K/Akt, NF‐kB and Wnt (Table 2 and Table S1).
At term, the unique proteins were primarily responsible for immunity and defence, while some proteins corresponded to the regulation of cell proliferation and tissue patterning, implying controlled growth (Table 3). Among commonly detected proteins, 880 were highly abundant, and 673 were sparse in the second‐trimester AF‐EVs compared to term (Figure 3B).
We identified 1090 proteins that were significantly differentially enriched between the two gestational time points (Figure 3C) (false discovery rate of 0.05 and S0 = 2). Figure 3D shows the heatmap with unsupervised hierarchical clustering of proteins that are significantly differentially enriched. The proteins are arranged into two distinct main hierarchical clusters in this heatmap, indicating the clear separation of these proteins between the two gestation time points. The protein signatures of the first four samples corresponding to the early second trimester (15–16 weeks) clustered more closely. The clustering gradually changed towards the fifth and sixth samples, representing late second‐trimester gestations (23 weeks), before the signature completely changed in the term samples (38–39 weeks).
The group of 30 proteins with the highest fold changes are indicated in Figure 3E. The first 15 proteins were highly abundant in the second trimester‐derived AF‐EVs and were identified with terms such as carbohydrate metabolism (SI) (Jacob et al.), cell adhesion (ITGA1) (Li et al.) and (CDHR5) (Gray et al.), lipid transport (SCARB1) (Shen et al.) and peptide transport (SLC15A1) (Smith et al.). The following 15 proteins were highly abundant in term‐derived AF‐EVs. Many of them, such as PIP (Umadat et al.), UMOD (Jian et al.), HLA‐DRB3 (Liu et al.), BPIFB4 (Villa et al.) and IGHM (Liu et al.), were implicated in the immune response. MUC7 is mainly present in saliva and the respiratory tract (McGuckin et al.), while AQP2 contributes to saliva secretion (Delporte et al.).
Proteomic data showed significant enrichment of the ESCRT‐accessory protein PDCD6IP (Alix) in term EVs (Figure 3F), consistent with Western blotting (Figure 1A,B). Additionally, exosome‐exclusive markers LAMP1 and LAMP2 were also significantly enriched in term EVs. (Mathieu et al.). Ectosome‐exclusive marker SLC3A2 (Mathieu et al.) was significantly enriched in the second‐trimester AF‐EVs. BSG (Mathieu et al.), another ectosome‐specific marker, followed the trend (p = 0.0511) These findings support the enrichment of the exosome fraction in the term.
Amniotic Fluid EV Proteome Is a Representation of Fetal Growth and Maturation
We subsequently performed an enrichment analysis on the significantly abundant proteins identified for each gestational age, using the protein enrichment tool, FunRich (Pathan et al.). Proteins enriched in the second‐trimester AF‐EVs were matched for expression in organs such as the ovary, pancreas, brain, liver and bone marrow (Figure 4A). AF‐EV proteome at term demonstrated a significant similarity to other human body fluids such as saliva, tears, cervicovaginal fluid and gastric juice (Figure 4B). Both gestational time points indicated a significant enrichment of placental and urine proteins.
The enrichment analysis for biological pathways matched second‐trimester‐enriched AF‐EV proteins with translation regulation, ribosome activity and protein synthesis‐related activities (Figure 4C), indicating the development the fetus undergoes during the second trimester.
Proteins enriched in the term AF‐EVs showed a significant involvement with biological processes that are important for bringing the fetal development phase to a halt (Figure 4D). Epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a cellular signalling pathway instrumental in morphogenesis and organogenesis during fetal development (Kalluri and Weinberg, Kim et al.). The reverse process, mesenchymal‐to‐epithelial transition (MET), helps to generate somatic cells (Pei et al.). We observed the activation of the MET pathway at term gestation. APC/Cdh1 complex, ornithine decarboxylase and active PAK2p34 all play essential roles in mitosis (Qiao et al.), cell growth and differentiation (Jakobi et al.) and cell survival (Clifford et al.), respectively. The regulation of these proteins towards term gestation indicates the easing of the fetal development phase. Moreover, adaptive immunity activation towards the end of gestation may be implied in ‘antigen processing via ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation’ as the fetus approaches birth.
We detected a significantly high number of proteins associated with the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT) machinery in term AF‐EVs. This is a signalling pathway and the critical regulator of multivesicular body (MVB) formation and protein sorting into EVs (Schmidt and Teis, Henne et al.). This observation explains the enrichment of exosomes in the term AF‐EV pellet compared to that of the second trimester, as observed in Figures 1A,B, and 3F.
Proteomics Results After Excluding the Fetus With a Congenital Anomaly
Due to the presence of one sample with a congenital anomaly, we repeated the proteomics analysis for five pairs after excluding the fetus with the bilateral cleft/palate and the matched control. We observed a similar overall expression profile, with nine of the ten protein enrichment sites overlapping in the second trimester (Figure S3A and Figure 4A) and term (Figure S3B and Figure 4B. Similarly, the biological pathways implicated in the second‐trimester (Figure 4C and Figure S3C) and term (Figure 4D and Figure S3D) enriched proteins remained unchanged between the original and smaller cohorts. Therefore, we concluded that retaining these samples in our primary analysis was reasonable.

INTRODUCTION:
Background
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released from all living cells as a natural aspect of their cellular homeostasis. They are membrane‐enclosed vesicles that contain selectively packed cargo of biologically active molecules such as proteins, nucleic acids and lipids (Colombo et al., Atukorala and Mathivanan). EVs mediate intercellular communication via this internal cargo and membrane‐bound molecules. Their role in facilitating inter‐organ communication, coordinating physiological processes and maintaining systemic homeostasis is widely studied (, Valadi et al., Radnaa et al.). EV biogenesis pathways influence cargo sorting (Raposo et al.) and change in response to extracellular stimuli (Hazelton et al., Bei et al.). However, the mechanisms driving the change in EV cargo composition, particularly in vivo, are poorly understood (Yates et al.).
Amniotic fluid (AF) is a valuable sample with a wealth of fetal biological information (Underwood et al., Moore, Hui et al.). In early gestation, AF primarily consists of maternal plasma ultrafiltrate. By 8–10 weeks, fetal urine production and swallowing begin, shifting AF composition towards greater fetal contribution (Liu et al., Ross et al.). AF constantly circulates the fetal body by urination, lung fluid secretion and swallowing (Ross and Nijland). AF volume increases until about 32 weeks, then gradually decreases. In the near term, the fetus produces 700–1000 mL of urine daily, with complete fluid turnover occurring every 24 h (Bianchi et al., Tong et al.). AF also has immune properties and reflects fetal immune status, offering diagnostic potential in infection‐related pregnancy complications. It contains essential nutrients and growth factors, including electrolytes, proteins and amino acids, that support growth, regulate development and maintain metabolic balance (Underwood et al., Atukorala et al.). Collectively, AF plays a vital role in fetal nutrition, development and homeostasis.
AF is used clinically for prenatal diagnosis, primarily for amniocyte analysis for chromosome and genetic abnormalities (Anandakumar et al., Wang et al.). However, AF‐EVs have been relatively unexplored until recently. Numerous exploratory studies have been published in the field of AF‐EV research (Atukorala et al.), showing substantial potential for translational impact in prognosis and treatment in perinatal medicine. The lipid bilayer membrane of EVs protects their cargo from external degrading enzymes (Colombo et al.), suggesting that EVs can contain stable biomarkers for understanding health and disease (Gebara et al., Dixon et al.). A growing body of preclinical and clinical researchers is now investigating the anti‐inflammatory, antioxidative, regenerative and angiogenic molecules within EVs for therapeutic applications (Cargnoni et al., Bellio et al., Senesi et al., del Rivero et al., Nunzi et al.). Conversely, our understanding of the general physiology of EVs from the fetoplacental unit is limited, including the cells they represent, the molecular information they contain, and the likely purpose of this information for both the baby and the mother.
This study aimed to delineate and compare AF‐EVs derived from uncomplicated second‐trimester and term pregnancies to uncover their physiology. These findings may enhance our understanding of AF‐EV biogenesis, cargo and physiological significance in fetal growth and development.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in PRIDE at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride, reference number PXD058882.