PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
diseases: Rheumatoid arthritis
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Lc-ms/ms; Immunoglobulins; Rheumatoid factor; Complementarity determining regions; Isotypes

ABSTRACT:
Rheumatoid factor are autoantibodies that are found in +/- two thirds of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by inflamed, swollen joints. They consist of polyclonal antibodies that target the Fc part of IgG. The antibodies are not highly specific for rheumatoid arthritis and clinical assays to measure rheumatoid factor are poorly harmonized. We studied rheumatoid factor using a mass-spectrometry-based approach in seropositive, seronegative rheumatoid arthritis patients and in disease controls.  Rheumatoid factor was captured on Fc coated microwell plates, isolated, digested into peptides and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Principal component analysis and sparse partial least squares discriminant analysis showed that peptides derived from seropositive rheumatoid arthritis patients clustered away from the controls. Mass spectrometry analysis revealed framework region-derived and variable region-derived peptides that were enriched in rheumatoid factor positive sera. However, mass spectrometry de novo sequencing failed to sequence the majority of unidentified peptides. Furthermore, mass spectrometry analysis revealed different rheumatoid factor isotypes. In addition to IgM, also IgA and IgG isotypes were observed.    In conclusion, mass spectrometry is able to capture the complexity and isotypes of rheumatoid factor autoantibodies, but advances in de novo sequencing are needed to fully characterize the variable part of the antibodies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mass spectrometric analysis of Rheumatoid factor

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
RF enrichment Costar plates were coated with Fc IgG1 (0.5µg per well) and left overnight at 4°C. The following day, coated plates were washed three times with PBS-T (0.05% Tween-20 in PBS). Diluted serum (1/10 in PBS-T) was added and the plates were incubated in a thermomixer (RT, 800rpm, 1h). After incubation, plates were washed 2 times with PBS-T and five times with PBS. Finally, plates were washed with 50mM Tris-HCl.  Digestion with chymotrypsin/lysin C Following enrichment, 60 µl 4 M urea/50 mM Tris-HCl was added to each well. Afterwards, proteins were reduced for 1h in the thermomixer (800 rpm, 37°C) in the presence of 8 mM DTT, followed by alkylation for 30 min in the dark (37°C) in the presence of 22 mM IAM. Digestion was started by addition of Lys-C at 0,4 µg/well and left overnight (thermomixer 37°C, 800 rpm, dark). The next day, 50 mM Tris-HCl was added until urea concentration dropped below 1 M. Chymotrypsin was added at 1 µg/well and digestion of the proteins continued in the thermomixer (4 h, 37°C, 800 rpm). Finally, digestion was stopped in the presence of 1% Formic acid (FA). Desalting Desalting was performed on Sep-Pak 96-well tC18 µElution plates using a vacuum pump. To activate the column, 200 µl 50% acetonitrile (ACN) was added to each well and the pump was activated for 1 min. This activation step was repeated once. For equilibration, 200 µl 0.5% formic acid (FA)/5% ACN was added to each well and the pump was activated for 1 min. This equilibration step was repeated once. Next, samples were loaded on the column and the pump was activated. The flow-through was passed through the column again to ensure maximum binding. Afterwards, the column was washed 4 times with 0.5% FA/5% ACN. To elute samples, 50 µl 70% ACN was loaded on the column, the pump was activated and the flow-through was collected in a new 96-well plate. Samples were transferred to Eppendorf 1.5 ml tubes and dried in the Speedvac centrifuge (Uniequip Univapo 150 ECH). Dried samples were stored at -20°C. MS analysis Dried samples were resuspended in 15 µl 0.1% FA/5% ACN before being injected (5 μL) and separated on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (C18 3 μm–100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 PepMap RSLC (2 μm, 50 μm-15 cm, Thermo Scientific) using a linear gradient (300 nL/min) of 0–4% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.08% FA) in 3 min, 4–10% B in 7 min, 10–35% in 25 min, 35–38% in 5 min, 38–40% in 2 min, 40–65% in 5 min, 65–95% in 1 min, 95% for 9 min, 95–5% in 1 min, 5% for 9 min. The Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was operated in positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 (FWHM at m/z 200), followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500) of the top ten most intense peaks with +2, +3, +4, and +5 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16,000 using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 eV with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z, apex trigger of 5-15s and dynamic exclusion of 30s. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 software (Thermo Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Progenesis software was used for relative quantification of data. To correct for possible sample variation, the samples were normalized based on the detected abundance values (median and mean absolute deviation outlier filtering approach, Nonlineair Dynamics Ltd, New Castle, UK). Data were log transformed and rescaled with a scalar estimation application. For every sample, a ratio was calculated for the value of the peptide ion abundance in that sample to the value in the normalisation reference: Ri,x=Abi,x/Abi,NR. The median and median absolute deviation are used as an approximation of the variance of the ratio distribution of all peptides. Mascot was used for identification of peptides by searching against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database. Additionally, de novo sequencing and a parallel database search using PEAKS Studio software (Version 12.5; Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) was performed. Database search was performed on the Uniprot Homo sapiens database Reviewed with a peptide FDR 1%. As we extract protein quantification using PEAKS software which is based on unique supporting peptides per protein, a smaller less redundant protein database was used compared to the database used for Mascot search, as this provides a more accurate protein quantification due to less protein interference. Peptides with a Mascot score ≥30 identified as non-immunoglobulin related peptides or with a Mascot score <30 were analyzed by de novo sequencing. De novo sequencing was performed starting from the raw data files. A de novo score (Average of Local Confidence, ALC%) was assigned by PEAKS based on the reliability of each amino acid in the de novo sequence. Only de novo peptides with scores of ALC% >80% were included for further analysis. Conflicts between the parallel database searches of Mascot and PEAKS were manually resolved based on the peptide identification score, with the identification with the most reliable scoring being selected. Supporting peptides are chosen out by PEAKS based on their unique sequence within a protein and a relative protein quantification is subsequently performed based on the area sample of unique peptides. If a peptide is present in more than one protein, it is excluded for use in protein quantification. All Uniprot accession protein hits related to the constant region of different immunoglobulin isotypes were extracted. Z-score (standardized normalized abundance) of the relevant proteins were calculated to illustrate protein abundance in heatmaps constructed by using R package ComplexHeatmap. An overview of used settings in the database searches is given in the Supplemental Table 3. De novo peptide sequences and peptide sequences with a low identification score were subsequently aligned to databases containing V, D or J-region germline sequences derived from IMGT database using IgBLAST and IMGT/DomainGapAlign algorithms. Peptides with sufficient match  to the human Ig V-region databases were assigned to a frame region (FR) or complementarity determining region (CDR) of the corresponding immunoglobulin germline gene (IgBLAST criteria for FR and CDR1/2: E-value ≤ 0.05; IMGT criteria for CDR3: E-value ≤ 1, Smith-Watermann score >30, and min. 3 amino acids aligned to any CDR). An overview of the bio-informatics analysis workflow is given in Supplemental Data Figure 1. Statistical analysis Normalized abundance was used to perform Kruskal Wallis testing followed by a post hoc Dunn test to acquire p-values. The mean abundance in RA patients and in control patients was calculated and compared to calculate fold change. Volcano plots were constructed using log2(fold change) and -log10(p-value) using R package ggplot2.   PCA (principal component analysis) and Sparse Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (sPLS-DA) of the normalized abundance values of the identified Ig and variable region peptides was performed to identify the most predictive/discriminative peptides to classify different disease groups. Three steps were performed for each experiment in the sPLS-DA analysis. First, sPLS-DA models require a X and Y matrix as input. For each experiment, the normalized abundance values per peptide for each individual was used as the X matrix and the patient group was used as the Y matrix. Second, two sPLS-DA parameters were tuned based on the Balanced Error Rate and maximum distance metric: the optimal number of components and the optimal number of variables to select on each component. Third, sPLS-DA models were calculated for H components (min 2 and max 5) with the component-specific optimal numbers of peptides using 3-fold cross-validations. Peptides that were included in the resulting sPLS-DA model were labeled as “discriminative peptides” for the corresponding experiment. sPLS-DA was performed using the MixOmics package in R. Peptides detected in two experiments were plotted using their median grouped abundance in a heatmap constructed by Graphpad Prism 9.