PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum; Blood cell
diseases: Type 2 diabetes mellitus
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Peptide counting
keywords: Exosomes; Tissue injury; Complement system; Stroke; Mass spectrometry; Blood coagulation; Diabetes

ABSTRACT:
This case-control study utilized mass spectrometry-based proteomics to compare exosomes from non-diabetic stroke (nDS=14), diabetic stroke (DS=13), and healthy control (HC=12) subjects. Among 1288 identified proteins, 387 were statistically compared. Statistical comparisons using a general linear model (log2 foldchange  0.58 and FDR-p0.05) were performed for nDS vs. HC, DS vs. HC, and DS vs. nDS. DS vs. HC and DS vs. nDS comparisons produced 155 and 159 differentially expressed proteins, respectively.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling of exosomal proteins in diabetic and non-diabetic ischemic stroke patients: a case-control study

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
10 μg of protein were used for in-gel digest. Samples were run in NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide for 10 minutes to get one big band. Gels were washed with deionized water for 15 minutes on the shaker. The big band per lane was cut into small equivalent blocks and transferred to 1.5 mL tubes. For digestion, 12.5 ng/µL of trypsin in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) was used for overnight sample incubated at 37 °C. The next day, gel blocks were centrifuged for 1 minute at 15,000g and supernatants were transferred into fresh tubes. Later, gel blocks were covered with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and 3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) for 10 minutes, and 100% ACN for 10 minutes. Finally, the supernatants were concentrated using speedvac at 37°C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were processed with the Genedata Refiner MS software (v13.0.1, Genedata, Basel, Switzerland). MS1 data were aligned between the runs, and MS2 data identifications were transferred to missing values. Processed MS2 spectra were used for identification. The FASTA database search was performed with the MASCOT search algorithm v2.6 against a UniProt/SwissProt database (2019) and limited to human entries while ensuring an adjusted FDR of <1%. The precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS2 tolerance to 0.05 Da. Only proteins detected with two unique peptides were considered for further quantitative analysis.