PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Maago; Maace1; Apace

ABSTRACT:
Prokaryotic Argonaute proteins (pAgos) from the long-A clade are stand-alone immune systems that use small interfering (si)DNA guides to recognize and cleave invading plasmid and virus DNA. Certain long-A pAgos are co-encoded with accessory proteins with unknown functions. Here, we show that cyanobacterial long-A pAgos act in conjunction with Argonaute-associated Cas4 family enzyme 1 (ACE1). Structural and biochemical analyses reveal that ACE1-associated pAgos mediate siDNA-guided DNA interference, akin to stand-alone pAgos. ACE1 is structurally homologous to the nuclease domain of bacterial DNA repair complexes and acts as a single-stranded DNA endonuclease that processes siDNA guides. pAgo and ACE1 form a heterodimeric APACE1 complex, which modulates ACE1 activity. While ACE1-associated pAgos alone interfere with plasmids and bacteriophages, plasmid interference is boosted when pAgo and ACE1 are co-expressed. Our study reveals that pAgo-mediated immunity is enhanced by accessory proteins and broadens our mechanistic understanding of how pAgo systems interfere with invading DNA.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cyanobacterial Argonautes and Cas4 family nucleases cooperate to interfere with invading DNA

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Purified MaAgo and MaACE1 were diluted to 1 mg/mL and 125 mM KCl, 20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, and 1 mM DTT. MaAgo and MaACE1 were mixed 1:1 (mg/ml:mg/ml) and samples were incubated for 1 hr at RT. Samples were centrifuged at 16.000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. After incubation, 50 μL of each sample was injected on a Superdex 200 Increase 10/300 GL column (Cytiva Life Sciences) equilibrated in SEC buffer (125 mM KCl, 20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 1 mM DTT). Elution fractions were collected and subsequently analyzed using SDS-PAGE in which protein bands were visualized using ProteoSilver Plus Silver Staining Kit (Sigma Aldrich) according to instructions of the manufacturer.      For cross-linking, MaAgo and MaACE1 were crosslinked in a 1:1 ratio using bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) in a 1:0.5 ratio (protein:crosslinker). The reaction was incubated for 1 hour at room temperature and subsequently quenched by addition of 100 mM Ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) and incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature. Crosslinked complexes were resolved using SDS-PAGE and stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue stain. Bands corresponding to the MaAgo-MaACE1 hetereodimer complex were excised and processed using in gel digestion. In brief, gel slices were washed with 50 mM ABC, and subsequently incubated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Slices were subsequently washed twice with 50 mM ABC. Trypsin (0.5 µg) in 50 mM ABC was added and incubated overnight at room temperature. The following day tryptic peptides were acidified with TFA to pH 2-3 and desalted using C18 µcolumns as described previously​

DATA PROCESSING:
RAW Thermo MSMS files were converter to mgf file format using MS Convert​. Next xiSearch (v1.8.1)  was used to identify crosslinked peptides. The database contained the protein sequences of MaAgo and MaACE1 and the reverse sequences as decoys. Search parameters were as follows: MS tolerance, 6ppm; MS/MS tolerance, 10ppm, enzyme, trypsin/P, missed cleavages, 2, crosslinker, BS3; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and modification by BS3 (BS3, BS3Amidated, BS3Hydrolized) with BS3 reaction specificity at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine, and N-termini of proteins for the NHS-ester group. Residue pair false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using xiFDR (v2.2.1)​​ with an acceptance of 5%.      Crosslinked peptides were mapped in ChimeraX using Xlink mapping and analysis (XMAS) package​ on the AlphaFold2 structure of MaAgo/MaACE1. Confident interlinks (found in 2 out of 3 replicates) were exported for modeling the accessible interaction surface using DISVIS​80​. For DISVIS modeling pAgo structures were used as a fixed chain and ACE1 as a scanning chain. The confident interlinks were used as restraints (distance restraint 0-30 Å), DISVIS output files were visualized in PyMOL. Crosslink maps of confident crosslinks were visualized using xiNET​81​ and illustrations were made using the PyMOL Molecular Graphics System (Version 2.0, Schrödinger, LLC, https://www.pymol.org).