PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Heart; Cardiocyte
diseases: Cardiovascular system disease
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Adrenaline; Stromal interaction molecule 1; Cyclase- q10 associated proteins; Dopamine; Nitro-catecholamine

ABSTRACT:
6-Nitrodopamine Q7 Q8 (6-ND Q9 ) has potent positive chronotropic and inotropic effects. At a very low dose, i.e., 10 fM, it causes potentiation of the positive chronotropic effects induced by catecholamines in the rat atria, indicating a distinct mechanism of action. Cyclase-associated proteins (CAP-1 and CAP-2) are potential receptors for 6-ND in human cardiomyocytes. Since cyclic 3′,5′-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) plays a fundamental role in the positive inotropic effects of classical catecholamines, it was further investigated whether 6-ND potentiates the positive inotropic effects induced by classical catecholamines in the rat isolated perfused heart. Human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)- derived cardiomyocytes were harvested and lysed, and following appropriate separation procedures, membrane proteins were incubated with 6-NDderivatized agarose, centrifuged, and the proteins retained in the agarose eluted with 6-ND (1 mM). The proteins isolated from the chemical pulldown assay were fractionated by SDS-PAGE, the bands were cut and hydrolyzed in situ with trypsin, and then separated and sequenced. A total of 817 proteins were generated, and following screening using UniProt “Retrieve/ID Mapping” function and Gene Ontology cellular component category, 124 proteins were identified as membrane proteins. These experiments identified three proteins that modulate adenylyl cyclase (AC) activity (CAP-1, CAP-2, and STIM1), which are compatible with the pharmacological findings reported for 6-ND in the rat heart. As expected, 6-ND strongly potentiates the inotropic effect induced by noradrenaline in Langendorff’s preparation. In conclusion, 6-ND-induced potentiation of catecholamine-induced chronotropic and inotropic effects is due to the modulation of adenylyl cyclase activity, probably via direct interactions with CAP-1 and CAP-2.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The identification of adenylyl cyclase modulators as potential receptors for 6-nitrodopamine in human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes and their relevance in heart inotropism

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For the pre-clearing step, 1.5 mg of the membrane extract was incubated (2 h) with 200 μL of naked PureCube Carboxy Agarose beads (Cube Biotech, Monheim, Germany) at 4°C to adsorb the protein background. The beads were centrifuged at 240 g for 2 min, and the supernatant was collected and then incubated with 200 μL of the resin derivatized with 6-ND overnight at 4°C. The naked agarose was washed with membrane extract buffer provided by the Mem- PER™ kit, and the proteins retained on the naked agarose were eluted with a solution of 1 mM of 6-ND. The eluted proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with GelCode™ Blue Safe Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) and destained with Milli-Q water (PC lane in Figure 2). The supernatant was incubated overnight with the 6-NDderivatized agarose and then centrifuged, and the pellet was washed with membrane extract buffer provided by the Mem-PER™ kit. The proteins retained on the 6-ND-derivatized agarose were eluted with a solution of 1 mM of 6-ND (PD lane in Figure 2). In the competitive assay, 1 mM of 4-nitropropanolol was added to the membrane protein extract collected after the 6-ND pulldown assay and then incubated with the resin derivatized with 6-ND overnight at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and the resin was washed with membrane extraction buffer provided by the Mem- PER™ kit. The proteins retained on the resin were eluted with a solution of 1 mM of 6-ND. To define the interactors shared between 4-nitropropanolol and 6-ND, we identified the proteins retained on the beads in the competitor assay and subtracted this list from that obtained in the absence of the competitor, as described above.The proteins derived from chemical pulldown were fractionated by SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with GelCode™ Blue Safe Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) and destained with Milli-Q water. A total of nine bands were cut and in situ-hydrolyzed by trypsin

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide mixtures were extracted in 0.2% HCOOH and ACN and vacuum-dried using a SpeedVac System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures from the hydrolyzed gel bands were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 instrument equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source and coupled with a Vanquish Neo nanoUPLC system. Samples were fractionated using a C18 capillary reverse-phase column (150 mm, 75, 2 μm 100 Å) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A linear gradient of eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) in A (0.2% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water) was used from 2% to 90% in 77 min. The MS/MS method, based on a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, recorded a single full-scan spectrum in the 375–1,200 m/z range, followed by fragmentation spectra of the top 20 ions (MS/MS scan) selected according to the intensity and charge state (+2, +3, and multi-charges), with a dynamic exclusion time of 40 s. Protein identification was carried out using MaxQuant software (v.1.5.2.8), with the UniProt Homo Sapiens database, as previously described (Palinski et al., 2021).

METHODS:
2 Materials and methods
2.1 Chemical pulldown assay and protein separation
Actively beating hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (iPS-DF19-9-7T, WiCell Research Institute, Madison, Unites States) were harvested and lysed with a specific membrane protein enrichment protocol. Cardiomyocytes were treated using a Mem-PER™ Plus Membrane Protein Extraction kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States), according to the manufacturer’s protocol to enrich the protein membrane protein extract. In brief, 50 × 106 cardiomyocytes were added to 7.5 mL of permeabilization buffer, vortexed, and incubated for 10 min at 4°C with constant mixing. The supernatant, comprising cytosolic proteins, was collected by centrifuging for 15 min at 21,000 g. Solubilization buffer (5 mL) was added to the pellet, vortexed, and incubated for 30 min at 4°C with constant mixing. The supernatant, comprising the membrane proteins, was collected by centrifugation for 15 min at 21,000 g. The quantification of the extracted proteins was performed using the Pierce 660 nm assay (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, United States). The efficiency of the fractionation procedure was analyzed by Western blot assays, monitoring specific markers for each cell compartment (GAPDH for cytosol and caveolin-1 for membrane) with specific antibodies (Figure 1).
2.2 Chemical pulldown assay
For the pre-clearing step, 1.5 mg of the membrane extract was incubated (2 h) with 200 μL of naked PureCube Carboxy Agarose beads (Cube Biotech, Monheim, Germany) at 4°C to adsorb the protein background. The beads were centrifuged at 240 g for 2 min, and the supernatant was collected and then incubated with 200 μL of the resin derivatized with 6-ND overnight at 4°C. The naked agarose was washed with membrane extract buffer provided by the Mem-PER™ kit, and the proteins retained on the naked agarose were eluted with a solution of 1 mM of 6-ND. The eluted proteins were fractionated by SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with GelCode™ Blue Safe Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) and destained with Milli-Q water (PC lane in Figure 2).
The supernatant was incubated overnight with the 6-ND-derivatized agarose and then centrifuged, and the pellet was washed with membrane extract buffer provided by the Mem-PER™ kit. The proteins retained on the 6-ND-derivatized agarose were eluted with a solution of 1 mM of 6-ND (PD lane in Figure 2).
In the competitive assay, 1 mM of 4-nitropropanolol was added to the membrane protein extract collected after the 6-ND pulldown assay and then incubated with the resin derivatized with 6-ND overnight at 4°C. The supernatant was removed, and the resin was washed with membrane extraction buffer provided by the Mem-PER™ kit. The proteins retained on the resin were eluted with a solution of 1 mM of 6-ND.
To define the interactors shared between 4-nitropropanolol and 6-ND, we identified the proteins retained on the beads in the competitor assay and subtracted this list from that obtained in the absence of the competitor, as described above.
2.3 Protein separation and identification
The proteins derived from chemical pulldown were fractionated by SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with GelCode™ Blue Safe Protein Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States) and destained with Milli-Q water. A total of nine bands were cut and in situ-hydrolyzed by trypsin. Peptide mixtures were extracted in 0.2% HCOOH and ACN and vacuum-dried using a SpeedVac System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures from the hydrolyzed gel bands were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 instrument equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source and coupled with a Vanquish Neo nanoUPLC system. Samples were fractionated using a C18 capillary reverse-phase column (150 mm, 75, 2 μm 100 Å) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. A linear gradient of eluent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) in A (0.2% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water) was used from 2% to 90% in 77 min. The MS/MS method, based on a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, recorded a single full-scan spectrum in the 375–1,200 m/z range, followed by fragmentation spectra of the top 20 ions (MS/MS scan) selected according to the intensity and charge state (+2, +3, and multi-charges), with a dynamic exclusion time of 40 s. Protein identification was carried out using MaxQuant software (v.1.5.2.8), with the UniProt Homo Sapiens database, as previously described. A diagram illustrating the above-described steps is presented in Figure 3.
Nonspecific contaminants were also removed for comparison using the Contaminant Repository for Affinity Purification (CRAPome) 2.0 web tool (https://reprint-apms.org). Contaminants defined as proteins reported in at least 50% of similar experiments were discarded from the initial lists.
2.4 Functional clustering analysis
Cell compartment enrichment analysis was carried out using FunRich 3.1.3 software by querying the Gene Ontology database. The Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p-value (FDR) and fold enrichment cutoffs were 0.001 and 3, respectively. The biological process over-representation analysis was performed using the ClueGO 2.5.7 app of the Cytoscape platform (FDR < 0.05).
2.5 Animals
Adult male Wistar rats (280–320 g) were obtained from the Central Animal House at the University of Campinas (CEMIB-UNICAMP; São Paulo, Brazil). All experimental protocols were approved by the Ethics Committee for Animal Use of the UNICAMP (CEUA; Protocol No. 5746-1/2021; 5831-1/2021), following the Brazilian Guidelines for the Production, Maintenance, and Use of Animals for Teaching or Research from the National Council of Control in Animal Experimentation (CONCEA), and the ARRIVE guidelines. Three individuals were housed in each cage placed on ventilated shelters at a humidity of 55% ± 5% and a temperature of 24°C ± 1°C under a 12-h light–dark cycle. Animals received filtered water and standard rodent food ad libitum.
2.6 Langendorff’s isolated perfused heart preparation and measurements of heart contractile function
Heparin (1,000 IU/kg) was previously injected intraperitoneally into the animals to prevent blood clotting, and euthanasia was performed by administering isoflurane overdose, as previously described. Exsanguination was performed to confirm the euthanasia. The chest was opened, the heart was rapidly excised, the ascending aorta was cannulated, and the heart was mounted on a nonrecirculating Langendorff apparatus. The isolated heart was perfused with Krebs–Henseleit’s solution (pH 7.4, 37°C) equilibrated with a carbogen gas mixture (95% O2: 5% CO2) at a constant flow (10 mL/min), and left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) was maintained between 4 and 8 mmHg during the initial equilibrium of the experiment. A water-filled latex balloon, connected to the pressure transducer (MLT1199 BP Transducer, ADInstruments, Inc., Dunedin, NZ), was inserted into the left ventricle (LV) via the mitral valve. Left ventricular systolic pressure (LVSP), left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVeDP), and heart rate (HR) were continuously recorded using a PowerLab System (ADInstruments, Inc., Dunedin, NZ). Only hearts that presented a basal heart rate between 250 and 300 bpm were employed in the experiments.
The hearts were allowed to equilibrate for at least 10 min, and the effects of a 1-min infusion (100 μL/min) 6-nitrodopamine (0.01, 0.1, or 1 pM final concentration) were evaluated. Each heart was subjected to only one infusion. Changes were monitored for 30 min. To investigate the synergism between 6-nitrodopamine and noradrenaline in the Langendorff’s perfused heart analysis, the following protocols were employed. One-minute (100 μL/min) infusion of 6-nitrodopamine (0.001 or 0.01 pM, final concentration) was performed, and then, a single bolus of noradrenaline (1 pmol) was administered, and the heart was monitored for 15 min. One heart was used for a single drug and infusion. Data obtained from the Landendorff preparations (heart rate, LVDP, dP/dt max, and RPP) were expressed as left ventricular developed pressure (LVDP), calculated using the following formula: LVSP − LVeDP, and expressed in mmHg. The rate pressure product (RPP) was defined as the product of HR and LVDP: RPP = (HR × LVDP). The maximal rate of increase in the left ventricular pressure (+dP/dtmax) was monitored continuously using a pressure transducer connected to a PowerLab system (AD Instrument, Australia).
2.7 Statistical analysis
Data obtained from the Langendorff preparations were represented by mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Comparison between baseline values and those obtained during drug stimulation in the same sample was performed using the paired t-test. Comparison between two groups was performed using the unpaired t-test. Comparisons among three or more groups were evaluated using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by the Newman–Keuls test. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
2.8 Chemicals and reagents
Noradrenaline was obtained from Cayman Chemicals (Michigan, United States). 6-Nitrodopamine was acquired from Toronto Research Chemicals (Ontario, CA). PureCube Carboxy Agarose Beads were purchased from Cube Biotech (Monheim, Germany). Trypsin, the Mem-PER™ Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit, Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay, GelCode™ Blue Safe Protein Stain, Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Mass Spectrometer), and Vanquish Neo nanoUPLC System were acquired from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, United States). 4-NO2-propranolol was synthesized as described elsewhere. Sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium chloride (KCl), calcium chloride (CaCl2), magnesium sulfate (MgSO4), sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3), potassium phosphate mono-basic (KH2PO4), and glucose were acquired from Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany).

RESULTS:
3 Results
3.1 Identification of 6-ND targets in cardiomyocytes
The proteins identified from the pre-clearing (PC lane) were discarded from the protein list obtained in the chemical pulldown (PD lane). The remaining proteins were filtered against the proteins listed in the Contaminant Repository for Affinity Purification (CRAPome) 2.0. At the end of this procedure, 869 potential 6-ND direct and indirect interactors were obtained (Supplementary Table S1). Another pulldown experiment was performed in the presence of an excess of 4-nitro-propranolol, the 6-ND antagonist. Eighty-two proteins were retained on the beads and represent the specific interactors of 6-ND (Table 1), and 52 have already been identified in the pulldown with 6-ND. By subtracting these 52 proteins from the 869 potential 6-ND direct and indirect interactors, a list of 817 proteins was obtained (Supplementary Table S2), which represent the interactors shared between 6-ND and 4-nitropropranolol experiments.
3.2 Functional enrichment analysis of 6-ND targets
To define cell components enriched in the targets of 6-ND within cardiomyocytes, an over-representation analysis was performed on the 817 proteins in common with the competitor. The identified proteins were functionally analyzed using the FunRich 3.1.3 search engine, in order to interrogate the Gene Ontology database for subcellular localizations. The terms were considered significant when the FDR was <0.001 and the fold enrichment was higher than 3. The results are reported in the histogram in Figure 4.
The cellular component analysis suggested a distribution of potential 6-ND targets through different cell compartments. This finding was expected since the membrane protein extract was partially contaminated also with cytosolic proteins, as suggested by the Western blot assay (Figure 1).
Therefore, in light of our interest in potential cell surface targets, the UniProt “Retrieve/ID Mapping” function was used; the total protein list was further screened according to the Gene Ontology cellular component category, and only those genes whose annotation contained the term “membrane” were considered for further analyses. From the initial list of 869 entries, only 124 (Table 2) were selected because they satisfied the previous restriction criteria.
Surprisingly, 116 proteins among the 124 are present in the list of the competitor binding proteins (Table 3). This finding highlights an almost complete overlapping between the sets of membrane protein targets recognized by the two active drugs, suggesting their involvement in stimulation/regulation of common regulative processes.
3.3 Functional clustering analysis
Cell compartment enrichment analysis was carried out using Funrich 3.1.3 software by querying the Gene Ontology database. The Benjamini–Hochberg-adjusted p-value (FDR) and fold enrichment cutoffs were 0.001 and 3, respectively. The biological process over-representation analysis was performed using the ClueGO 2.5.7 app of the Cytoscape platform (FDR < 0.05), and the functional clustering analysis is represented in Figure 5.
3.4 Positive chronotropic and inotropic effects induced by 6-ND in Langendorff’s preparation
At low concentrations, 6-nitrodopamine (0.01 and 0.1 pM) had no chronotropic and/or inotropic effect. However, at a higher concentration (1 pM), 6-ND infusion significantly increased the heart rate (Figure 6A), LVDP (Figure 6B), dP/dt (max) (Figure 6C), and RPP (Figure 6D).
3.5 Interactions of 6-nitrodopamine with noradrenaline on the isolated rat heart (Langendorff’s preparation)
Bolus injection of noradrenaline (1 pmol) had no effect on the heart rate frequency (Figure 7A), LVDP (Figure 7B), dPdt (max) (Figure 7C), and RPP (Figure 7D). One-min infusion of 6-nitrodopamine (0.001 pM) alone did not alter any of these parameters either. However, infusion of 6-nitrodopamine (0.01 pM) significantly increased the heart rate frequency (Figure 7A), LVDP (Figure 7B), dP/dt (max) (Figure 7C), and RPP (Figure 7D) when noradrenaline (1 pmol) was injected at the end of the infusion (1 min).

INTRODUCTION:
1 Introduction
6-Nitrodopamine (6-ND) is a novel endogenous catecholamine that exerts potent and long-lasting positive chronotropic and inotropic responses in the isolated rat heart. In rat isolated right atria, 6-ND at a concentration as low as 10 fM markedly potentiates the positive chronotropic effects induced by the classical catecholamines dopamine, noradrenaline, and adrenaline. Interestingly, the low concentration (100 nM) of selective β1-adrenoceptor antagonists atenolol, betaxolol, and metoprolol significantly reduced both basal atrial rates and 6-ND-induced positive chronotropism. This result implies that these drugs act as 6-ND receptor antagonists. More recently, 4-nitropropanolol has been identified as a more selective 6-ND receptor antagonist in the rat isolated right atrium; however, the receptor of 6-ND is yet to be identified.
Human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived cardiomyocytes reproduce the molecular mechanisms involved in heart disorders such as long QT syndrome, catecholamine polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, and Brugada syndrome, thus offering a suitable translational model for investigating the expression of 6-ND receptors. Therefore, we employed hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes to explore the potential targets for 6-ND, using a chemical pulldown approach, in which 6-ND was immobilized on agarose beads and incubated with cardiomyocyte membrane extracts. The purified proteins were then fractionated by SDS-PAGE; the bands were cut and hydrolyzed with trypsin, and the peptide mixtures were separated through UPLC and analyzed using mass spectrometry. Protein identification was carried out using the MaxQuant search-engine to query the UniProt Homo Sapiens database. In the competitive assay, 4-nitropropranolol, here referred to as a selective 6-ND antagonist, was added to the protein extract, and the proteins retained on the beads were subtracted from that obtained in the absence of 4-nitropropranolol. Three proteins that modulate the adenylyl cyclase (AC) activity were identified. Because cyclic 3′,5′-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) plays a fundamental role in the positive inotropic effects of classical catecholamines, we demonstrated the synergistic effects of 6-ND with noradrenaline on the positive inotropic response by using the Langendorff isolated heart perfusion model.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability statement
The data presented in the study are deposited in the PRIDE repository, accession number PXD066711.
Ethics statement
Ethical approval was not required for the studies on humans in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements because only commercially available established cell lines were used. The animal study was approved by the Ethics Committee in Animal Use of UNICAMP. The study was conducted in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2025.1597035/full#supplementary-material 