PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
diseases: Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Exploris 480; Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; Serum; Federated proteomics; Kidney; Federated learning

ABSTRACT:
Quantitative mass spectrometry has transformed proteomics by allowing the simultaneous quantification of thousands of proteins. To boost statistical power, it is necessary to increase sample sizes by combining patient-derived data from various institutions. However, this practice raises significant privacy concerns. We created this dataset comtaining 30 healthy donors and 30 patients suffering from focal segmental glomerulosclerosis - a rare kidney disease - and distributed them to three independent proteomics centers. This distributed data were used as a proof of concept to introduce FedProt - the first privacy-preserving tool for collaborative differential protein abundance analysis of distributed data.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Ring study of patients suffering from focal segmental glomerulosclerosis as a proof of concept for federated proteomics.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were prepared by three independent scientists applying harmonized protocol. Briefly, 10 µL of the blood samples were loaded onto depletion columns (High-Select Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Resin, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to deplete the 14 most abundant serum proteins. Thirty micrograms of the filtrates were reduced, alkylated, and digested using LysC followed by trypsin, applying the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol by Wisniewski (Wiśniewski, 2018). The samples were subsequently desalted using Oasis HLB 96-well µElution Plates (Waters) and reconstituted in 30 µL of 0.1% formic acid containing 3% acetonitrile. The resulting peptide concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop Microvolume Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, five micrograms of each sample, along with a pooled common reference sample, were labeled using the TMT-11plex kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TMT-labeled samples were combined into six sets, each containing five healthy, five FSGS, and one common reference sample and dried in vacuum. Ultimately, the six sample sets were fractionated (High pH reversed phase peptide fractionation kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the fractions were dried in vacuum. Mass spectrometry data were acquired in three independent research centers using their preferred instruments and corresponding parameter setup (Center 1: Easy-nLC 1200, QExactive HF; Center 2: Ultimate 3000 nano, Exploris 480, Easy-nLC 1200, Orbitrap Fusion Lumos). Prior measurement, all samples were dissolved in 0.1 % formic acid and injected onto the indicated nano-LC systems. Samples were separated by 120-min multistep gradients. MS and MS/MS parameters were set individually by each research center. Center 1: Samples were measured in data-dependent mode, using an MS/MS scan on the Top 10 most abundant precursors per survey scan with a dynamic exclusion time of 30 seconds. The HCD collision energy was set to 34%, with an isolation width of 0.7 Da. Survey scans covered a range of 300–1650 m/z, with a mass resolution of 60,000, an AGC target value of 3 × 10^6, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. For MS/MS scans, the AGC target was set to 1 × 10^5 and the maximum injection time was 110 ms. Center 2: The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds, using HCD collision energy at 36%. The MS2 spectrum was recorded in the orbitrap with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 Da. During the master scan (MS1), the resolution was set to 120,000, with a scan range of 350-1600 m/z, an AGC target of standard, and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. A lock mass correction was applied using the background ion m/z=445.12003. Precursors were dynamically excluded after one occurrence with an exclusion duration of 45 seconds and a precursor range of 30 ppm. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2, the first mass was set to 110 Da, and the scan resolution was 45,000 with an AGC target of 200% and an auto fill time. Center 3: The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode with a cycle time of 3 seconds, using HCD collision energy at 36% and recording the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 Da. For the master scan (MS1), the resolution was set to 120,000, with a scan range of 350-1600 m/z, an AGC target of 'standard,' and a maximum fill time of 50 ms. A lock mass correction using the background ion m/z=445.12003 was applied. Precursors were dynamically excluded after one occurrence with an exclusion duration of 45 seconds and a precursor range of 20 ppm. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2, the first mass was set to 110 Da, and the scan resolution was 50,000 with an AGC target of 200% and a fill time of 50 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw mass spectra were uniformly preprocessed and quantified using MaxQuant (v 2.4.2) software (Tyanova et al., 2016) for each center separately. The analysis utilized default settings unless specified otherwise. The experimentally acquired mass spectra were searched against a human reference proteome (Uniprot, version 2023_05, reviewed/Swiss-Prot entries only, 20,418 protein sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as the protease (specific mode), allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus were allowed as variable modifications. Protein inference required a minimum of two peptides, including one unique peptide, with an FDR controlled to < 0.05 in target/decoy mode. The match between runs feature was enabled.