PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Kibra; Wwc1; Memory; Kinobead; Msti

ABSTRACT:
The localization, number, and function of postsynaptic AMPA-type glutamate receptors (AMPARs) are crucial for synaptic plasticity, a cellular correlate for learning and memory. The Hippo pathway member WWC1 is an important component of AMPAR hetero-protein complexes. However, genetic analysis suggests that the availability of WWC1 is constrained by its interaction with the Hippo kinases LATS1 and LATS2 (LATS1/2). Here, we explored the biochemical regulation of this interaction. A proteome-wide analysis of kinase inhibition in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line  using the kinobead assay identified the upstream kinases MST1/2 as two major targets of the small molecule inhibitor XMU-MP1 (hereafter, MSTi)and Luteolin.Upon pharmacological inhibition of MST1/2 in male mice and human brain organoids WWC1 dissociated from LATS1/2, resulting in increased abundance of WWC1 in AMPAR complexes. Moreover, MSTi enhanced synaptic transmission in mouse hippocampal brain slices, and improved cognition in healthy male mice and in male mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease and ageing. Thus, blocking WWC1-LATS1/2 binding might be explored for development as cognitive enhancers.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Targeting upstream Hippo-pathway kinases releases the scaffolder WWC1 to promote synaptic plasticity and long-term memory in mice

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For the analysis of MSTi and Luteolin targets in SH-SY5Y cells, kinobead γ pulldowns were performed. Briefly, cells were lysed in 0.8% NP40, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM Na3VO4, 25 mM NaF, 1 mM DTT, protease inhibitors (SigmaFast, Sigma) and phosphatase inhibitors. MSTi or Luteolin were spiked into 1 mL of lysate, which was adjusted to 5 mg/mL protein, with increasing concentrations (DMSO control, 3 nM, 10 nM, 30 nM, 100 nM, 300 nM, 1 µM, 3 µM and 10 µM) and incubated for 45 min at 4°C. Afterwards, incubation with 35 µL settled kinobeads took place for 30 min at 4°C. In order to enable the determination of a correction factor for each protein and to calculate apparent dissociation constants, a second kinobead pulldown (with fresh beads) was performed on the unbound fraction of the DMSO control. Proteins bound to kinobeads were eluted with LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 50 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM CAA. Kinobead pulldown eluates were purified by short SDS-PAGE (ca. 1 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were subsequently subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion according to standard procedures. After drying in a centrifugal evaporator, the samples were stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS measurement of peptides in eluates was performed using an UltiMate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Acclaim PepMap analytical column (0.1 mm x 15 cm, C18, 2 µM, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 15 min linear gradient from 3-28% solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0. 1% formic acid, 5% DMSO in water) at a flow rate of 50 µL min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra were acquired over a range of 360-1300 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap by applying an AGC of 3 x e6 or maximum injection time of 50 ms. Up to 12 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD; 1.3 m/z isolation window, AGC value of 1 x e5, maximum injection time of 22 ms) using 28% normalized collision energy (NCE) and analyzed at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap.

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein and peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3) by searching the tandem MS data against all human canonical and isoform sequences as annotated in the Swissprot reference database (42355 entries, downloaded 06.06.2018) using the embedded search engine Andromeda. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. In addition, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine was set as variable modification. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to seven and all data were adjusted to 1% propensity score matching (PSM) and 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR). A minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. Label-free quantification and data matching were enabled within MaxQuant. Protein intensities were normalized to the respective DMSO control. IC50 and EC50 values were deduced by a four-parameter log-logistic regression using an internal pipeline that utilizes the ‘drc’ package in R. A Kdapp was calculated by multiplying the estimated EC50 with a protein-dependent correction factor that was limited to a maximum value of 1. The correction factor for a protein is defined as the ratio of the amount of protein captured from two consecutive pulldowns of the same DMSO control lysate and was set to the average of correction factors across all experiments using the same lysate and beads.