PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
diseases: Traumatic brain injury
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: 10-fluoroethoxyphosphinyl-N-(biotinamidopentyl)decanamide; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Human; Serum; Activity based proteome profilling

ABSTRACT:
Purpose: Traumatic brain injury (TBI), including pediatric abusive head trauma (AHT), is the leading cause of death and disability in children and young adults worldwide. The current understanding of trauma-induced molecular changes in the brain of human subjects with intracranial haemorrhage (ICH) remains inadequate and requires further investigation to improve the outcome and management of TBI in the clinic. Calcium-mediated damage at the site of brain injury has been shown to activate several catalytic enzymes. Experimental design: Serine hydrolases (SHs) are major catalytic enzymes involved in the biochemical pathways of blood coagulation, systemic inflammation and neuronal signaling. Here we investigated activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) by measuring the activity status of SH enzymes in the serum of infants with severe ICH as a consequence of AHT or atraumatic infants who died of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Results: Our proof-of-principle study revealed significantly reduced physiological activity of dozens of metabolic SHs in the serum of infants with severe AHT compared to the SIDS group, with some of the enzymes being related to neurodevelopment and basic brain metabolism.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Activity based proteome profiling of serum serine hydrolases: application in pediatric abusive head trauma

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The antemortem serum collected in the ICU from AHT cases (n=5) and atraumatic controls (infants died of sudden infant death syndrome, n=5) were collected.Activity based proteome profilling protocol was applied on 50 μl of infants serum.

DATA PROCESSING:
Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS).Data-dependant analysis (DDA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 120’000 FWHM followed by as many subsequent MS2 scans on selected precursors as possible within 3 second maximum cycle time. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 4 x 105, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS2 was performed in the ion-trap with an AGC target at 1 x 104 and a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Isolation windows was set at 1.2 m/z and 30% normalised collision energy was used for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. Analysis of generated MS data MS raw data files were analyzed with MaxQuant proteomic software (version 2.1.3.0).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Purpose</h4>Traumatic brain injury (TBI), including pediatric abusive head trauma (AHT), is the leading cause of death and disability in children and young adults worldwide. The current understanding of trauma-induced molecular changes in the brain of human subjects with intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) remains inadequate and requires further investigation to improve the outcome and management of TBI in the clinic. Calcium-mediated damage at the site of brain injury has been shown to activate several catalytic enzymes.<h4>Experimental design</h4>Serine hydrolases (SHs) are major catalytic enzymes involved in the biochemical pathways of blood coagulation, systemic inflammation, and neuronal signaling. Here, we investigated activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) coupled to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) by measuring the activity status of SH enzymes in the serum of infants with severe ICH as a consequence of AHT or atraumatic infants who died of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).<h4>Results</h4>Our proof-of-principle study revealed significantly reduced physiological activity of dozens of metabolic SHs in the serum of infants with severe AHT compared to the SIDS group, with some of the enzymes being related to neurodevelopment and basic brain metabolism.<h4>Conclusions and clinical relevance</h4>To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the ABPP of the SHs enzyme family to detect changes in their physiological activity in blood serum in severe TBI. We used antemortem (AM) serum from infants under the age of 2 years who were victims of AHT with a severe form of ICH. The analytical approach used in the proof-of-principle study shows reduced activities of serum serine lipases in AHT cases and could be further investigated in mild forms of AHT, which currently show 30% of misdiagnosed cases in clinics.