PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: T cell; B cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480; Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; biotinylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting; Absolute quantification
keywords: Proximity proteomics; Apex2; Signalling; T cells; Tigit

ABSTRACT:
TIGIT is an immune checkpoint receptor that can signal via its intracellular inhibitory motifs to inhibit T cells, though the mechanisms remain poorly defined. To elucidate inhibitory signalling interactors of TIGIT, proximity proteomics was employed in model Jurkat T cells expressing TIGIT fused to APEX2. This identified several ligation-specific TIGIT interactors, including proteins involved in signalling (Grb2 and SOS1), cytoskeletal (CD2AP and SdcBP), and endocytic processes (IST1 and SNX3). A TIGIT mutant incapable of signalling via its inhibitory motifs prevented the recruitment of these proteins, indicating inhibitory signalling-specific engagement of these pathways. Furthermore, TIGIT engagement with these pathways, in addition to its phosphorylation and internalisation, was dependent on T cell activation as well as TIGIT ligation. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that TIGIT inhibitory signalling is restricted to activated T cells, indicating a regulatory mechanism that limits inhibition to when functionally required.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Inhibitory TIGIT signalling is dependent on activating T cell receptor signalling

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins proximal to TIGIT were affinity purified and prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using S-TRAP (Profiti) protocol. Samples were desalted using R3 beads and dried using a vacuum centrifuge. The desalted peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and ran for 1 hr on the Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or Orbitrap Exloris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteome Discoverer was used to search for proteins using the human UniProt database, applying theconditions specific to the mass spectrometers and modifications. Further analysis of the raw abundances obtained from Proteome Discoverer was performed using Manchester Proteome Profiler.