PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Monocyte
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Thp1; Silac; Methacrylate

ABSTRACT:
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) is commonly used in polymer resin-based dental materials. This projected investigated molecular mechanisms of TEGDMA toxicity by identifying time- and dose dependent effects on the proteome of human THP-1 monocytes. Effects of different concentrations (0.07mM-5mM) and exposure times (0-72h) of TEGDMA on cell viability, proliferation, and morphology were determined by a real-time viability assay, automated cell counting, and electron microscopy, and laid the fundament for choice of exposure scenarios in the proteomic experiments. Cells were metabolically labelled (SILAC), and exposed to 0.3mM or 2.5mM TEGDMA for 6h or 16h prior to LC-MS/MS analyses. Regulated proteins were analysed with the STRING database. Cells exposed to 0.3mM TEGDMA showed increased viability, and time-dependent upregulation of proteins associated with stress/oxidative stress, autophagy, and cytoprotective functions. Cells exposed to 2.5mM TEGDMA showed diminished viability, and a protein expression profile associated with oxidative stress, DNA-damage, mitochondrial dysfunction and cell-cycle inhibition. Altered expression of immune genes was observed in both groups.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Dose- and time-dependent effects of triethylene glycol dimethacrylate on the proteome of human THP-1 monocytes

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
THP-1 cells were metabolically labelled by cultivation in RPMI-1640/10% FBS medium for SILAC and prepared according to the SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit protocol (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for eight cell doubling prior to TEGDMA exposure. Experimental state and stable isotope labels were swapped to account for systematic errors due to metabolic incorporation of the heavy and light amino acid (label-swap). Cell numbers were counted prior to mixing to ensure a 1:1 mix of 12C and 13C labelled cells. Culture mediums were discarded and cells were washed 3 times with PBS in order to only process intracellular proteins from intact cells. Cell were lysed in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (4X). The samples were denatured for 30 min at 95ºC and protein concentration measured with the Millipore Direct detect protein chip. Around 50 μg protein/sample were loaded onto a Novex gel with NuPAGE buffer and run at 200V for 20 min, before fixation for 60 min in 40% methanol, 10% acetic acid, and 50% Milli-Q water. Proteins were visualized with SimplyBlue SafeStain and cut for proteomics analysis. Gel pieces were subjected to in gel reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion using 6 ng/μl trypsin (V511A, Promega, Wisconsin, USA) (33). OMIX C18 tips (Varian, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA) were used for sample cleanup and concentration. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system and EASY-Spray column (C18, 2µm, 100 Å, 75µm, 50cm). Peptides were fractionated using a linear 2-100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1 % formic acid over 200 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The separated peptides were analysed using a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Data was collected in data dependent mode using a top10 method. Raw files from the Q-Exactive MS were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.0). Statistical validation of protein regulation was done using the Perseus 1.5.6.0 software.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files from the Q-Exactive MS were analysed using the quantitative proteomics software MaxQuant (version 1.5.6.0). SILAC pairs were quantitated in MaxQuant and proteins were identified by the built in Andromeda search engine using the Uniprot Homo sapiens (Human) database (Nov2016). Main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance to 20 ppm. A false discovery rate (FDR) ration of 0.01 were needed to give protein identification. At least 2 peptides had to be quantitated to give a quantitation value.   Statistical validation of protein regulation was done using the Perseus 1.5.6.0 software (29).  Proteins significantly regulated in two biological replicates were further analyzed with the STRING database. Gene ontology analysis of biological processes (herby referred to as GO enrichment analysis) were conducted for the 0.3mM and 2.5mM TEGDMA treatment groups at both 6h and 16h.

METHODS:
Material and methods
A summary of the methods is presented in Fig. 1.
Chemicals and materials
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (cat. no. 759406), and Triton X‐100 were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA). RPMI‐1640 medium (supplemented with l‐glutamine and sodium bicarbonate), fetal bovine serum (FBS), SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit (LysC) RPMI 1640, L‐Arginine‐13C6 hydrochloride for SILAC, NuPage 4–12% gels and buffers, and SimplyBlue SafeStain were from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). RealTime‐Glo MT Cell Viability Assay was from Promega (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), and MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit was from Lonza (Basel, Switzerland).
Cell culture
The human monocytic cell line THP‐1 (ATCC TIB‐202; LOT: 59598936) was acquired from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). The cells were cultured in RPMI‐1640 with 10% FBS, without antibiotics, at 37°C in an atmosphere of 20% O2 and 5% CO2, and passaged every 2–3 d at a concentration of 0.2 × 106 cells ml−1. Experiments were performed with cells up to passage 26. The cell cultures were regularly screened for mycoplasma infection.
Measurement of TEGDMA solubility in cell culture medium
Solvents can interfere with the cytotoxicity of methacrylates 28. Still, there is no consensus on the type or concentration of solvent used in cell culture experiments 24. We therefore tested whether solvents could be omitted. The particle size distribution of 10 mM TEGDMA in RPMI‐1640 medium was determined by photon correlation spectroscopy using a submicron particle sizer (Model 370; Nicomp, Santa Barbara, CA, USA). According to this method, a particle intensity of approximately 250–350 kHz should be achieved for valid measurement of particles in the solution (values below this indicate a solution). The value measured for 10 mM TEGDMA was 14 kHz. Therefore, TEGDMA was dissolved directly in the cell medium for all experiments.
Cell viability
Cell viability was determined using the RealTime‐Glo MT Cell Viability Assay (Promega), measuring the reduction potential as a marker of cell metabolism. In the present study, this assay was used in the continuous read format to determine the effect of different concentrations of TEGDMA on cell viability at different times over the course of 72 h, compared with cells not treated with TEGDMA.
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate was weighed under sterile conditions and diluted to a 10 mM solution in RPMI‐1640/10% FBS. Initially, serial dilutions of the TEGDMA solutions (5, 2.5, 1.25, 0.65, 0.3, 0.15 mM) were pipetted into white 96‐well plates. Based on the results, 5 mM TEGDMA was excluded from further platings and 0.07 mM TEGDMA was used. The positive assay control was 5% Triton X‐100. Cells (0.2 × 106 ml−1, 50 μl) in RPMI‐1640/10% FBS, 2 × RT substrate, and Nanoluc enzymes were added to all treatments, except the treatment blank, according to the manufacturer's protocol. The cells were incubated for 15 min at 37°C before the first reading was performed in a prewarmed (37°C) CLARIOstar plate reader (BMG LABTECH, Offenburg, Germany), and monitored frequently for up to 72 h.
Morphological assessment and cell counting
To supplement the cell‐viability assay, cell proliferation was assessed using automated cell counting, and cell morphology was assessed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For cell counting, 24‐well tissue‐culture plates were prepared with 0.2–0.3 million THP‐1 cells per well in 1 ml of RPMI‐1640/10% FBS supplemented with the following concentrations of TEGDMA: 2.5, 1.25, 0.6, 0.3, 0.15, or 0.0 mM. Every 24 h for up to 72 h, the cell cultures were evaluated by phase‐contrast microscopy, and the numbers of cells in aliquots of cell culture were counted in a Sysmex XP‐300 Automated Hematology Analyzer (Sysmex, Kobe, Japan).
THP‐1 cells for TEM were collected from cell suspensions in RPMI‐1640/10% FBS medium for SILAC, then fixed in 4% formaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M PHEM buffer (1 ¦ 0.1 M PHEM, pH 7, contains 18.14 g PIPES, 6.5 g HEPES, 3.8 EGTA, 0.99 g MgSO4 per l, adjusted to pH 7 with 10 M KOH), pH 7. The fixed cells were processed according to a modified version of a protocol given previously 29. The cells were post‐fixed for 1 h in 0.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M PHEM buffer with 0.05% malachite green. The cells were spun down, washed 2 × 15 min in 0.1 M PHEM buffer, further fixed for 1 h in 0.8% K3Fe(CN)6 and 1% OsO4 in 0.1 M PHEM buffer, washed 2 × 15 min in 0.1 M PHEM buffer, treated for 30 min with 1% tannic acid in double‐distilled water, washed 2 × 15 min in 0.1 M PHEM buffer, 2 × 3 min in double‐distilled water, then incubated in 1% uranyl acetate in double‐distilled water, washed 2 × 3 min in double‐distilled water, and dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol (1 × 5 min 30%, 1 × 5 min 60%, 1 × 5 min 90%, 2 × 5 min 100%). Dehydrated cell pellets were infiltrated over night with 50% propylenoxide and 50% Agar 100 resin (Agar Scientific, Stansted, UK) before infiltration with 100% AGAR 100 resin overnight and polymerized at 60°C overnight. All steps, except polymerization, were carried out at room temperature, with cells in 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. Washing was static, and all liquid volumes were 1 ml. Ultrathin sections (70–90 nm) were analyzed using a JEM‐1010 microscope (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan), equipped with a Morada CCD camera (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture
THP‐1 cells were metabolically labeled by cultivation in RPMI‐1640/10% FBS medium for SILAC and prepared according to the SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cells were cultured in SILAC medium containing either light (12C6) or heavy (13C6) isotope arginine and lysine, for eight cell doublings, before exposure to TEGDMA. Pilot experiments showed that six doublings yielded unsatisfactory incorporation of amino acids.
SILAC: processing of TEGDMA‐treated cells
Cells with incorporation of either heavy or light amino acids were exposed for 6 or 16 h to 0.3 or 2.5 mM TEGDMA, respectively. The control was non‐treated cells. Experimental state and stable isotope labels were swapped to account for systematic errors caused by metabolic incorporation of the heavy and light amino acid (label‐swap).
Cell numbers were counted before mixing to ensure a 1:1 mix of 12C‐ and 13C‐labeled cells. Culture media were discarded and cells were washed three times with PBS in order to process only intracellular proteins from intact cells. Cells were lysed in NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (4×) and stored at −70°C until gel preparation.
The samples were denatured for 30 min at 95°C and protein concentration was measured using the Millipore Direct detect protein chip. Around 50 μg of protein per sample was loaded onto a Novex gel with NuPAGE buffer and run at 200 V for 20 min, before fixation for 60 min in 40% methanol, 10% acetic acid, and 50% Milli‐Q water. Proteins were visualized with SimplyBlue SafeStain and each sample were cut in three pieces for proteomics analysis.
Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectroscopy
Gel pieces were subjected to in‐gel reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion using 6 ng μl−1 of trypsin (V511A; Promega) 30. OMIX C18 tips (Varian, Palo Alto, CA, USA) were used for sample cleanup and concentration. Peptide mixtures containing 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY‐nLC1000 system and EASY‐Spray column (C18, particle size: 2 μm, pore size 100 Å, diameter: 75 μm, length 50 cm). Peptides were fractionated using a linear 2–100% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 200 min at a flow rate of 200 nl min−1. The separated peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Q‐Exactive mass spectrometer. Data were collected in data‐dependent mode using a top10 method.
SILAC quantitation
Raw files from the Q‐Exactive MS were analyzed using the quantitative proteomics software maxquant (version 1.5.6.0) 25. The SILAC pairs were quantitated in maxquant, and proteins were identified using the built‐in Andromeda search engine from the Uniprot Homo sapiens (Human) database (Nov 2016). Main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance to 20 ppm. A false discovery rate (FDR) ratio of 0.01 was needed to give protein identification. At least two peptides had to be quantitated to give a quantitation value.
Statistical validation of protein regulation was performed using the perseus 1.5.6.0 software 26. To determine significant outliers a significance B test was performed. This was carried out according to the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure with an FDR of 0.05. A protein that was significantly regulated in at least two of four replicates according to the significant B‐test was determined as significant regulated. Proteins that had less than two‐fold change in protein levels compared with the control had to be significantly regulated in both the 12C‐ and the 13C‐labeled cells, in each treatment group, to be included in further analysis.
Data analysis and statistics
Proteins that passed the initial screening process were analyzed in the STRING database 27. STRING is a database of known and predicted protein–protein interactions; for example, direct (physical) and indirect (functional) associations, based on computational prediction; read‐across from different organisms; and interactions collected in other primary databases. Searches in the database were based on proteins determined regulated in the proteomic experiments. Gene ontology analysis of biological processes (hereby referred to as GO enrichment analysis) was conducted for the 0.3 and 2.5 mM TEGDMA treatment groups at both 6 and 16 h.
Graphing and statistical analysis were performed in sigmaplot 13 (Systat, San Jose, CA, USA). Results from the cell‐viability and cell‐proliferation assays were analyzed using one‐way ANOVA (α = 0.05). Post‐hoc tests were performed using the Holm–Šidák method (α = 0.05).
Nomenclature
Proteins are referred to with their entry name in the STRING database [corresponding to Human Genome Organisation (HUGO) gene names]. Gene symbols are italicized.
Data availability
The data sets generated and analyzed during the study are available in the PRoteomics IDEntifications (PRIDE) database 31. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009206.

RESULTS:
Results
Effect of TEGDMA on THP‐1 cell viability
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate showed a time‐ and dose‐dependent effect on THP‐1 cell viability, as determined by monitoring the cellular reduction potential (Fig. 2). Incubation with ≤0.6 mM TEGDMA for 10 h increased the cell‐reducing potential above the value obtained for untreated control cells, while incubation with ≥1.25 mM TEGDMA decreased this variable.
A marked reduction in the rate of cell proliferation was apparent in cultures treated with 1.25 or 2.5 mM TEGDMA (Fig. 3). For all treatment groups, the cells appeared intact after 24 h, but after 48 and 72 h, dead or dying cells were observed in cultures treated with 2.5 mM TEGDMA (phase contrast microscopy, data not shown). Transmission electron microscopy showed that THP‐1 cells exposed to 2.5 mM TEGDMA for 16 h had membrane protrusions with a more rounded shape than the membrane protrusions of untreated control cells and cells exposed to 0.3 mM TEGDMA (Fig. 4). After 72 h, all cells exposed to 2.5 mM TEGDMA were necrotic, whereas cells exposed to 0.3 mM TEGDMA looked intact and similar to those of the control group (Fig. 4).
Proteome response to TEGDMA exposure
The objective of the proteomic study was to explore early events in THP‐1 cells exposed to non‐cytotoxic and cytotoxic doses of TEGDMA. Based on the results of the cell viability and proliferation studies, we chose to perform SILAC‐based quantitative proteomic analyses of cells treated for 6 and 16 h with either 0.3 or 2.5 mM TEGDMA. The analyses demonstrated that 22 proteins were upregulated and 11 proteins were downregulated in cells exposed to 0.3 mM TEGDMA. In cells exposed to 2.5 mM TEGDMA, 15 proteins were upregulated and 37 proteins were downregulated. Tables 1 and 2 show an overview of dose‐ and time‐dependent changes in the expression of individual proteins. Of note, more than 50% of the regulated proteins were significantly up‐ or downregulated in at least three out of four biological replicates (the inclusion criteria being two out of four). The most common reason for not identifying a protein in a replicate as regulated, was that the protein was not identified (NaN – not quantified protein), which is an inherent method weakness. One of the replicates in the 2.5 mM/6 h group was excluded from the analysis because of a very large ratio distribution compared with the other samples.
To determine the biological significance of the regulated proteins, the results were analyzed using the STRING database. The biological relationships currently recognized between proteins are displayed in Figs 5 and 6. The GO enrichment analysis showed that six pathways were affected by 0.3 mM TEGDMA (Table 3). Among these, response to stress and oxidative stress were the pathways with the largest number of regulated proteins (16 and six proteins, respectively). Upregulation of proteins involved in oxidative stress resistance was most pronounced in cells exposed to 0.3 mM TEGDMA. In the 2.5 mM TEGDMA group, the GO enrichment analysis identified five and 13 pathways at 6 and 16 h, respectively (Table 3). At 6 h, these included regulation of protein ubiquitination, the mitotic cell cycle, and cell‐cycle checkpoints; all pathways unique for the 2.5 mM treatment group. At 16 h, pathways related to apoptotic signaling, regulation of response to stress, and cellular homeostasis, as well as cellular responses to DNA‐damage stimulus, were affected (Table 3) 27.
The protein‐protein interaction (PPI) enrichment P‐values for the data sets were 0.00195 (6 h) and 4.02e‐05 (16 h) for the 2.5 mM exposure groups, and 0.0412 (6 h) and 5.55e‐16 (16 h) for the 0.3 mM exposure groups. This indicates that the proteins in the data sets have more interactions among themselves than expected for a similarly sized random set of proteins. The PPI enrichment P‐values further suggest that the proteins in the data sets were at least partially biologically connected as a group.

INTRODUCTION:
Methacrylates are the most abundant organic component in polymer resin‐based dental materials (PRMs). Patients and dental personnel are exposed to these substances through inhalation of volatile and particle‐bound methacrylates 1, 2, 3, or by direct contact with uncured PRMs, for example, during pulp‐capping procedures or handling 4, 5. In addition, elution of unreacted methacrylates from PRMs may result in exposure of patients to such substances 6, 7.
Exposure to methacrylates can induce allergic reactions 5. The ability of these compounds to react with nucleophilic centers of proteins, lipids, and/or DNA may also cause cytotoxic and/or genotoxic effects 5, 8, 9. Even though adverse reactions caused by PRMs are seldom reported, it does not imply that such substances are innocuous 10. By charting the mechanisms that underlie methacrylate toxicity, one may better understand the hazards posed by these substances 11.
Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA) is a commonly used and much‐studied methacrylate in dentistry 12. It has been shown in vitro to induce dose‐dependent effects, such as apoptosis, cell cycle delay, and genotoxicity 12. While the toxic potency of methacrylates varies, some common modes of action have been reported, for example, induction of oxidative stress 12. The increased oxidative stress caused by TEGDMA and other methacrylates is partly attributed to depletion of scavengers of reactive oxygen species (ROS) – especially glutathione 13, 14, 15. However, increased levels of ROS may also be attributed to damage to, and subsequent dysfunction of, ROS‐producing organelles, such as the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria 16, 17, 18. Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate is shown to modulate transcripts associated with redox‐sensitive pathways, for example, nuclear factor (erythroid‐derived 2)‐like 2 (NRF2)‐regulated pathways 19. Still, other mechanisms may be important in TEGDMA toxicity as antioxidants are not able to nullify all the negative effects of TEGDMA and other methacrylates 20, 21, 22.
Analysis of changes in the cell proteome can give novel insight into the collective protein expression that orchestrates biological events. To our knowledge, this is the first study utilizing a proteomic approach to study the mechanisms of methacrylate toxicity. Stable isotope labeled amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) is a powerful, unbiased, and versatile metabolic‐labeling strategy that is used to study differential expression of proteins using mass spectrometry (MS)‐based quantitative proteomics 23. The high sensitivity of this technique makes it suitable for studies of the biological effects of TEGDMA at concentrations that previously have been described or regarded as non‐toxic 24.
In this study, we aimed to explore time‐ and dose‐dependent proteomic alterations caused by TEGDMA in human THP1 monocytes, a commonly used cell model in methacrylate toxicity studies. We initially established a non‐cytotoxic and a cytotoxic concentration of TEGDMA, then performed proteomic analyses of THP‐1 cells cultivated in SILAC medium, 6 and 16 h after exposure to these non‐cytotoxic and cytotoxic concentrations of TEGDMA. Our study increases, and reinforces, the current understanding of how TEGDMA interacts with cells. Interestingly, even low doses of TEGDMA induced a substantial cellular response.