PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood cell; Blood plasma
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap
modifications: acetylated residue; 2-pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic acid (Gln); iTRAQ4plex-114 reporter+balance reagent acylated N-terminal; iTRAQ4plex-114 reporter+balance reagent O4'-acylated tyrosine; L-cysteine methyl disulfide; iTRAQ4plex-114 reporter+balance reagent N6-acylated lysine; 2-pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic acid (Glu); monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Remote ischemic preconditioning; Plasma; Human

ABSTRACT:
Six healthy male adults underwent RIPC, consisting of 3x5 min cycles of upper arm ischemia (inflating a blood pressure cuff to >200 mmHg) alternating with 3x5 min reperfusion (bp cuff deflated). Blood samples were collected at baseline and at 1 and 4 min into each reperfusion period. Plasma was isolated and the six reperfusion samples were pooled to one RIPC sample. Both baseline and RIPC samples were depleted, concentrated, trypsin digested, iTRAQ labeled and analyzed by LC and Orbitrap-MS where each RIPC sample was compared to the same individual's baseline sample.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The human plasma proteome before and after remote ischemic preconditioning

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Not available

DATA PROCESSING:
Not available

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
This study was approved by the regional ethics committee for medical and health research in Western Norway (REK 2010/1642-1). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants and the study conformed to the principles in the declaration of Helsinki. Six healthy adult male donors aged 29±2 years old (mean ± SD), not on any medication, underwent the RIPC protocol which consisted of 3 cycles of 5 min upper arm ischemia alternating with 5 min reperfusion (Figure 1). All subjects rested upright on a bench for 15 min before ischemia was induced by inflating a blood pressure cuff to 200 mmHg. Venous blood samples were collected from the ipsilateral arm after 14 min of rest in the beginning, and at 1 and 4 min into each reperfusion period. Blood samples were collected in K2 EDTA-coated tubes (Vacutainer, BD). Samples were centrifuged at 1,500 rcf at 4°C for 15 min within 30 min after sampling. 1.5 ml plasma was transferred to Eppendorf tubes before a second centrifugation at 15,000 rcf at 4°C for 15 min to remove any cell contaminants or cell fragments. ∼90% of the clear supernatant was removed using a 1 ml pipette and stored at −80°C. The whole process from sampling to freezing of each individual sample took less than 75 min. Samples from 1 and 4 min of each of the reperfusion periods were pooled, resulting in 12 samples: a sample before (control) and after RIPC for each of the six individuals.
Chemicals
Trypsin was purchased from Promega. N-octyl-β-D-glycopyranoside (NOG), acetonitrile (ACN), formic acid (FA), ammonium formate and water were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Water and ACN were of HPLC quality.
Abundant protein depletion and concentration
20 µl of plasma from each sample was depleted using a human Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS Hu-14) 4.6 mm×50 mm LC column (Agilent Technologies) according to the protocol provided by the supplier, using a Dionex 3000-series LC system. The MARS column depletes the plasma of albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin, fibrinogen, alpha-2-macroglobulin, alpha-1-acid glycoprotein, IgM, apolipoprotein AI, apolipoprotein AII, complement C3 and transthyretin. The protein depleted plasma samples were concentrated using 3 kDa ultracentrifugation filters (Amicon Ultra-4, Millipore, Bedford, MA) pre-treated with 0.1% NOG.
Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling
The entire depleted protein sample was reduced, cysteine blocked, trypsin digested (1∶20, trypsin∶protein, w/w), iTRAQ labeled (114, 115, 116 and 117) and combined according to the protocol using the chemicals provided (AB Sciex). The iTRAQ 4-Plex kit allowed us to multiplex two conditions from two donors per kit, resulting in three parallel experiments as detailed in Table 1. Both conditions (before and after RIPC) followed the exact same downstream workflow for every individual.
Mix-mode fractionation
iTRAQ labeled peptides were fractionated into 60 fractions using a mixed-mode (MM) reversed phase anion exchange (RP-AX) Sielc Promix column as described by Philips et al.  (MP-10.250.0530, 1.0×250 mm, 5 µm, 300 Å, Sielc Technologies, Prospect Heights, Illinois) coupled to an Agilent 1260 series LC system (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA). The iTRAQ labeled peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate, 3% ACN (buffer A) and loaded on the column in 85% buffer A for 10 minutes at a flowrate of 50 µl/min. The peptides were eluted from the column increasing the contents of buffer B (2 mM ammonium formate, 80% ACN, pH 3.0), from 15% to 60% in 35 minutes and further to 100% buffer over 10 minutes. Buffer B was held constant for 5 minutes before the column was equilibrated for 10 minutes in 85% buffer A. The fractions from the first 10 minutes of the gradient were discarded.
LC-MS/MS analyses
Fifty fractions from the MM RP-AX separation from each sample were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate NCR-3000RS LC system. The fractions were dissolved in 1% FA and trapped on the pre-column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm×75 µm i.d, 3 µm C18 beads) in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flowrate of 5 µl/min for 5 minutes before separation by reverse phase chromatography (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap 100, 15 cm×75 µm i.d., 3 µm C18 beads) at a flow of 280 nL/min. The fractions were run on three nano LC gradients: The first fifteen fractions were run on a LC gradient consisting of a gradient starting at 5% buffer B (90%ACN, 0.1% FA) ramping to 12% buffer B over 55 minutes (5–60 min), the gradient was subsequently ramped to 30% buffer B in 30 minutes (60–90 min), increased to 90% B in 10 minutes (90–100 min), held for 5 minutes (100–105 min) followed by ramping to 5% buffer B for 3 minutes (105–108) and equilibration of the column in 12 minutes (108–120); fractions 16–35 were separated on the following LC gradient: 0–5.0 minutes 5% buffer B, 5.0–5.5 minutes 8% buffer B, 5.5–60 minutes 20% buffer, 60–90 minutes 35% buffer B; the last fractions (36–50) were separated using the following gradient: 0–5.0 minutes 5% buffer B, 5.0–5.5 minutes 8% buffer B, 5.5–90 minutes 40% buffer. The last part of the nano LC gradient is similar for all three gradients.
The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent-acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The instrument was controlled by Tune 2.6.0 and Xcalibur 2.1. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 2,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a target value of 1E6 in the linear ion trap with maximum allowed ion accumulation time of 500 ms). The 7 most intense eluting peptides above an ion threshold of 1,000 counts and charge states 2 or higher, were sequentially isolated in the high-pressure linear ion trap to a target value of 5E5 at a maximum allowed accumulation time of 1,000 ms, and isolation width maintained at 2 Da. Fragmentation in the Higher-Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) cell was performed with a normalized collision energy of 40%, and activation time of 0.1 ms. Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 with first mass fixed at m/z 100.
Data analysis
All RAW data were transformed into mgf peak lists using the ProteoWizard software package version 2.2.2954. The obtained peak lists were searched with OMSSA version 2.1.9 and X!Tandem Cyclone 2013.2.01.1 using SearchGUI version 1.12.2. Peak lists were searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human complement of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (downloaded on September 2012). The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. Search settings were as follows: Trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10 ppm as MS, 0.6 Da as MS/MS tolerances, respectively; fixed modifications: methylthio of Cys (+45.987721 Da) and iTRAQ on Lys and peptide N-term (+144.105918 Da); and variable modifications: oxidation of Met (+15.994915 Da) and iTRAQ on Tyr (+144.105918 Da). All other OMSSA or X!Tandem settings were kept at the default values set in SearchGUI. Peptides and proteins were inferred from the search engine results using PeptideShaker (http://peptide-shaker.googlecode.com). Peptide to Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a stringent 1% FDR estimated using the decoy hits. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium(http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD000605 and DOI 10.6019/PXD000605.
For every validated protein, the iTRAQ reporter ions were extracted from spectra of validated PSMs and deisotoped using the isotope abundance matrix. Intensities were normalized using the median intensity in order to limit the ratio deviation and peptide and protein ratios were estimated using maximum likelihood estimators. Ratios were log2 converted and normalized to the median to avoid inter-sample bias. Only those proteins presenting two or more validated and quantified peptides were retained for the quantitative analysis. Standard contaminants as well as all proteins with known affinity to the antibodies in the MARS column were excluded from downstream statistical analysis. A paired two-sided t-test was conducted on protein ratios using a p-value threshold of 0.01. Subsequently, in order to distinguish RIPC specific regulations from random biological variability, an asymmetric normal distribution was drawn from the background ratios (calibrated on the median and ±34.1 percentiles) and only those proteins having a probability <1% to be derived from the background were considered confidently regulated. Finally, protein abundance indexes were estimated using spectral counting where the spectral counting index is simply the number of validated PSMs divided by the protein molecular weight.

RESULTS:
Results
The plasma proteome from six healthy donors was compared at baseline and after RIPC as illustrated in Figure 1 and 2. In total, 727 proteins were confidently identified (<1% FDR). Among them, 409 proteins could be accurately quantified by two or more unique peptides. Of these, 393 remained after exclusion of known contaminant and depletion-affected proteins, and are listed in Table S1. These 393 accurately quantified plasma proteins showed accurate and reproducible stability: 388 (98.7%) presented a fold change between 0.91∶1 and 1.1∶1, which is in accordance with the known technical variability of iTRAQ quantification reported in the literature. In order to assess the relevance of the regulations, the quantified proteins were classified into four categories (as detailed in Table S1): (A) proteins with low variability among donors (t-test passed) and confident regulation to the background (no protein); (B) low donor variability but no confident regulation to the background (4 proteins); (C) high donor variability (t-test failed) but confident regulation to the background (42 proteins); and (D) high donor variability (t-test failed) and no confident regulation to the background (347 proteins). These proteins are plotted in Figure 3 and 4. Notably, no protein was validated by both statistical tests (category A).
Four proteins had a significant p-value (<0.01) between the baseline and RIPC samples for the six subjects examined (category B; Kallistatin, Complement C2, Lactoylglutathione lyase (GLO1), and Cysteine-rich secretory protein 3 (CRISP-3))(Table S1). The fold changes for these, however, were very low (<10% change). We considered changes below 20% to be within what can be explained by the technical variability of the analytical approach. This was corroborated by the statistical analysis, showing no confident regulation to the background. Interestingly, all highly regulated proteins were detected in a much lower abundance (see Figure 4) and failed the t-test (p-value>0.01), suggesting that these cannot be trusted for clinical application.
In contrast, high ratios were systematically found for contaminants and proteins affected by depletion. Remarkably, the remaining amount of proteins targeted by the MARS hu-14 depletion column was consistently less abundant in RIPC samples, hinting at a systematic artifact in the depletion procedure. Among them, fibronectin, previously reported to be regulated after RIPC has been identified in the bound fraction after MARS hu-14 depletion. Fibronectin was confidently regulated to the background (ratios of 0.62∶1) in close agreement with Apolipoprotein A-I (ratio of 0.61∶1) and Haptoglobin (ratio of 0.63∶1), both also targeted by the MARS column. In conclusion, we cannot rule out that the difference in relative abundance measured for these proteins are not simply protocol related. On the other hand, our ability to quantify these potential experimental artifacts demonstrates the reliability of the quantification procedure and rules out the hypothesis that regulations were systematically lost along the workflow.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Remote ischemic preconditioning (RIPC) is an emerging treatment for reducing ischemia reperfusion injury (IRI) in the heart. Several proof-of-concept studies and small randomized controlled trials have demonstrated that the human heart is amenable to RIPC. Recently, it was also reported that 3 cycles of 5 min upper arm ischemia substantially reduced myocardial injury after coronary artery bypass graft in large pools of patients. This was demonstrated by a significant decrease in cardiac troponin I (cTnI) release, significantly improving prognosis with a reduction in mortality in the group receiving RIPC compared to controls.
The signaling pathway of RIPC in the human heart is just starting to be uncovered, but how the RIPC stimulus is transferred from the arm to the heart remains unclear. Compelling preclinical evidence suggests communication via one or more unknown humoral factors: First, it seems that a period of reperfusion after the RIPC stimulus is required for protection, suggesting that wash-out of blood borne factors and transport to the site of protection is involved. Secondly, it was demonstrated that effluent from preconditioned hearts could transfer the protection to naïve recipient hearts and that the protection is mediated via small, unknown hydrophobic factors of protein nature between 3.5 and 15–30 kDa. Moreover, the fact that this humoral factor is effective at a remote location after dilution in blood or perfusion fluid, hints at a large concentration change which should be detectable by modern proteomic techniques.
In fact, several proteins were recently found to be regulated after RIPC, paving the way for potential use of these cardioprotective compounds in the clinic. Notably, Hepponstall et al. conducted an ambitious study where 806 differentially expressed peptides were identified after RIPC. Among them, 133 could be mapped to 48 protein sequences. In addition, 2D gel experiments reported 33 regulated spots with 6 identifiable proteins. Surprisingly, only one of the given protein accession numbers could be found in both the mass spectrometry and the 2D gel result sets. Subsequently, Pang et al. found 14 proteins to be differentially regulated by RIPC and validated these findings by Western blotting. Notably, only one of the accessions reported, Gelsolin (UniProt accession number P06396), could be mapped to those published by Hepponstall et al. Additionally, albeit with different sequences, both studies underlined the regulation of Apolipoprotein A-I. However, Pang et al. found this protein to be down-regulated, while Hepponstall et al. found it down-regulated using gels and up-regulated when applying a gel free technique in the same study. The latter result is in concordance with the study of Hibert et al. showing a 30% up-regulation of Apolipoprotein A-I, postulating it to be the principal factor behind RIPC mediated cardioprotection. Later on, however, Hilbert et al. published another report where this protein appeared not to be regulated, but seven other related proteins presented a Mann-Whitney test p-value <0.05. Notably, no protein passed a more stringent 0.01 threshold and all proteins showed moderate regulations (between 0.58∶1 and 1.2∶1), consistently below the two fold change regulation level generally used in biology. The results of Davidson et al. suggested SDF-1α to be the main mediator of RIPC, presumably communicating the cardioprotection via SDF-1α/CXCR4 signaling. Importantly, Przyklenk criticized the latter study for its limitations, as the plasma levels of SDF-1α should have been monitored both before and after the RIPC stimulus, thereby failing to validate the factor as a mediator of RIPC.
Discovery studies “often significantly overestimate their findings” as claimed by Gosho et al. . Consequently, prior to clinical testing, protein markers must be validated, preferably using targeted mass spectrometry based proteomics. For that, quantitative assays are built in order to target and quantify the compounds of interest. Setting up such an assay requires experimental data on the digestion, peptide elution, ionization, and fragmentation profile of the targeted protein. This information is, however, not available from any of the mentioned mass spectrometry datasets. Notably, they are not available in public repositories, despite this being standard publication guidelines in proteomics. In fact, the peptide information is not available and in the case of Hepponstall et al., not even the estimated protein ratios are reported.
The disagreement in the literature, even in studies from the same group or within the same study, together with the lack of provided information, show the striking need for a transparent proteomic dataset stringently monitoring the proteomic changes induced by RIPC. Here, we present a quantitative in depth sequencing of the plasma proteome before and after RIPC. Six healthy donors underwent RIPC according to the protocol used in consensus with the literature and whose efficiency has been long established. In contrast to previously reported studies, the digested plasma samples were multiplexed using isobaric tags and fractionated, thereby limiting inter-sample artifacts and dramatically increasing sample coverage. The protein identification and quantification was achieved using open source software applying stringent quality criteria to avoid reporting artifact regulations. The acquired raw data was deposited to the ProteomeXchange consortium together with identification results, and can thereby freely be accessed, inspected and even reprocessed to better plan further experiments.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting Information