PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Mass spectrometry; Ribosome; Saccharomyces cerevisiae

ABSTRACT:
Characterization of the riboproteome composition in quiescent cells and post-translational reactivation. To characterize ribosome heterogeneity during the exit from quiescence, the protein composition of ribosomal particles from stationary phase and nutrient-stimulated cells was assessed. A label-free quantitative mass spectrometry strategy was taken to compare quiescent yeast cells with cells that had been nutrient stimulated for 30 and 60 min. To this end, crude extracts from these cells were subjected to sucrose gradient centrifugation and three fractions free (F); monosome (M=80S + 60S + 40S) and polysome (P) were analyzed by nano-HPLC-MS/MS. A total of 528 proteins were identified.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Riboproteome remodelling during quiescence exit in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Fractions from the sucrose gradients were prepared for Mass Spectrometry Analysis. 27 samples (corresponding to three biological replicates of each of the 3 fractions of the 3 different treatments: SP F,SP M,SP P, SP + 30 min SDC F, SP + 30 min SDC M, SP + 30 min SDC P, SP + 60 min SDC F,SP + 60 min SDC M, SP + 60 min SDC) were analyzed. Protein samples were reduced with dithiotreitol (DTT) in 50mM of ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 10 mM (45 min, 56°C) and alkylated with iodoacetamide in the same solvent at a final concentration of 30mM (40 min, RT, in darkness). Proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega V5111). After that, the peptides were purified and desalted with ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). digests were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS in a Thermo Scientific QExactive Mass Spectrometer coupled to a nanoHPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). For the LC-MS/MS analysis, approximately 1 μg of peptides was loaded onto the column and eluted for 120 minutes using a reverse phase column (C18, 2 µm, 100A, 50 µm x 150 mm) Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (P/N ES801)) suitable for separating protein complexes with a high degree of resolution. The flow rate used for the nano column was 300 nL min-1 and the solvent range from 7% B (5 min) to 35% (120 min). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water whereas B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The injection volume was 2µL. The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyzer (Thermo Scientific, Q-Exactive). A voltage of 3,5 kV was used for Electro Spray Ionization (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SPRAY). XCalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific) software was used for data acquisition. Equipment configuration allows peptide identification at the same time of their chromatographic separation. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer. The scanned mass range was 400-1800 m/z, at a resolution of 70000 at 400 m/z and the 15 most intense ions in each cycle, were sequentially isolated, fragmented by HCD and measured in the Orbitrap analyzer. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2.

DATA PROCESSING:
Q Exactive raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.1.21 Thermo Scientific) and searched against Saccharomyces cerevisiae UP00002311 protein sequence database with trypsin specificity and a maximum of one missed cleavage per peptide. Proteome Discoverer searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Static modifications were set to carbamidomethylation of Cys, and dynamic modifications were set to oxidation of Met and N-terminal acetylation. Protein hits were filtered for high confidence peptide matches, with a maximum protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1% calculated by employing a reverse database strategy.