PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cerebrospinal fluid
diseases: Acute leukemia
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Mass spectrometry; Extracellular vesicles; Ultracentrifugation; Cerebrospinal fluid; Proteome; Data independent acquisition; Exploris 480; Biomarkers

ABSTRACT:
Proteome analysis of cerebrospinal fluid is associated with many of the same challenges that has to be faced when analyzing other biofluids like plasma or urine. Most importantly is the high dynamic range of protein concentrations, which makes it difficult to quantify more than a thousand proteins in a singleshot analysis of a tryptic digest of a raw sample. In addition, cerebrospinal fluid—especially  when collected from children—is a much more scarce and precious sample as compare to urine and plasma. The aim of this work therefore was to find the optimal way to process and analyze cerebrospinal fluid from a minimal amount of sample and still obtain the deepest possible cerebrospinal fluid proteome.  The work shows that enrichment of extracellular vesicles by ultracentrifugation increases the complexity of the cerebrospinal fluid proteome by two-fold or more. Thus, by following the enrichment protocol, more than two thousand proteins can routinely be quantified reproducibly by label-free quantification and data independent acquisition (DIA) in single-shot LC-MSMS runs of less than one hour. The project also present an optimized workflow for cerebrospinal fluid proteomics that enables a high-throughput method with a short chromatographic gradient (12 min) allowing analysis of  hundred samples per day and still obtaining deep proteome coverage, especially when including a study-specific spectral library generated by repeated injection and gas-phase fractionation of pooled samples.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Optimization of the workflow for deep CSF proteome analysis by enrichment of extracellular vesicles

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were enriched from 200 uL, 400 uL or 800 uL cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) supplemented with PBS (Gibco, cat #20012-019) until equal volumes of 800 uL. The samples were centrifuged (20,000g, 4 °C, 30 min) followed by removal of the supernatant leaving 20 uL together with the EV pellet. PBS was supplemented until 800 uL followed by a second centrifugation. The pellet and a small volume (20 uL) of remaining supernatant were then subject to tryptic protein digestion by different strategies.  For PAC digestion, the samples were reduced and alkylated 30 min at RT with 5 mM TCEP, 10 mM CAA in 1% SDS. Magnetic beads (MagReSyn hydroxyl beads, cat# MR-HYX2L, ReSyn Biosciences, Ltd, South Africa), were added at protein:bead ratios of 1:10 to the EV pellet and 1:2 to the unfractionated CSF and left to incubate for 20 min in 70% ACN at RT. The beads were then washed 2X with 100% ACN followed 2X with 70% ethanol before endoproteinase Lys-C  (Cat# 129-02541, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Richmond, VA) was added (1:250, enzyme to protein ratio [E:P]) for 1 h incubation on a thermoshaker at 37 °C in 50 mM HEPES buffer at pH 7.5. Trypsin (Cat# V5111, Promega) was added (1:100, E:P) for overnight incubation on a thermoshaker at 37 °C. The beads were then removed and the supernatant acidified with TFA (1 % final concentration) and frozen at -80 °C until analysis  For Urea-based digestion the samples were incubated 30 min at RT in 4 M Urea, 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA. Then endoproteinase Lys-C (1:250, E:P) was added and the samples were incubated 1 h on a thermoshaker at RT. The samples were then diluted 4X with Milli-Q water before addition of trypsin (1:100, E:P) and overnight digestion on a thermoshaker at RT. The samples were acidified with TFA (1 % final concentration) and frozen at -80 °C until analysis.  For Direct digestion, all samples were reduced and alkylated in 5 mM TCEP,  10 mM CAA, 16 mM HEPES pH 7.5 for 30 min at RT. Then endoproteinase Lys-C was added (1:250, E:P) for 1 h incubation on a thermoshaker at 37 °C before addition of trypsin (1:100, E:P) and digestion overnight at 37 °C on a thermoshaker. The samples were acidified with TFA (1% final concentration) and frozen at -80 °C until analysis.  750 ng peptides (NanoDrop, A280) were loaded on Evotips and eluted over 12, 22 or 44 min gradients (Solvent A: 5% ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid, solvent B  99.9% ACN, 0.1% Formic Acid) using an EvoSep One system connected to a 8 cm x 150 µm analytical column packed with 1.5 μm ReproSil Saphir C18 beads (cat# EV-1109, EvoSep Biosystems). Eluting peptides were sprayed into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer applying 2 kV spray voltage, RF funnel at 40%, and ion transfer tube temperature set to 275 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode using either data-dependent-acquisition (DDA) or data-independent-acquisition (DIA) modes.   In DDA mode, full-scan precursor spectra (350-1400 Da) were recorded in profile mode using a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a normalized AGC target of 300% and a maximum injection time (IT) of 25 ms. Fragment spectra were recorded in profile mode with a precursor intensity threshold of 2e5 and a resolution of 15,000. In each scan cycle the 12 most intense precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell using 30% normalized collision energy (NCE), a normalized AGC target of 200% and a max IT of 22 ms. Dynamic exclusion (30s) was applied to avoid repeated fragmentation of the same peptides.  In DIA mode, full scan precursor spectra (350-1400 Da) were recorded in profile mode using a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a normalized AGC target of 300% and a max IT of 45 ms. Fragment spectra were then recorded in profile mode fragmenting 49 consecutive 14.7 Da windows (1 m/z overlap) covering the mass range 361-1033 Da and using a resolution of 30,000. Isolated precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell using 27% NCE, a normalized AGC target of 1000% and a max IT of 54 ms.   A project specific spectral library were generated by injecting the same sample (pool from individual samples) multiple times and applying gas phase fractionation in combination with DIA acquisition in a series of staggered narrow windows to fractionate precursors in a near DDA like mode. In brief, the sample were injected 7 times covering the precursor intervals 350-450 Da, 449-549 Da, 548-648 Da, 647-747 Da, 746-846 Da, 845-945 Da and 944-1044 Da recorded in profile mode using a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a normalized AGC target of 300% and a max IT of 45 ms. Fragment spectra were then recorded in profile mode fragmenting 50 consecutive 2 Da windows (0.5 m/z overlap) each covering a mass range of 100 Da and using a resolution of 15,000. Isolated precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell using 27% NCE, a normalized AGC target of 1000% and a max IT of 22 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
Collected RAW-files were analyzed using Spectronaut v17.1 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) for DIA data and MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0 for DDA data using standard settings searching against a FASTA file containing the human proteome (SwissProt, 20,431 sequences, signal peptides removed) and supplemented with the sequences of the two proteolytic enzymes used for digestion. For library-free DIA analyses, directDIA was used with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of Methionine as variable modifications. A Q-value of 1 % against mutated decoys was applied to filter identifications. Only files representing workflow replicates of the same samples were searched together in Spectronaut in order to minimize inflation of the number of quantified proteins by match-between-run between differently processed samples. Sum of peptides (area, MS2 level) was applied for quantification.   Spectral libraries used for Spectronaut searches with spectral libraries were generated using DIANN v 1.8 searching against the same two FASTA files as mentioned above using DIANN’s default settings, except for ticking-on “Generate spectral library”, Enabling “Ox(M)”, Setting precursor charges to “2-5 Da”, Neural network classifier to “Double pass mode” and Library generation to “Smart profiling”.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Cerebrospinal Fluid Samples
Since 2012, CSF has been collected from pediatric patients with malignancies involving or potentially involving CNS. Our biobank contains CSF samples from pediatric patients treated for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and solid brain tumors, including all pathological subtypes, at the Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet.
In this study, cases that encompassed the ALL subgroup included patients with precursor B-ALL, exclusively. Samples were collected at diagnosis (Day 0) from 22 patients of which 11 were without detectable leukemic cells in the CSF by flow cytometry (FCM-negative) and 11 were with detectable leukemic cells by flow cytometry (FCM-positive) and Day 15 during induction therapy from 8 patients (four FCM-negative and four FCM-positive). Flow cytometry positive was defined as ≥10 leukemic blasts detected. The brain tumor subgroup included patients with a variety of different pathologies (Table 1 for detailed overview). The perioperative sampling was achieved immediately after opening of the dura and prior to excision of the tumor and as part of the surgical procedure. Care was taken not to pollute the sample with blood although not completely avoidable. All samples were received in our laboratory within 30 min from collection and underwent a standardized protocol, primarily to remove cell pellet by centrifugation at 652g for 5 min, thereby obtaining a cell-free supernatant for further analysis (which correspond to the Raw fraction, as elaborated later). All samples were stored at −80 °C.
Cases, or their legal guardian, provided written consent, with approvals obtained from the Capital Regional Committee on Biomedical Research Ethics (IRB) (H-1–2012–077 and H-20000845) and the Danish Data Protection Agency (j. nr. 30.8094). The nontumor control group included children, adolescents, and young adults initially suspected of neuro-infectious diseases. Following a microbiological examination of the CSF at the Department of Clinical Microbiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, these individuals were cleared of having a CNS infection (IRB approval: H-20000845\84459). Finally, other healthy individuals voluntarily enrolled as nontumor controls (IRB approval: H-18007272).
Pooled CSF
The limited sample availability from individual patients necessitated the pooling of CSF to achieve a homogeneous sample pool suitable for the optimization experiments. First, we created CSF pools for each subgroup, i.e., a pool of nontumor controls, patients with ALL or patients with a brain tumor, respectively. These subgroup-specific pools were stored as aliquots of 0.1, 0.2, or 1 mL in polypropylene Eppendorf tubes. For each of the optimization experiments below, the required amount of CSF was thawed on slushed ice water and subsequently pooled together in a 1:1:1 ratio before use in the individual experiments.
Optimizing Sample Input for EV Enrichment by Ultracentrifugation
EVs were isolated from CSF pools of increasing volume (200, 400, and 800 μL). Each sample was supplemented with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, cat #20012–019, Gibco) to a final volume of 800 μL. The CSF samples were subsequently centrifuged at 20,000g at 4 °C for 30 min and 780 μL supernatant was removed leaving a small pellet with 20 μL supernatant. The 20K pellet was washed by resuspending in PBS (final volume of 800 μL) and then subjected to recentrifugation at the same conditions. The supernatant was discarded, thereby yielding a 20 μL pellet washed and enriched with 20K EVs. The supernatant, which was removed after the first centrifugation, was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 120,000g at 4 °C for 90 min. This step also resulted in a pellet with the remaining 20 μL of the supernatant, this time concentrated with 120K EVs. The supernatant, that was removed after the 120,000g centrifugation was included as the EV-depleted (EV-depl.) fraction. Finally, the 20 μL pellet containing 120K EVs was washed following resuspension in PBS, and recentrifuged under identical 120,000g conditions. In total, four fractions from CSF were collected and included Raw CSF, 20K EVs, 120K EVs and the EV-depl. fractions. The Raw fraction refers to the cell-free CSF fraction obtained by initial laboratory centrifugation.
For the comparative analysis of different sample input volumes and EV fractions obtained through sequential ultracentrifugation, we used the urea-based in-solution digestion as described below.
Optimizing Protein Digestion
In this experiment, we used a fixed sample volume of 400 μL and subjected it to the fractionation steps described above. The four 20 μL fractions were subsequently proteolytically digested evaluating three different protocols in parallel (urea-based in-solution digestion, protein aggregation capture (PAC)-based on-bead digestion, and direct digestion).
For urea-based in-solution digest, each sample underwent reduction and alkylation for 30 min at room temperature in a solution with final concentrations comprising 4 M urea, 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), and 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA). Following this, endoproteinase Lys-C (Cat# 129–02541, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Richmond, VA) was added at a 1:250 enzyme-to-protein ratio and the mixture was incubated for an hour at 22 °C on a thermoshaker. Subsequently, the samples were diluted 4-fold with Milli-Q water to 1 M urea and trypsin (Cat# V5111, Promega) was added at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio before the samples were left for an overnight digestion at 22 °C on a thermoshaker. The digestion process was terminated by acidification with 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a 1% final concentration. The sample digest was stored at −80 °C until further analysis.
For PAC-based on-bead digestion, samples were supplemented with 1:3 volume 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5 supplemented with TCEP and CAA resulting in a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP, 10 mM CAA, and 1% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Then MagReSyn hydroxyl beads (cat# MR-HYX2L, ReSyn Biosciences, Ltd., South Africa) were supplied in a protein-to-bead ratio of 1:10 for the 20K EV fraction (due to a low protein amount) and 1:2 for the Raw, 120K EV and EV-depl. fractions. Acetonitrile was then added to a final concentration of 70% v/v before incubation for 20 min at room temperature. Then, the beads underwent a washing process: first, with 100% ACN and then with 70% ethanol. The washing process was repeated twice for each solvent to ensure complete SDS removal. Afterward, Lys-C was added in a 1:250 enzyme-to-protein mass ratio and incubated for 1 h at 37 °C on a thermoshaker in a 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazine-1-ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer at pH 7.5. This step was followed by an overnight incubation with trypsin supplemented at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein mass ratio, also at 37 °C on a thermoshaker. Postincubation, the beads were separated on a magnetic rack, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and acidified using 10% v/v TFA to a final concentration of 1%. The final sample digest was stored at −80 °C until further analysis.
In the direct digestion method, each sample was supplemented with 1:3 volume 50 mM Hepes pH 7.5 supplemented with TCEP and CAA (5 mM TCEP, 10 mM CAA final concentration) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Following this, Lys-C was added to the samples at a ratio of 1:250 (enzyme to protein mass) and were incubated on a thermoshaker at 37 °C for 1 h. Trypsin was subsequently supplemented at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio, and the samples underwent overnight incubation at 37 °C on the thermoshaker. All samples were acidified with 10% v/v TFA to a final concentration of 1% TFA terminate the digestion. The sample digest was stored at −80 °C until further analysis.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
All samples were prepared in workflow triplicates. Samples were loaded on EvoTips (Cat# EV2001; EvoSep Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) for desalting and preparation for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. A subset of experiments utilized volume-based loading, and 20, 40, and 80 μL digest were loaded on EvoTips. In the remaining experiments peptide amount -based loading was applied and here each EvoTip was loaded with 750 ng peptide. All samples, regardless of loading strategy, were subjected to A280 measurements using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). In mass-based loading, guided by the A280 measurements, the samples were diluted with 0.1% formic acid to obtain equal volumes with the intended loading of 750 ng peptide. For the peptide elution, an EvoSep One LC system (EvoSep Biosystems) was applied with the following specifications: 8 cm × 150 μm analytical performance column packed with 1.5 μm ReproSil Saphir C18 beads (cat# EV-1109, EvoSep Biosystems). Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) was loaded into the column and peptides were eluted by gradually increasing the concentration of solvent B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) over gradient length corresponding to 12, 21, or 45 min (30, 60, or 100 samples-per-day [SPD]). The peptides were electrospray-ionized into an Orbitrap Exploris-480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at a 2 kV spray voltage, with the funnel RF level set at 40 and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode, where mass spectrometry data was obtained through data-independent acquisition (DIA). In a subexperiment, we compared the results obtained from DIA to those from data dependent acquisition (DDA). In DDA mode, full-scan precursor spectra from 350 to 1400 Da were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 at mz 200, with a normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target of 300% and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. The fragment spectra, captured at a resolution of 15,000, were based on a precursor intensity threshold of 2× 105. The top 12 most intense precursors in each cycle were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in the Ion-Routing Multipole (IRM) using 30% normalized collision energy, a normalized AGC target of 200%, and a maximum injection time of 22 ms with a dynamic exclusion of 30 s to prevent repeated fragmentation. In DIA mode, the full-scan precursor spectra were recorded at a higher resolution of 120,000 at mz 200, maintaining the same AGC target and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Fragment spectra covered 56 sequential 13 Da windows (with 1 mz overlap) across a range of 361–1033 Da, at a resolution of 30,000. Precursors were fragmented in the HCD cell using 27% normalized collision energy, a higher normalized AGC target of 1000%, and a maximum injection time of 54 ms.
Additionally, to construct a project-specific spectral library, leftover samples from each subexperiment were repeatedly injected, utilizing gas-phase fractionation combined with DIA in a series of staggered, narrow windows (thus, resembling a DDA-like mode). The sample was injected seven times, covering precursor mz ranges of 350–450, 449–549 Da, and so on, up to 944–1044 Da. These were recorded in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 at mz 200, with a normalized AGC target of 300% and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. Fragment spectra were then captured, fragmenting 50 consecutive 2 Da windows (each spanning 100 Da) at a resolution of 15,000. Precursors underwent fragmentation in the HCD cell with 27% normalized collision energy, a normalized AGC target of 1000%, and a maximum injection time of 22 ms.
Nanoparticle Tracking
We determined the concentration and size distributions of EVs in the Raw, 20K EV and 120K EV fractions using nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). This analysis was performed using a ZetaView PMX-220 nanoparticle analyzer (Particle Metrix GmbH; Inning am Ammersee, Germany) equipped with a 520 nm laser enabling detection of Brownian motion of EVs. Instrument calibration was performed using 100 nm polystyrene beads prior to the analysis of the samples. We then evaluated pooled CSF samples from children diagnosed with ALL, from children with brain tumors, and from nontumor control subjects. The analysis was carried out at 22 °C by scanning 11 different positions twice. For the EV concentration and size distribution analysis, we included data from the positions specified as reliable by the software version (8.05.14 SP7), exclusively.
Cryo-Transmission Electron Microscopy
We used Cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryoTEM) to visualize EVs isolated from both 20K and 120K EV fractions. We assessed the EVs separately for each of the three groups: (1) ALL patients, (2) brain tumor patients, and (3) nontumor controls. Using sequential ultracentrifugation, as described, EVs were isolated from 2.5 mL of CSF for each pool from these groups.
The initial preparation step encompassed treating lacey Formvar-coated copper grids (300 mesh Cu, Ted Pella Inc., p/n 01887-F) with a glow discharge at 10 mA for 30 s using a Leica EM ACE 200 (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). For sample application, 3 μL of the sample was placed on the carbon-coated side of the grid, which was set up in a Vitrobot Mark IV (FEI Instruments, Oregon). The grid, maintained at 4 °C and 100% humidity, was blotted for 2.5 s (blot force 0) to eliminate excess sample. It was then rapidly frozen in liquid ethane cooled by liquid nitrogen, a process that swiftly forms amorphous ice, thus preserving the EVs in their morphological state. Following this, the grid was moved to a Tecnai G2 electron microscope (FEI Instruments, Oregon) fitted with a Megaview II camera (Olympus Soft Imaging Systems, Münster, Germany). The microscope operated at an acceleration voltage of 200 kV, capturing images at a magnification of 25,000× and a defocus range between −3 to −6 μm.
Western Blotting
Samples containing ∼12 μg of protein from the Raw, 20K EVs and 120K EVs fractions were mixed with lithium dodecyl sulfate (LDS) 4× sample buffer (Invitrogen, cat# NP0007), supplemented with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 80 °C for 10 min before loading onto NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris 10-well SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen, cat# NP0321BOX) for electrophoretic separation. Postseparation, the proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Whatman Protran, Sigma–Aldrich). To assess the efficiency of blotting and for slicing the membranes into segments representing various molecular weight ranges, Ponceau S staining was applied. After rinsing off the Ponceau S stain, the membranes were blocked in a 5% BSA solution in PBS-T buffer (PBS with 0.1% Tween-20, pH 7.4). This was followed by an overnight incubation with primary antibodies, each diluted to 1:1000. The applied antibodies were from Cell Signaling Systems (CD54/ICAM-1 [E3Q9N] Rabbit mAb #67836; Flotillin-1 [D2 V7J] Rabbit mAb #18634; CD9 [D8O1A] Rabbit mAb #13174) and Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. (ACTB [C4] Mouse mAb sc-47778). Subsequently, the membranes were washed three times with PBS-T before incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h (goat antirabbit IgG, Jackson Immunoresearch; #111–036–045, and goat antimouse IgG, Jackson Immunoresearch; #115–036–062), each diluted 1:5000 in PBS-T with 5% w/v skim milk. The final steps involved a 2 min treatment with Novex ECL chemiluminescent substrate and capturing the results by exposing high-performance chemiluminescence films (Amersham Hyperfilm). These films were then developed using a Kodak Medical X-ray processor (Carestream Health) and scanned with a CanoScan 8800 scanner (Canon).
Data Analysis
The raw files encompassing mass spectrometry data recorded by DIA, were processed using Spectronaut v. 17.1 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). We processed DDA raw files by using MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0. For DDA and DIA analyses without a spectral library, both strategies utilized standard settings and was searched against a FASTA file containing the human proteome (SwissProt, with 20,431 sequences with signal peptides removed, downloaded 17th October, 2018). Additionally, the FASTA file included sequences of Lys-C and trypsin used in the digestion. Here, for the DIA FASTA-file search, the directDIA method was employed with carbamidomethyl included as a fixed modification while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation was included as variable modifications. A Q-value cutoff of 1% against mutated decoys was applied as false-discovery rate. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was based on the area under the curve for each targeted ion without automatized data normalization to better highlight sample variability.
Spectral libraries used for the Spectronaut searches were created using DIANN v1.8 by searching the same two FASTA files with default settings, except for enabling “Generate spectral library,” activating “Ox(M),” setting Precursor charges to “2–5 Da,” selecting Neural network classifier “Double pass mode,” and “Smart profiling” for library generation. The spectral library encompassed samples from most subexperiments, meaning that all fractions were represented in combinations with a variety of different input sample volumes; digest methods described, and peptide loadings.
The experiment comparing different input sample volumes was repeated with ∼3 months in-between to assess reproducibility of the sequential ultracentrifugation. The MS2 intensities from each experiment were Z-transformed separately before being combined for unsupervised clustering. This approach allowed us to evaluate the clustering patterns across different experiments independently.
Further, proteins were rank ordered and plotted against their log2(MS2-intensities) to visualize the dynamic range of the quantified proteins. Venn diagrams, created using unique SwissProt IDs, were used to display proteins detected in more than one fraction. Additionally, we calculated the overall hydrophobicity of samples using a cumulative GRAVY score based on all unique peptides quantified. Finally, prediction of the subcellular location of proteins were obtained using the DeepLoc algorithm.
Application to Individual Patient Samples
To evaluate the optimized workflow, we included eight age-matched samples from eight ALL patients (four patients FCM-positive CNS leukemia and four patients with FCM-negative CNS leukemia). Here, we compared the urea-based in-solution digestion with the PAC-based on-bead digestion using DIA MS analysis of the samples in combination with the developed gas-phase spectral library. An input sample volume of 500 μL CSF was used (standard volume of biobanked aliquots). The Raw, 20K EV and 120K EV fractions were generated by the sequential ultracentrifugation described above. Finally, t-test-based Volcano plots were computed to tentatively compare protein abundances for FCM-positive vs FCM-negative patients.
We used the Perseus v.1.6.15.0 software and R v. 4.3.2 for the proteome analyses described.
Data Availability
All raw-files with mass spectrometry data recorded were uploaded to MS data repository and is accessible with the identifier PXD052666

RESULTS:
Results
Cases and Nontumor Controls: CSF Pool
Table 1 provides a detailed overview of the samples used to obtain the CSF pools and can be summarized as follows. CSF was obtained from 30 patients in both the ALL cohort and the nontumor control group. The age of ALL patients ranged from 0.1 to 17.1 years, with a median age of 5.3 years and an interquartile range of 3.4 to 8.2 years. The age of the nontumor control individuals varied more widely, from 0.0 to 35.2 years, with a median age of 15.3 years and an interquartile range of 3.0 to 26.0 years. The brain tumor group consisted of 18 patients, with a median age of 8.5 years at the time of CSF sampling. The age range was 0.4–17.7 years, and the interquartile range was 4.6–15.4 years. This subgroup included various tumor types: four cases of anaplastic ependymoma, four pilocytic astrocytomas, three medulloblastomas, two craniopharyngiomas, two diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas, two gliomas, and one atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT).
Sequential Ultracentrifugation
To enrich different EV fractions from the CSF, sequential ultracentrifugation was employed as described. The fractionation process is outlined in Figure 1A. To assess the reproducibility of the fractionation process, we repeated the entire procedure twice, with approximately three months between each run. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis of Z-scored MS2 protein intensities and heatmap visualization showed distinct clustering patterns. The 20K and 120K EV fractions formed distinct clusters that remained consistent across experimental batches, demonstrating both the robustness and reproducibility of the EV fractionation. In contrast, the clustering of the Raw and EV-depleted fractions was primarily influenced by the volume used for EvoTip loading (40 vs 80 μL). However, the subclusters within these main clusters correlated with the individual fractions (Figure 2A).
The 20K EV fraction appeared most essential for increasing the number of quantifiable proteins by reducing the dynamic range of the sample. A higher sample volume of CSF resulted in a higher quantification of unique proteins in the 20K EV fraction (+33% when increasing from 400 to 800 μL), making the 120K EV-fractionation less necessary with increasing starting volume. This was attributed to a higher 20K EV yield as a consequence of a higher input sample volume, leading to a more complex proteome (Figure 2B).
Mapping the in silico predicted subcellular location to all identified proteins highlighted those proteins differed in their location depending on the fraction analyzed (Figure 2C). In the Raw fraction, proteins from the “Extracellular domain” constituted 92% of the total MS2 intensity, while those from the “Cytoplasm” made up only 6%. In contrast, cytoplasmic proteins accounted for 27.4% of the MS2 intensity in the 20K EV fraction while the “Extracellular domain” constituted 65.4% of the total MS2 intensity. Similar, but less pronounced, trends were observed for the 120K EV fraction while the EV-depl. fraction resembled the Raw fraction.
Table 2 provides an overview of the expected time required to obtain each individual fraction.
Enrichment of EVs
Cryo-TEM, Western blot and mass spectrometry analyses all provided evidence for the enrichment of EVs in the 20K and the 120K fractions. CryoEM showed distinct morphological characteristics of EVs in the 20K EV and 120K EV fractions (Figure 2D). Western blot analysis (Figure 2E), probed for common EV markers like ANXA5, CD9, and FLOT-1, showed enrichment in the 20K and 120K fractions, particularly in contrast to the Raw or EV-depleted fractions. Finally, MS data further supported the enrichment of EV-associated proteins in both the 20K EV and 120K EV fractions over the Raw fraction (Figure 2F).
Nanoparticle tracking analysis suggested a size distribution difference between the two EV fractions, indicating that the 120K EVs are smaller than the 20K EVs (Figure 2G). This is expected, as lower centrifugal force primarily affects larger vesicles, while higher centrifugal force affects smaller vesicles. It was further suggested that variation in 120K EV morphology could be correlated to disease origin; specifically, brain tumor patients had considerably smaller EVs in the 120K EV fraction compared to ALL and nontumor controls (Figure 2G).
Biomarker Coverage
We recently published and summarized current potential CSF biomarkers based on published literature applying mass spectrometry-based proteomics for biomarker search in pediatric neuro-oncology. We applied this aggregated knowledge to highlight potential protein biomarkers on dynamic range plots including all proteins quantified in the current study for both the RAW fraction and the 20K fraction showing the increased accessibility to quantify potential biomarkers with our approach (Figure 2H). Supporting Table 1 presents a ranking of each fraction based on the MS2 intensity levels of the included biomarkers, indicating which fraction shows the highest intensity.
CSF Sample Volume
As indicated in Figure 2B, the 20K EV fraction substantially enhances the proteome depth by almost doubling the number of proteins covered. Fractionation beyond this step became less advantageous with increased sample volumes of CSF. Figure 3A presents the estimates from an adjusted linear regression model, where the outcome variable is the total number of proteins in each fraction. The model adjusts to loaded peptide mass (A280), CSF sample volume, and spectral library utilization. The results indicated that using 800 μL of CSF as sampling volume increased the identification of more unique proteins in all fractions than using 200 μL. In contrast, no statistically significant benefits in quantification of unique proteins were observed for the Raw, 120K EV, or EV-depl. fractions when increasing CSF sample volume from 400 to 800 μL. The 20K EV fraction, however, demonstrated further enhanced (and statistically significant) protein quantification with a higher sample volume (i.e., 800 vs 400 μL; P-value <0.001, Figure 3A).
The coefficient of variation indicated that protein quantification was consistent when using sample volumes of 400–800 μL. However, lowering the sample volume to 200 μL led to decreased reproducibility of protein quantification (Figure 3B).
Including a spectral library based on gas-phase fractionation for each fraction was highly beneficial and increased the number of quantifiable proteins in all fractions (Figure 3C), independent of the CSF sample volume. Generally, the benefits of the gas-phase spectral library were reduced at lower sample volumes. Using peptide amount-based loading, no benefit in quantification of proteins was observed when increasing the loaded peptide amount above 1000 ng (in accordance with product specification for the EvoTips) (Figure 3D). Regardless of CSF sample volume used in the 120K EV fraction, the quantification of unique proteins was similar when the peptide amount-based load ranged from 750 to 1000 ng (Figure 3D). As suggested, a higher CSF sample volume correlated with higher quantification in the 20K EV fraction (and Raw, but this observation was attributed to correspondingly higher quantity of EVs in Raw) (Figure 3D). Increasing the peptide load toward the level of the Evotip capacity correlated with lower overall GRAVY scores, suggesting displacement of hydrophilic peptides by more hydrophobic peptides as these peptides bind stronger to the C18 material in the EvoTips (Figure 3E).
Protein Digestion Methods
To identify the best protein extraction and digestion method for the CSF fractions, we used a fixed CSF sample volume of 400 μL CSF to compare three different digestion methodologies. From the resulting digests, we loaded 750 ng of peptide mixtures onto EvoTips and analyzed using DIA and a 22 min (60 SPD) gradient.
Utilizing the spectral library, the highest quantification of unique proteins across all fractions was achieved with the PAC-based digest (n = 2989) followed by Urea (n = 2558) and the Direct digest (n = 2133) (Figure 4A). There were 631, 207, and 142 unique proteins exclusively quantified in the PAC, Urea and Direct digest, respectively. Except for the 120K EVs fraction, the PAC digest consistently outperformed the two other methods across all fractions, especially when using the spectral library (Figure 4B). The 20K EV fraction considerably increased the dynamic range covered compared to the Raw fraction. Fractionating beyond the 20K EVs fraction, however, offered no substantial increase in the detection of unique proteins with any digestion method applied (Figure 4C). When comparing the protein quantification associated with the EV fractions of PAC and Urea digests, the PAC-20K EVs was superior and quantified 530 unique proteins while 145 were uniquely quantified using the Urea counterpart (Figure 4D). The significance of the 120K EVs fraction was minimal in the PAC digest, with only 2.7% of unique proteins identified in this fraction (Figure 4D,E). In contrast, 7.9% of the unique proteins in the Urea digest were identified in the 120K EV fraction.
The PAC digest resulted in fewer missed cleavages, and applying a spectral library further decreased the percentage of missed cleavages in all fractions (Figure 4F). The Urea-20K EVs fraction showed the highest rate of missed cleavages, leading to increased sample complexity due to combinations of possible partially overlapping peptides. Consequently, while the absolute peptide quantification in the Urea-20K EV fraction was high and similar to that of PAC-20K EV, it did not result in a correspondingly higher number of quantified unique proteins (Figure 4G). In general, the PAC digest resulted in more hydrophilic peptides whereas the Urea digest was associated with quantification of more hydrophobic peptides (Figure 4H).
MS Acquisition Modes
We compared DIA vs DDA using LC-MS/MS gradient lengths of 100SPD, 60SPD and 30SPD. Corresponding to each individual gradient length, we loaded 100, 250, and 500 ng of the same sample, respectively. DIA consistently outperformed DDA, and application of the gas-phase spectral library increased the identification of unique proteins and peptides considerably (Figure 5A,B). When using the spectral library, the quantification of unique proteins increased by a median of 76% (range: 38–105%), while the median increase of unique peptide quantification was 67% (range: 29–84%) across all fractions.
Comparison to Previous Studies
The total proteins identified in our study using PAC-based (n = 2989) and urea-based (n = 2558) digestion methods are comparable to that of previous research, although these have quantified more than 3000 proteins in CSF (Figure 5C). Unlike previous studies requiring extensive fractionation and MS time, our data was derived primarily from two fractions, Raw and 20K EVs, using a 60SPD (∼21 min gradient). Adjusting for efficiency, i.e., comparing , our data demonstrates an efficiency up to 60-fold greater than previous studies (Figure 5D). This study identified proteins wherein approximately 50% overlapped with those found in research on healthy adult CSF, with 12.7% being unique to our study (Figure 5E). In comparison, about 75% of the proteins identified here overlapped with those from another study also enriching for EVs, leaving roughly 25% as unique to this investigation (Figure 5F).
Application to Individual Samples
Finally, we compared the PAC vs Urea digestion protocols and applied them to eight individual ALL patient samples (n = 4 that were FCM-positive, and n = 4 that were FCM-negative patients). Four patients were included in both the PAC and Urea protocols. Limitations on available samples necessitated allocation of four unique patients to each separate protocol. The median age was 2.7 (range: 2.4–3.4) and 2.9 (range: 2.0–5.9) in the PAC vs Urea protocol, respectively.
Distinct clusters corresponding to the Raw, 20K EVs, and 120K EVs fractions were identified using both digestion methods, thus providing further evidence for the reproducibility of the EV fractionation (Figure 6A). When comparing the PAC protocol to the Urea protocol using the spectral library, 2004 and 2213 unique proteins were quantified, respectively (Figure 5B). However, the number of unique proteins quantified in the PAC-20K EV fraction was consistently lower than expected. This outcome was reproduced in three separate experiments, each time using different individual samples (due to sample limitation). In our optimization experiments, we used pooled CSF containing a wide range of patients linked to different medical conditions (ALL, brain tumors, and nontumor cases) and age groups (0 to 35 years). Therefore, this mixture demonstrated considerable diversity, unlike individual samples that naturally exhibited higher uniformity. In addition, the protein concentration in the 20K EV fraction is low, at just 4% of the Raw fraction based on a BCA assessment. This low concentration, combined with more uniform samples, may pose challenges for effective capture. Regardless, we increased the protein-to-bead ratio to 1:10 to mitigate issues related to a reduced bead volume (rather than the 1:2 protein-to-bead ratio used for the remaining fractions). Still, the critical step of rinsing the beads with 70% ethanol (EtOH) and 100% ACN (twice, to remove SDS), may inadvertently lead to the loss of some beads. Although this loss might be volumetrically small, it could significantly impact proteome depth in individual patient samples with a low protein concentration.
The Urea digest performed well and consistently by quantifying 2213 unique proteins. The 120K EVs fraction increased protein quantification by 12% (Figure 6B). Finally, volcano plots were generated by stratifying for the digest method and individual CSF fractions (Figure 6C). In addition to the lower protein identification observed with the PAC protocol, the results also suggested a skewed distribution toward FCM-negative patients in the 20K EV proteome.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) provides structural and functional support essential to the central nervous system (CNS). Functions attributed to this compartment include the clearance of excreted waste products and providing a cytotoxic environment for invading microorganisms, which is facilitated by anaerobic conditions with limited nutrients and growth factors. The state of the CNS is often reflected in the CSF, and examination of CSF is integrated into the diagnostic workflow of several diseases, including infectious CNS disease, neurodegenerative diseases, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), and CNS cancer. Cytological evaluation using microscopy remains the primary approach for the identification of cancer cells in CSF, in contrast to other diseases with established noncellular biomarkers, such as xanthochromia caused by hemoglobin catabolism in SAH or β-amyloid in Alzheimer’s disease.
The lack of accurate biomarker-based risk categorization in pediatric CNS cancer patients implies that treatment with CNS-directed chemotherapy is administered to children, adolescents, and young adults, even when there is no detection of circulating or invasive tumor cells.− CNS-directed chemotherapy is associated with substantial short- and long-term adverse neurotoxic effects, and this treatment may be unwarranted in low-risk cancer patients. A deeper understanding of the CSF proteome could advance our knowledge of CNS malignancies. Identification of unique proteome profiles may allow for reliable risk categorization, complement disease progression monitoring, and early detection of neurotoxicity in pediatric CNS cancer patients.
However, the pediatric CSF proteome remains to be extensively studied and the current proteome research is limited to diverse experimental workflows and small cohort sizes, which consequently affect the quality of evidence synthesis. The rapid technological advancement of mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics continues to enable more in-depth proteome analysis through an increasing collection of different methods. Despite these advancements, several challenges often persist in proteomic studies of pediatric CSF: first, the rarity of childhood cancer often necessitates long-term inclusion to obtain adequately sized cohorts; second, the challenge of obtaining adequate CSF volumes due to the limited natural reserves in children; and third, the diversity in age of pediatric cancer patients may obscure distinctions between natural variations in CNS development and disease. Consequently, CSF samples from pediatric patients constitute a unique but scarce resource that emphasizes the need for cost-efficient analyses.
We previously published a review with a meta-analysis of individual patient data, synthesizing methods and evidence from previous LC-MS/MS-based studies on CSF from pediatric patients with CNS malignancies. We refer to this review for more detailed information, as it covered: (1) methods of CSF collection, preparation before storage, and storage conditions; (2) the analytical workflow applied (including CSF volume, discovery process, and proteome depth); and (3) the validation process (validation cohort, analytical method, and data availability) for each individual study. Results in brief, CSF proteome studies focusing on children with ALL have quantified between 366 and 635 proteins.− In contrast, studies that have focused on solid brain tumors have quantified in the range of 729 to 1526 unique proteins.−
The protein concentration in CSF is substantially less than that in plasma, with CSF protein levels being 50 to 100 times lower. Typically, plasma protein concentrations range from approximately 60 to 70 mg/mL, whereas CSF protein concentrations normally range between 0.2 and 0.7 mg/mL. Despite this reduced concentration, CSF retains many properties similar to plasma, including a wide range of protein concentrations (referred to as “high dynamic range”). A persistent but significant challenge for biomarker discovery is encompassed by this high dynamic range of protein concentrations present in CSF. The presence of highly abundant proteins can mask the detection of low-abundance, yet potentially critical, biomarkers. Overcoming this challenge requires methods that can either deplete high-abundance proteins, but carries a risk of codepletion of other proteins, or enrich low-abundance ones without compromising the integrity of the sample. In plasma proteomics, strategies such as sequential ultracentrifugation for the enrichment of extracellular vesicles (EVs) have proven effective in addressing the high dynamic range in CSF. By selectively enriching these EVs, the relative concentration of proteins within the EVs is increased, thus facilitating the identification of potential biomarkers that would otherwise be below the detection limit of MS.
The aim of this study is to provide a comprehensive assessment of analytical workflows for deep CSF proteome analysis involving different sample preparation methods and MS data acquisition strategies through application of high-resolution MS-based proteomics. Sample preparation methodologies included ultracentrifugation-based fractionation of the CSF proteome to enrich different EV fractions as well as testing different protein extraction and digestion protocols. Here, we used a unique CSF sample set collected in our biobank to create a homogeneous pool that represented a diverse cohort that includes noncancer controls, CNS cancers of hematological and solid origin, and a wide age range extending from infancy to young adulthood. The optimized protocols were ultimately applied to eight individual ALL patient samples to evaluate their technical performance at the individual level rather than on a homogeneous pool, exclusively.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting Information Available
Table showing fractions categorized into highest to lowest MS2 intensity of previously reported biomarkers (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00471.
Supplementary Material