PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment
keywords: Peritoneal dialysis; Extracellular vesicles; Proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Proteomics-based analysis of  Peritoneal Dialysis Effluent is a relatively new approach to studying the changes associated with PD. Recent studies have shown altered proteomic profiles in various conditions of PD patients, including uremia, diabetes, peritonitis, abnormal peritoneal transport function and with different peritoneal dialysis modality. However, these studies extracted proteins in PDE by precipitation techniques resulting in high abundant diffusible proteins from blood circulation which interfered with the identification of low abundant, locally secreted, yet important, biomarkers. we hypothesize that EVs are secreted from peritoneal resident cells and contain known biomarkers for PDE-related membrane injury. As a proof of concept, here we identified and characterized EVs from PDE of healthy PD patients using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). Furthermore, we did proteomics and bioinformatics analyses to determine the number and type of proteins measurable within EVs isolated from the PDE using two methods of vesicle isolation. 

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Multiple Extracellular Vesicle Types in Peritoneal Dialysis Effluent are Prominent and Contain Known Biomarkers

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Briefly, all samples (300 ml of PDE per sample) were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 15 min at 4 ºC to remove whole cells, cell fragments, large debris, lamellar bodies, denser ectosomes, and macrovesicles (such as traditionally described apoptotic bodies; 1 to 5 µm in size. The supernatants were then centrifuged at 110,000 x gave for 1 hour at 4 ºC to obtain low-density membrane pellets. The pellets were subsequently resuspended in 200 µl of PBS and stored at -20 ºC until further processing unless otherwise stated. Five patients used for repeat analysis had samples processed as above, and then 50% of the low-density pellet was solubilized in 400 µl of PBS and passed thru a size exclusion chromatography (SEC) column with 70 nm pore size as per company instructions for plasma (IZON Science Ltd). 500 µl fractions were collected. Fractions 1-5 (2.5 ml in total), 6-10 (2.5 ml in total), and 11-30 (10 ml in total) were combined respectively. Pooled fractions were concentrated with a 10-kDa filter (Amicon Ultra-4) by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 25 minutes. Relative percentages of protein in SEC pooled fractions were 0.5% (fraction 1-5), 4.8% (fraction 6-10), and 94.7% (fraction 11-30). Total protein amount in the SEC vesicle fraction (fraction 6-10) was 26 ± 15 µg.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptides were separated by nano-liquid chromatography (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The full MS scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z was selected, and precursor ions with the charge states of +1 or greater than +8 were excluded. Normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 28%. Raw LC-MS/MS files were searched by X! Tandem (CYCLONE, 2013.2.01) against human databases (ENSEMBL v.76 Homo sapiens GRCh38) plus common contaminants concatenated with their reversed sequences. A target-decoy approach was used to limit a false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified peptides to less than 1%. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine was used as a fixed modification mass. Variable modifications were oxidation at methionine. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage sites was allowed.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
PD effluent (PDE) samples
This study was approved by IRB of the King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital (499/58). All participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study. The ethics committees/IRBs approved this consent procedure. Overnight PDE was collected from 8 healthy PD patients (Table 1) who had both, no residual renal function and peritonitis within the past 1 months. A repeat of the analysis was done from 5 different patients at a later date. Dwell time was 8 hours for all patients. Low-density membrane fractions were isolated using the most common exosome isolation method as described. Briefly, all samples (300 ml of PDE per sample) were centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C to remove whole cells, cell fragments, large debris, lamellar bodies, denser ectosomes, and macrovesicles (such as traditionally described apoptotic bodies; 1 to 5 μm in size). The supernatants were then centrifuged at 110,000 x gave for 1 hour at 4°C to obtain low-density membrane pellets. The pellets were subsequently resuspended in 200 μl of PBS and stored at -20°C until further processing unless otherwise stated. Five patients used for repeat analysis had samples processed as above, and then 50% of the low-density pellet was solubilized in 400 μl of PBS and passed thru a size exclusion chromatography (SEC) column with 70 nm pore size as per company instructions for plasma (IZON Science Ltd). 500 μl fractions were collected. Fractions 1–5 (2.5 ml in total), 6–10 (2.5 ml in total), and 11–30 (10 ml in total) were combined respectively. Pooled fractions were concentrated with a 10-kDa filter (Amicon Ultra-4) by centrifugation at 4,000 x g for 25 minutes. Relative percentages of protein in SEC pooled fractions were 0.5% (fraction 1–5), 4.8% (fraction 6–10), and 94.7% (fraction 11–30). Total protein amount in the SEC vesicle fraction (fraction 6–10) was 26 ± 15 μg.
Transmission electron microscopy
Negative staining electron microscopy was performed to identify and determine the size and morphology of vesicles from the low-density membrane pellets, and then again, with the pooled fractions from SEC. Each low-density membrane pellet was mixed with 100 μl of 4% paraformaldehyde. Then 10 μl of the mixture was spotted onto the parafilm sheet. A grid was later floated on the mixture drop for 10 min. Then the grid containing the vesicles was washed by floating on PBS and water droplets, respectively. The grid was stained by floating on 1% uranyl acetate droplet for 1 min and finally evaluated using TEM (Joel JEM-1400 Plus operated at 100 kV).
Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA)
For size distribution analysis of the membrane-bound structures using a NanoSight NS300 (Malvern), vesicle samples were diluted 1,000 times in particle-free PBS. Videos of 25 seconds were recorded at camera level 12. Videos were analyzed at a detection threshold of 2 on the NanoSight Software 3.1 Build 3.1.54. Five samples were submitted for analysis; samples were read in duplicate.
Dynamic light scattering (DLS)
DLS measurements were performed with a Zetasizer Version 7.04 (Malvern). Membrane/vesicle pellets suspended in PBS as described above were diluted 1:1000 in PBS plus 0.05% Tween-20. Machine settings were reflective index 1.334 and viscosity (cP) 0.8900, at room temperature. Seven individual low-density membrane samples were submitted for reading then additionally processed samples after pooling of SEC fractions (1–5, 6–10, and 11–30) from 4 patients were analyzed. Controls included a column flow thru before sample addition, PBS only, and samples with and without Tween-20 (0.05%). Each sample had three recordings; each recording was the average of ten measurements. An intensity above 0.5 background intensity was considered as a positive for size calculations of particle population.
Western blotting
Western blotting was performed on SEC pooled fractions (1–5, 6–10, and 11–30) and low-density membrane pellets. Samples were mixed with 5X sample buffer (7.5% SDS, 10 mM Tris, pH 6.8) and heated for 5 minutes at 70°C. 20 μg of proteins was loaded per lane of a 10% polyacrylamide gel (except for the pooled fraction 1–5 in which less than 5 μg was loaded). SDS-PAGE was run at 130 volts until the dye reached the bottom of the gel. The proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membrane with trans-blot turbo (Bio-rad) at 1.0 A, 25V for 30 minutes. The membrane was blocked for one hour in TBST with 5% milk powder. 1:1000 mouse mAb anti-CD63 (Abcam ab193349) was added and incubated at 4°C overnight. After washing, HRP-conjugated secondary rabbit anti-mouse antibody at 1:5000 was incubated for 1 hour and bands visualized after washing with ECL Prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent (GE Healthcare).
1D SDS-PAGE and in-gel trypsin digestion
Each low-density membrane pellet was suspended in 1X Laemmli sample buffer (1.5% SDS, 10 mM Tris, pH 6.8). The proteins from 8 low-density membrane pellet samples were pooled equally, and 200 μg of the protein mixture was separated by 1D SDS-PAGE using a 10% polyacrylamide gel for 60 minutes at 100 volts. The gel was rinsed with ddH2O, stained with Imperial Protein Stain (Thermo Scientific) for 5 minutes at room temperature, then destained in ddH2O for 60 minutes at room temperature. Negative controls included PBS alone and PBS plus 0.05% Tween-20. For repeat analysis, the low-density membrane pellet or SEC vesicle fraction (fraction 6–10) samples from 5 patients were pooled equally, and 130 μg of proteins from each pooled sample was loaded onto a separate lane and run as above. In-gel trypsin digestion was performed as previously described. In brief, the gel was cut into 40 fractions from top to bottom. Each gel fraction was destained, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. For trypsinization, 12.5 ng/μl trypsin solution was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, and 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid was added for peptide extraction. The peptides were desalted with C18 StageTips. The samples were dried and stored at -80°C for mass spectrometry analysis.
Nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry analysis and database searches
Peptides were separated by nano-liquid chromatography (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS methods included a full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The full MS scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z was selected, and precursor ions with the charge states of +1 or greater than +8 were excluded. Normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 28%. Raw LC-MS/MS files were searched by X! Tandem (CYCLONE, 2013.2.01) against human databases (ENSEMBL v.76 Homo sapiens GRCh38) plus common contaminants concatenated with their reversed sequences. A target-decoy approach was used to limit a false discovery rate (FDR) of the identified peptides to less than 1%. Parent and fragment monoisotopic mass errors were set at 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine was used as a fixed modification mass. Variable modifications were oxidation at methionine. A maximum of 1 missed cleavage sites was allowed. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride) with the dataset identifier PXD006371.
Bioinformatics analysis
Manual assignment of apoptotic, ectosome, exosome markers, and highlighted proteins of interest was performed by cross-referencing with reviewed literature from NCBI protein database. The database from Qiagen (http://www.sabiosciences.com/rt_pcr_product/HTML/PAHS-090Z.html) was used for identifying referenced markers of epithelial to mesenchymal transition. Reactome Pathway Database (www.reactome.org/) was employed for categorizing proteins that are in the pathways related to peritoneal membrane injury and fibrosis e.g. TGF-beta pathway. Gene ontology as performed for cellular component analysis using David bioinformatics resource 6.8. Two protein lists generated from pooled low-density membrane pellet (background) and pooled SEC vesicle fraction (target) samples were compared using gene ontology enrichment analysis and visualization tool, GOrilla (http://cbl-gorilla.cs.technion.ac.il/).

RESULTS:
Results
Patient characteristics
PDE was taken from 8 stable PD patients to perform the isolation of EVs using differential centrifugation only (Group A), and additional samples from 5 patients with similar demographics were repeatedly analyzed with differential centrifugation followed by SEC (Group B). Table 1 shows demographic data for the patients. For Group A, the average duration of PD therapy was 30 ± 28 months. Systolic and diastolic blood pressures were 142 ± 18 and 82 ± 11 mmHg, respectively. For Group B, the average duration of PD therapy was 33 ± 30 months, and blood pressure was 135 (± 27)/ 73 (± 13) mmHg.
Transmission electron microscopy
TEM confirmed that there were vesicles, as defined by circular structures with a lipid bilayer without intracellular structures, from low-density membrane pellets or SEC fractions (Fig 1). After purification of the low-density membrane pellet by SEC, it was established that over 99% of eluted vesicles were present in the SEC pooled fraction 6–10 (SEC vesicle fraction) (Fig 1B). After SEC, it was also observable that there were two types of morphologically distinct particle, the majority being typical “exosome” in structure while there was also a significant population of unidentified large circular particles (Fig 1B). Size range after SEC was prominently between 50–200 nm typical for exosome type vesicles (Fig 1B and 1D). Note that the cup-shaped vesicles observed are a commonly reported TEM artifact of isolated exosomes. The larger particles were 250–500 nm in size (Fig 1B and 1E). TEM of low-density membrane pellets without SEC purification (Fig 1F) indicated the majority of identifiable single structures over 30 nm in size were membrane-bound structures (50–600 nm); but many other background particles were also observed, sometimes partly obscuring vesicles, they may be protein aggregates, broken vesicles, or chylomicrons observable (Fig 1F).
Particle count and size analysis
Particle size distribution was evaluated by two methods NTA and DLS (Fig 2). NTA showed mean particle size of 213 nm (47–827 nm), mode of 155 nm, and 31% of particles less than 150 nm in size. Comparatively, DLS mean particle size was 282 nm (68–955 nm), and the mode was 342 nm. DLS percent intensity cannot be used to quantify vesicle numbers as larger particles give off more light. We found that NTA gave a mean particle size that was smaller and had narrower size distribution than DLS. A smaller population of 10–40 nm was seen with DLS. This population was also demonstrated in the negative control using a mixture of PBS and Tween-20, but not in PBS alone and therefore not included in calculations. Thus, this small population observed by DLS, but not NTA, was likely to be predominantly Tween-20 micelles rather than small vesicles. After SEC, two particle populations were evident, i.e. 99 ± 36 nm and 413 ± 150 nm (n = 4), in the SEC pooled fraction 6–10 using DLS. Particles were also observed in the SEC pooled fraction 11–30 but only when PBS was used without Tween-20.
1D SDS-PAGE and western blotting
After Coomassie blue staining, several high MW bands were visible in the low-density membrane pellet lane (Fig 3A, lane A), but were absent in the SEC sample lane (Fig 3A, lane B). Western blotting showed that CD63 was detected in the SEC pooled fraction 6–10 sample, but not in the pooled low-density membrane pellet or SEC fraction 11–30 sample (Fig 3B).
Proteomic profiling of extracellular vesicles
A total of 3,744 proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS. All data can be accessible from the online database of this study (URL: http://sysbio.chula.ac.th/Database/PDEV/) and from S1 Table. Among all of the proteins identified, 2,094 were identified from low-density membrane pellet samples prepared by differential centrifugation. The additional purification of low-density membrane pellets by SEC further helped discover 1,650 more proteins. Protein markers associated with EVs and peritoneal pathophysiological responses identified in this study are further described in more details below. Gene ontology analysis for the cell component class showed a prominence of the exosome and membrane-associated proteins (Fig 4). SEC further enriched for the exosome component (Fig 5).
Identification of extracellular vesicle markers
Twenty-five protein markers of exosomes, 13 protein markers of apoptotic bodies, and 6 protein markers of ectosomes were identified (Table 2). Relative estimation of protein quantity was done by dividing the total peptide spectral counts per protein by its MW (normalized spectral count). Proteins were ranked based on the combined normalized spectral counts within the same class, see the classification in Table 2. After SEC, it was apparent that exosome markers were more prominently enriched, estimated at over 6 folds. In contrast, apoptotic body markers were less enriched and sometimes decreased. Protein enrichment ratio by SEC was determined by calculating the ratio of the normalized spectral count of SEC sample to the normalized spectral count of low-density membrane pellet (LDP) sample pooled from five patients (Table 2, Column 4). Exosome markers, TSG101 and CD63, were only identified in the SEC sample, but not in the LDP sample (see the online database).
Highlighted marker proteins for investigation of peritoneal pathophysiological responses
Table 3 shows previously reported proteins involved in peritoneal inflammation or fibrosis (TGF-β pathway, other cytokines, and chemokines), proteins altered in a transition from an epithelial to a mesenchymal state, other proteins reported as regulated during peritoneal pathophysiological processes, and proteins involved in coagulation pathway.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Currently, there are two major dialysis options for end-stage renal disease i.e. peritoneal dialysis (PD) and hemodialysis. Worldwide data indicated that the total number of patients receiving PD is markedly increasing. Although the overall outcome is similar between the two dialysis approaches, PD has been reported to have a more favorable outcome compared with hemodialysis in the first few years after starting therapy. However, although results vary by studies, PD appears to subsequently lose its advantage over time. The reason for the less favorable outcome over time could be associated with peritoneal membrane dysfunction leading to ultrafiltration (UF) failure. An exposure of the peritoneal membrane to bio-incompatible solutions during PD gradually results in changes in morphology and, eventually, failure of peritoneal membrane. Without healthy function of the membrane, the PD is inevitably ineffective. Furthermore, unresolved peritoneal inflammation and peritoneal accumulation of inflammatory cytokines have been demonstrated to contribute to propagated coagulopathy and serious encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis (EPS) in 0.7% to 7.3% of patients. Due to a wide diversity of peritoneal function between patients, both before starting and in response to PD, detailed elucidation of these pathophysiological processes would provide a better understanding of UF failure, permitting therapeutic options to be refined.
The traditional method for evaluating the pathological damage of the peritoneum is an invasive peritoneal biopsy. However, the peritoneal biopsy does not reflect the global changes in the peritoneum and is not feasible and safe to perform within the context of clinical practice. Also, functional tests (peritoneal equilibrium test) cannot differentiate simple peritoneal sclerosis from EPS. Study of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in PD effluent (PDE) may be an alternative approach, a so-called “liquid biopsy”, to investigate peritoneal membrane pathophysiology in lieu of performing a peritoneal biopsy. EVs are potentially attractive sources of biomarkers in complex body fluids and are increasingly being demonstrated to have significant roles in various physiological processes throughout the body; however, none has yet demonstrated the presence of EVs in PDE. EVs are heterogeneous in nature often classified into apoptotic bodies, ectosomes, and exosomes according to their formation processes, sizes, and surface protein markers. Exosomes are typically 50–100 nm in diameter, originating from multivesicular endosomes. While ectosomes and more recently described small apoptotic bodies are 160–500 nm in diameter and originate from the plasma membrane blebbing. Each type of EVs has unique constituents and roles in various cellular processes. EVs hold great promise as novel biomarkers for clinical diagnosis and therapeutic opportunity. However, it may be difficult to expand this technology in the field of PD since the concentration of EVs in the PDE is expected to be minimal because of a diluting effect of infilled PD fluid (8–10 L/day), thus an optimal procedure for isolating EVs is required. Here we demonstrate the combination of 2 methods, differential centrifugation and size exclusion chromatography (SEC), to retrieve the EVs from the PDE.
Proteomics-based analysis of PDE is a relatively new approach to studying the changes associated with PD. Recent studies have shown altered proteomic profiles in various conditions of PD patients, including uremia, diabetes, peritonitis, abnormal peritoneal transport function, and with different peritoneal dialysis modality. However, these studies extracted proteins in PDE by precipitation techniques resulting in high abundant diffusible proteins from blood circulation which interfered with the identification of low abundant, locally secreted, yet important, biomarkers. Methods to overcome this contamination include introducing more sample purification or separation steps once the proteins are isolated using 2D gel electrophoresis separation, liquid chromatography, and then sample enrichment. However, these methods result in protein loss, increased technical demand, and possibly less reproducibility. Recently, the microvesicle/exosome isolation has been used to analyze protein changes in other body fluids without additional protein purification.
In this study, we hypothesize that EVs are secreted from peritoneal resident cells and contain known biomarkers for PDE-related membrane injury. As a proof of concept, here we identified and characterized EVs from PDE of healthy PD patients using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). Furthermore, we did proteomics and bioinformatics analyses to determine the number and type of proteins measurable within EVs isolated from the PDE using two methods of vesicle isolation.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information