PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Macrophage; Cell culture
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: timsTOF fleX; Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Proprotein convertases; Furin; Breast cancer; Car macrophage; Tumoroids

ABSTRACT:
Anti-cancer immunotherapy approaches are increasingly coveted. Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy has been shown to be an effective treatment for hematological tumors, but the treatment of solid tumors still lacks effectiveness, due to lower intra-tumor infiltration of CAR-T cells and tumor-induced immunosuppression. Macrophages represent a very large proportion of the tumor environment, participate in many aspects to tumor development and therefore represent interesting therapeutic targets. Macrophages can infiltrate solid tumor tissue and interact with almost all cellular components in the tumor microenvironment. In addition, macrophages can also promote a direct anti-tumor response by phagocyting tumor cells. We have developed macrophages expressing a CAR receptor against the HER2 antigen. The CAR receptor possesses an intracellular domain CD3ζ having homology with the protein FcεRI-γ, which once activated by the recognition antibody-antigen, induces the phagocytic activity of macrophages. 72% of macrophages express the CAR after transduction. CAR-M can specifically phagocyte HER2 coated-beads in a much more effective way than WT macrophages. We have then confirmed the capacity of CAR-M to phagocyte HER2+ cancer cell lines. Co-culture of CAR-M with breast cancer tumoroids (HER2+ or HER2-) has also been performed demonstrating their efficacy in a more complex environment. However, in the tumor microenvironment, due to their plasticity, macrophages tend to adopt an anti-inflammatory phenotype losing their anti-tumor activities. We have therefore developed a combined strategy by inhibiting two proprotein convertases, Furin and PC1/3 in CAR-M. The inhibition of furin or PC1/3 induces an increase in pro-inflammatory markers and maintains macrophage activation in the presence of cancer cells. In addition, HER2+ CAR-M with shFurin or shPC1/3 greatly increases the phagocytic activity on Her2+ beads or Her2+ tumors. These enzymes are therefore phenotypic regulators of macrophages. Our strategy is therefore based on a double activation of tumor-infiltrating macrophages. The first one consists in boosting the phagocytic activity of macrophages by having them express a CAR receptor targeting a tumor antigen. The second allows their reprogramming towards a pro- inflammatory phenotype by the inhibition of Furin and/or PC1/3 proprotein convertases

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Inhibition of Furin in CAR macrophages directs them towards a pro-inflammatory phenotype and enhances their anti-tumor activities.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
LC‒MS/MS analysis  The samples were separated either by on-line reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000 system equipped with a trap column (75 µm ID × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and a C18 packed-tip column (75 µm ID × 50 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using increasing amounts of acetonitrile (5-35% over 100 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The LC eluent was electrosprayed directly from the analytical column, and a voltage of 2.4 kV was applied via the liquid junction of the nanospray source. The chromatography system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer, which was programmed to acquire data in a data-dependent acquisition mode (top 10). Full scan MS analysis was performed over a m/z range of 300 to 1600, a resolution of 70,000 FWHM, an AGC of 3e6 ions, and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. For MS/MS analysis, the m/z mass range was set between 200 and 2000, with an AGC of 5e4 ions, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and a resolution of 17 500 FWHM. The higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was set to 30%. Precursor ions with charge states greater than +1 and less than +8 were selected for fragmentation, with a dynamic exclusion time of 25 seconds.  For the lymphocytes, the peptides were loaded and analyzed by Evosep One LC system coupled to a timsTOF HT (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) mass spectrometer. The Evosep One system operated with 60 Samples Per Day (60 SPD) method using C18 performance column (EV1109; 8 cm x 150 μm, 1.5 μm) maintained at 40°C. Analytical column was connected using a fused silica ID emitter (10 μm ID; Bruker Daltonics) within a Captive spray source (Bruker). Samples were acquired in dia-PASEF mode, with spectra acquired within an m/z range of 100–1700 and an Ion Mobility range from 1/K0=1.51 V cm−2 to 1/K0=0.6 V cm−2.

DATA PROCESSING:
Macrophage proteins were identified using MaxQuant software21 version 1.6.10.43 by comparing all MS/MS data with the proteome database of the complete reviewed proteome of Homo sapiens (UniProt, release July 2018; 8054 entries). Lys-C trypsin specificity was used for the digestion mode with two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were chosen as variable modifications. For the MS spectra, an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm was selected, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the HCD data. For identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.01 for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and at the protein level. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with the default parameters22. Analysis of the identified proteins was performed using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framew ork.org/) (version 1.6.10.43)23. The file containing the identification information was used with hits to the reverse database, and proteins identified with modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. The LFQ intensity was then logarithmized (log2[x]). Categorical annotation of the rows was used to define different groups (CAR-HER2 and CAR-HER2-siFurin). Two-sample t test was performed using Student’s t test with a p value of 0.05, with grouping maintained duringrandomization. The results were normalized to the z scores and are presented as hierarchical clustering. Functional annotation and characterization of the identified proteins were performed using STRING (version 10.5, http://string-db.org) and Funrich (version 3.1.3, http://www.funrich.org/).  The proteomics data analysis for lymphocytes analysis was conducted using DIA-NN software (version 1.8.1). A search against the human UniProt reviewed Homo sapiens database (downloaded in May, 2023, 20,422 entries) was performed using library-free workflow. A maximum of 2 trypsin missed cleavages were allowed and the maximum variable modification was set to 3. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as the fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. The peptide length range was set to 7–30 amino acids, precursor charge range 2–4, precursor m/z range 300–1300, and fragment ion m/z range 100– 1700. False discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Match between runs was allowed and “robust LC (high accuracy)” as the quantification strategy was enabled. Analysis of the identified proteins was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.10.43) software. Statistical tests were performed using ANOVA with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Visual representation of significant protein variations was obtained using hierarchical clustering analysis in the form of a heatmap.