PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Embryonic stem cell
diseases: Disease free
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Acquity uplc m-class system; Embryonic stem cell; Orbitrap elite; Ribo-flag immunoprecipitation; Ribosome; Ribosome-associated proteins; Mouse

ABSTRACT:
Ribosomes are emerging as direct regulators of gene expression, with ribosome-associated proteins (RAPs) allowing ribosomes to modulate translation. Nevertheless, a lack of technologies to enrich RAPs across sample types has prevented systematic analysis of RAP identities, dynamics, and functions. We have developed a label-free methodology called RAPIDASH to enrich ribosomes and RAPs from any sample. We applied RAPIDASH to mouse embryonic tissues and identified hundreds of potential RAPs, including DHX30 and LLPH, two forebrain RAPs important for neurodevelopment. We identified a critical role of LLPH in neural development linked to the translation of genes with long coding sequences. In addition, we showed RAPIDASH can identify ribosome changes in cancer cells. Finally, we characterized ribosome composition remodeling during immune cell activation and observed extensive changes post-stimulation. RAPIDASH has therefore enabled the discovery of RAPs in multiple cell types, tissues, and stimuli and is adaptable to characterize ribosome remodeling in several contexts.

This dataset refers to label-free identification of RAPs enriched by RAPIDASH from L36-FLAG and S17-FLAG mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). This dataset is used for comparison with Ribo-FLAG IP and elaborated in Figures 1G-H.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
RAPIDASH: Tag-free enrichment of ribosome-associated proteins reveals compositional dynamics in embryonic tissues, cancer cells, and macrophages - label-free MS RAPIDASH of L36-FLAG and S17-FLAG E14 mESCs

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Each protein sample was solubilized by pipetting with a low retention pipette tip in 50 µL denaturing buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 6 M urea, in HPLC water). The protein concentration for each sample was then quantified using a Bradford assay with technical duplicates following the manufacturer’s protocol. For each mESC RAPIDASH sample (Figures 1G-H), 80 μg protein was denatured and reduced by adding 0.5 µL 500 mM DTT to each sample for a final concentration of 5 mM and incubating in a thermomixer at 37 °C for 1 hour at 500 rpm. The samples were alkylated by adding 1 µL 500 mM iodoacetamide to each 50 µL sample for a final concentration of 15 mM and incubating them in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. A 0.2 µg/µL Trypsin/Lys-C stock solution in Resuspension Buffer was subsequently added to each sample at a 1:50 trypsin/Lys-C:sample ratio by mass to digest the protein into tryptic peptides. The samples were mixed and then shaken at 500 rpm for 4 hours in a thermocycler at 37 °C for the initial digestion by Lys-C. Afterwards, each sample was diluted sixfold by adding 250 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 to reduce the urea concentration to 1 M to allow trypsin to refold. The samples were then incubated for another 12 hours in a 37 °C water bath to complete the digestion. Trypsinization was then quenched by adding 3 µL 50% (v/v) heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA) in HPLC water to each sample. The samples were then either stored at -80 °C or immediately desalted.

Each sample was desalted using an OMIX C18 pipette tip attached to a P200 pipette set to 150 µL. Each OMIX C18 pipette tip was conditioned by pipetting 50% (v/v) acetonitrile up and down three times. No air was allowed to pass through the sorbent after it was conditioned. The OMIX C18 pipette tip was then equilibrated with 1% (v/v) HFBA by pipetting up and down three times. Acidified peptides were bound to the OMIX C18 sorbent by pipetting up and down for seven times carefully. After the peptides were bound, each tip was rinsed with 0.1% (v/v) HFBA by pipetting up and down three times. To elute the peptides, 7 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile by carefully pipetting up and down five times. A second elution was performed by pipetting up and down with 7 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 75% (v/v) acetonitrile five times. The two elutions were then pooled together and dried completely using a speed-vac (~45 minutes). The dried peptide samples were stored at -80 °C. The peptides were resuspended in 15 µL 0.1% formic acid for analysis by mass spectrometry.

Mass spectrometry was performed on an Acquity UPLC (ultra performance liquid chromatography) M-class system coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a Self-Pack PicoFrit column with a 360 µm outer diameter, 75 µm inner diameter, and a tip size of 15 µm packed to approximately 22 cm with HALO Peptide ES-C18 Bulk Packing 2.7 µm beads. The UPLC solvents A and B were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in/100% acetonitrile, respectively. For each sample, 2 µL was loaded at 1% B at 0.3 µL/minute for 20 minutes. Peptides were then separated at 0.3 µL/minute over a linear gradient from 1% B to 40% B for 90 minutes, followed by a linear gradient from 40% B to 100% B for 20 minutes, followed by a constant flow at 100% B for 10 minutes. Then, there was a linear ramp back down to 1% B over 5 minutes and then constant flow at 1% B for 5 minutes.

The Orbitrap Elite was operated in a data-dependent mode using Xcalibur v3.0. Collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS scans were recorded after each MS1 scan (R = 120,000) for the top 15 most abundant precursor ions in the Orbitrap. The isolation width was 1.8 m/z, the normalized collision energy was 35%, and the activation time was 10 milliseconds. The dynamic exclusion parameters were: a repeat count 1 with a 45 second repeat duration, an exclusion list size of 500, an exclusion duration of 80 seconds, and a +/- 10 ppm exclusion mass width. Only charge states of 2 or 3 were not rejected; others, including unassigned charges, were rejected.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (v2.4.2.0) against Mus musculus SwissProt reviewed proteome database downloaded on June 7, 2024 with the following parameters: a maximum of 2 missed trypsin enzyme cleavage sites, first search mass tolerance of 20 ppm, main search mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and MS/MS match tolerance of 20 ppm. Deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), and N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) was searched as a fixed modification. For identification, a minimum of one razor + unique peptide was required, and the result was filtered with 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels.

For data related to Figure 1H (Table S3), proteins that were identified only by site, contaminants, and reverse hits were filtered out. Proteins that were identified in three out of six mESC samples (Figure 1H) were used for subsequent analysis. Gene ontology molecular function (GOMF) terms were obtained by first converting SwissProt IDs into Entrez Gene IDs. The Entrez Gene IDs were then analyzed by Manteia to obtain gene ontology terms that are significant. These were filtered so that level 4 terms were the most broad term level that was utilized (e.g. for terms that had more than one level associated, those that were level 1, 2, or 3 in any branch were filtered out).