PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Retina
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Hrecs; capsl; knockdown; overexpression

ABSTRACT:
The purpose of this project is to explore the changes in signaling pathways after CAPSL knockdown and overexpression, and to identify potential downstream target genes of CAPSL along with the signaling pathways they are involved in. Ultimately elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying CAPSL pathogenesis. HRECs were transfected with ctrl shRNA, CAPSL knockdown shRNA and LentiOE CAPSL. The cells were then collected at least 72h after transfection, and samples were then usd for proteomic analysis. After cell collection, a series of cutting-edge technologies, including protein extraction, enzyme digestion, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, and bioinformatics analysis, were employed to investigate the quantitative proteome of the samples.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic raw data for ctrl HRECs, CAPSL knockdown HRECs, and CAPSL overexpression HRECs

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Collect the cells into a 1.5mL centrifuge tube and rapidly freeze them using liquid nitrogen. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three minutes on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein solution was digested with trypsin, and the peptides were desalted by Strata X SPE column. After LC-MS/MS Analysis, the resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer search engine (v.2.4). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20230103.fasta (20389 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy and contaminants database. Trypsin (Full) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Min. peptide length was set as 6 and max. number of modification per peptide was set as 3. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification. Oxidation on Met, acetylation on protein N-terminal, met-loss on Met and met-loss+acetyl on Met were specified as variable modification. False discovery rate (FDR) of protein, peptide and PSM was adjusted to < 1%.

DATA PROCESSING:
Gene Ontology analysis (GO analysis) was used to extract GO IDs from the identified proteins based on the EggNOG database, and then performing functional classification annotation analysis on the proteins according to cellular components, molecular functions, and biological processes. Then, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) was used to annotate protein pathways and identify proteins through BLAST comparison (blastp, evalue ≤ 1e-4), for each sequence, the annotation is based on the top-scoring comparison result. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze the significance of functional enrichment of differentially expressed proteins (using the identified protein as the background). Functional terms with Fold enrichment>1.5 and P value <0.05 were considered as significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on differentially expressed protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, KEGG pathway, Reactome and WikiPathways). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). These p values were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the "Heatmap" function from the "ComplexHeatmap" R-package.