PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast); Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Dilution series; Yeast; Standard; Ups1

ABSTRACT:
A standard proteolytic digest of a human protein mixture, prepared at 1.5-fold to 3-fold protein concentration changes, and diluted into a constant background of yeast proteins. Similar to other datasets used for ground truth in quantitative studies, with the exception of being more granular, and much larger in terms of replicates, to enable more rigorous and accurate testing of quantitative algorithms.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Standard dataset of UPS1 spiked into yeast at various concentrations

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
A dilution series of UPS1 was prepared at concentrations of 0, 0.25, 0.74, 2.2, 3.3, 6.6, and 20 fmol/ul in a constant 60 ng/ul yeast background. For each concentration, 12 identical injections were collected by shotgun MS. To minimize the batch effects experienced with chromatography column and nano-ESI detector signal loss, the samples were randomly analyzed in sets of three injections until twelve injections were collected for all concentrations, with blank injections performed between each set.  LC-MS/MS analysis of each sample (2ul per injection) was performed using a 10.5 cm PicoChip  capillary (75 µm ID, ReproSil Pur C18 3 µm) on an Easy nLC-1000 system. Each sample was separated using a linear binary mobile phase gradient (0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), from 2% to 40% over two hours, followed by wash and re-equilibration. Mass spectra were acquired on a Q-Exactive HF operated by DDA using a top 30 selection count and HCD fragmentation. The precursor ion scan range was 350-1400 m/z at 60000 resolution. An isolation window of 1.2 m/z was used for selection, and MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15000 resolution. Charge exclusion was set to 1 and greater than 5, with isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 seconds.

DATA PROCESSING:
Spectra were searched using Comet against the UniProt S. cerevisiae reviewed proteome (downloaded on December 4, 2015), supplemented with the 48 UPS1 protein sequences, and reversed decoy sequences (13,484 total protein sequences). Comet parameters included a fixed modification of +57.021464 Da on cysteine and a variable modification of +15.994915 Da on methionine. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and a fragment bin tolerance of 0.2 and fragment bin offset of 0 were used. Semi-tryptic enzymatic cleavage was set, allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. PSMs were analyzed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline.

METHODS:
Experimental
Sample preparation
Yeast strain EDC3 (a gift from Prof. JD Aitchinson, ISB, Seattle) was grown to mid-log phase and harvested by centrifugation. The cells were lysed by flash freezing in liquid nitrogen prior to disruption using a Retsch ball mill grinder and resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, as previously described. Protein concentration was determined by micro BCA assay (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). A yeast protein stock of 100 ng/μL in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was reduced in 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60°C, alkylated with 7.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30 minutes at room temperature in darkness, and digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at a 1:200 ratio for 4 hours at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by heat inactivation, samples were then acidified with 0.1 % formic acid and stored at −80°C. The universal proteomics standard set (UPS1, Sigma-Aldrich, St-Louis, MO) was prepared by resuspending one 6 μg vial with 100 μL of 50 % TFE in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 60°C and alkylated with 7.5 mM IAM for 30 minutes at room temperature and darkness. The TFE was diluted by addition of 500 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 ratio for 4 hours at 37°C. Digestion was stopped by heat inactivation. The peptides were dried down and reconstituted in 100 μL of 0.1 % formic acid solution to an approximate concentration of 50 fmol/μL.
A dilution series of UPS1 in yeast background was prepared by mixing varying concentrations of each solution in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, to approximate the dilution series of Paulovich et al., with an additional dilution factor for increased granularity. The protein concentrations used in this study are listed in Table 1. For each spiked-in concentration, 12 identical injections were analyzed. This number was chosen as being sufficiently low to resemble clinical datasets as well as sufficiently high for providing some statistical power (datasets with three replicates are not reasonable for statistical analysis on samples containing hundreds of proteins). To minimize the batch effects experienced with chromatography column and nano-ESI detector signal loss, the samples were randomly analyzed in sets of three injections until twelve injections were collected for all UPS1 spiked-in concentrations, with blank injections performed between each set. Our acquisition was thus different from approaches that acquire all sample injections from lowest to highest concentration to minimize carryover. For example, UPS1 proteins were observed in the yeast control samples, despite the use of blank injections between sample sets.
Mass Spectrometry analysis
LC-MS/MS analysis of each UPS1/yeast sample was performed using a 10.5 cm PicoChip (New Objective, USA) capillary (75 μm ID, ReproSil Pur C18 3 μm). Prior to loading onto the column, each sample was loaded onto a 2 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 trap (75 μm ID, C18 3 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample injection, 2 μL of sample was loaded onto the trap using an Easy nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water, and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. Each sample was separated using a binary mobile phase gradient to elute the peptides. The gradient program consisted of three steps at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min: (1) a linear gradient from 2% to 40% mobile phase B over two hours, (2) a 10 minute column wash at 80% mobile phase B, and (3) column re-equilibration for 10 minutes at 2% mobile phase B. Mass spectra were acquired on a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer operated by data dependent acquisition (DDA) using a top 30 selection count. The precursor ion scan range was 350–1400 m/z at 60000 resolution. An isolation window of 1.2 m/z was used for selection, a normalized collision energy of 30 was set, and higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15000 resolution. An automatic gain control (AGC) target of 105 and maximum injection time of 50 ms was set. Charge exclusion was set to 1 and greater than 5, with isotope exclusion. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 10 seconds.
MS/MS-data processing
Mass spectra (Thermo Fisher .raw files) were converted to mzML format using MSConvert (version 2.2.0) and searched with Comet (version 2015.02 rev. 2). Spectra were searched against the UniProt S. cerevisiae reviewed proteome (downloaded on December 4, 2015), supplemented with the 48 UPS1 protein sequences, and reversed decoy sequences (13,484 total protein sequences). Comet parameters included a fixed modification of +57.021464 Da on cysteine and a variable modification of +15.994915 Da on methionine. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and a fragment bin tolerance of 0.2 and fragment bin offset of 0 were used. Semi-tryptic enzymatic cleavage was set, allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were analyzed using the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, version 4.8.0 PHILAE), to assign peptide probabilities using PeptideProphet and iProphet. Spectral counts and precursor ion intensities were exported for each non-redundant PSM at a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with dataset identifier PXD006447.
Experimental design and statistical rationale
The resulting data matrix containing intensity values for all the identified peptides and corresponding assigned protein names was used as an input for calculation, including all contaminant and decoy sequences. Peptides that were assigned to more than one protein were discarded from the analysis, in order not to overestimate their importance in the further data analysis with respect to the other peptides collected. Though methods have been developed that can incorporate these degenerate peptides, no consensus currently exists in the literature in this respect. Overall, the number of multiple assignments was low. These represented 1312 peptides over a total of 10,406 peptides (across all conditions). Then, for a comparison between two experimental conditions, all peptides which had at least one non-null value over the 2×12 samples analyzed were considered in our statistical pipeline. The present work is mainly intended for the discovery stage of a two-stage discovery-verification process, in which case the proteins selected here would be subsequently re-analyzed in a verification stage, presumably with more replicates and/or higher quality data.
The discovery of differentially abundant proteins is a two-class problem, with two experimental conditions (here, the UPS1 concentrations) and peptide-level measurements available for na samples from class a and nb samples from class b. Let Npep denote the number of identified peptides in the LC-MS/MS experiment and let Nprot be the corresponding number of proteins (identified for at least one sample) after assignment using PeptideProphet and iProphet (see above section). For each protein i, let pep(i) be the set of detected peptides assigned to protein i, with Ni = |pep(i)| the size of this set, for i = 1,…,Nprot. Recall that each peptide is uniquely assigned to a protein and consequently there is no overlap among the sets pep(i).
We now describe our nonparametric test. We will write yjk for the measured value for peptide j in sample k, expressed in original units (i.e., not log-transformed); ‘peptide values’ later represent either PI or spectral counts. For any given comparison between two classes or conditions, the complete set of values yjk is organized as a matrix where each row represents a peptide j = 1…,Npep and each column represents a sample k = 1,…,na + nb. The first na columns are counts for class a and the next nb columns are the counts for class b. Note that in the current analysis, na = nb = 12 for all comparisons performed. All calculations on the peptide values matrix were performed using MATLAB (The Mathworks, Inc., Natic, MA, USA). The MATLAB script is provided as Supplementary Information.
Data properties
Our approach is motivated by some general properties of the peptide quantitation data. Suppose a protein i is fixed. The data available for designing an algorithm for detecting differential abundance are then two sets of measurements: the naNi observed peptide values {yjk, j = 1,…,Ni;k = 1,…,na} for class a and the nbNi values {yjk, j = 1,…,Ni;k = na + 1,…,na + nb} for class b. Whereas the two sets of values are statistically independent, the values within each set are generally neither independent nor identically distributed. They are not independent, even within a sample k, due to peptide-to-peptide correlations and they are not identically distributed, again even within samples, due to possible differences in both digestion and detection across peptides from a given protein. Finally, recall that if peptide j was not detected in a sample k, yjk is set to 0. A notable property of these data is that there can be many zero values, especially for peptides associated with proteins at low concentrations. In particular, the assumption of normally-distributed yjk values is rarely fulfilled (see Discussion).
Test statistics
In short, our algorithm performs a re-scaling of detected peptide values, then aggregates these values within each class, and evaluates the significance of the resulting difference using permutation testing (Figure 1).
In a first step, for each peptide j, we re-scale the set of values yjk,k = 1,…,na + nb (i.e., one row of the matrix) to [0,1]; this normalizes for peptide-to-peptide variability, or the different responses observed for peptides of equal abundance originating from the same protein. Let mj (respectively, Mj) be the minimum (resp., maximum) value observed over all samples k = 1,…,na +nb for peptide j, and define  In most of our experiments mj = 0 due to the widespread presence of zero values. In that case (or if we use yjk/Mj), this transformation has the property that, within peptides, the ratios of original counts from sample to sample are preserved; this is not the case when using, for example, a log-transformation. Note that the ynorm values are a surrogate for ranks, with ties allowed.
The normalized peptide values are then averaged across peptides in order to assign an overall value to a protein within a sample, and next averaged across samples for classes a and b separately: 
The resulting test statistic or “score” for a protein i is the difference of these two class-wise averages:  We use the term “score” to underline the fact that  no longer represents a detected amount or other physically meaningful quantity, but a computed value. We refer to this method as CSNorm for Class-wise Sum of Normalized peptide values. Since this score can both be used on PI or SC as peptide values, we will further denote it as CSNorm-PI in the first case and CSNorm-SC in the second one. The performance of this score will be compared with that of related nonparametric scores, as well as with other approaches. It is worth noting that many alternative transformations were tried, including using ranks and more complex approaches, of which none uniformly outperformed the others. Our solution was to favor simple methods.
Significance
For each protein i we compute a p-value pi for the test statistic  (Eq. 2) by constructing a permutation-based null distribution. This avoids making any assumptions about the distribution of the test statistic under the null hypothesis that there is no difference between classes in the distribution of peptide signals. We follow the standard approach. We generate K “null values” of the test statistic  by randomly permuting the na + nb class labels (i.e., selecting a permutation of {1,…,na + nb} at random) and computing the test statistic  for the new, randomized data. The estimated p-value (two-tailed) is the fraction of these K null values which exceed the value of  on the original data. The choice of K (generally 2×104 to 1×105) determines the resolution of the p-values.
Alternative test statistics
There are several natural alternative test statistics to CSNorm that will be discussed in later sections. One is to use the plain yj,k values, which we denote as CSPep (-PI or -SC), for Class-wise Sum of Peptide values. Another is to replace  in Eq. 2 by log(yjk); we denote the resulting score as CSLog and later use it as a reference method, as most similar to traditional fold-change based approaches.
The normalized spectral index (NSI), which was originally defined by Griffin et al. as a homogeneity measure, was used to compare our different experimental conditions. Consistent with that publication, protein abundances were log-scaled prior to comparative analysis. An additional approach, the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF)7 was also compared to our methods, and computed using the protein quantification tool, StPeter (version 1.2.3). For both the NSI and NSAF analyses, protein values were computed in the two classes, and the difference of the class sums was used as a statistic, the significance of which was evaluated by permutation testing, as described above.
Our method was yet further compared to the popular MSstats v3.5.3 method, which was implemented using Tukey’s median polish, and normalization set to “equalizeMedians”. Precursor ion intensities were imported for all non-degenerate peptide sequences, missing measurements from any given sample being labeled as “NA”. The MBImpute parameter was set to true.
Output and performance metrics
As an input, our algorithm requires a matrix for peptide values, each row being a peptide and each column a sample, the samples being grouped by condition or class. In addition, the algorithm requires the input of a two-column matrix: the first column corresponds to an index for the peptides present in the data matrix and the second column corresponds to an index for the protein to which each peptide was assigned.
The output of the algorithm is a list of p-values {pi,i = 1,…,Nprot}, one for each protein, as well as the sign of the difference Sb − Sa, which indicates whether the corresponding protein concentration increases or decreases from one class to the other. For simplicity, the proteins are ordered by increasing p-value, so that p1 ≤ p2 ≤ ⋯ pNprot . Detection is performed by specifying a threshold, and the resulting set of proteins are then those whose variations across the two conditions are declared significant at the chosen threshold.
In our approach we focus on two criteria for determining which proteins are selected as significantly differentially abundant.
The first criterion is to specify the number ND of detected proteins (or discoveries). We thus propose distinct values for ND, the smallest (30) for verification of detected candidates using for example affinity-based assays (e.g., ELISA) and the largest ones (120–150) for using, for example, selected-reaction monitoring (SRM) verification, for which it is feasible to survey much larger numbers of proteins through specific peptide surrogates. Since the p-values are ordered, the corresponding set of proteins is simply {1,…,ND}.
The second criterion, of broad use in computational biology, is based on the false discovery rate (FDR). (Note that this FDR applies to the detection of differential abundance across classes, and is hence different from that used to assign peptide identities to MS data.) A target or nominal FDR is selected, e.g., 0.05, and this cut-off is transformed into a p-value threshold (and vice-versa), for example using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure. In order to allow for proper comparisons among the results of different methods, it will be useful to make these terms more precise. Let TD be the number of true positives, or true detections, among the ND detections determined by the p-value threshold. The false discovery rate for the given data is then , which is the fraction of detected proteins which are false positives. We will refer to Q as the realized or empirical FDR. Some authors use an equivalent metric, precision, which corresponds to 1 − Q. In statistics, the FDR itself is defined as E(Q), where the expectation is over all possible datasets generated under the same conditions.
Another important performance metric is the sensitivity, or recall, of the method, namely the fraction TD/NP, where NP is the total number of true positives. In general cases, one does not know which protein detections are true positives and which are false positives. However, in the series of experiments presented here, these sets of proteins are known in advance: every human UPS1 protein is a true positive and every yeast protein is a false positive. This allows us to precisely quantify the performance of our method and of competing algorithms, for instance by comparing the target FDR with the realized FDR Q, which is the fraction of detected proteins which are yeast proteins. Similarly, for any given threshold, whether based on a target FDR or on the total number of detections, we can compute the (realized) sensitivity.
Although it is common to consider the realized FDR Q as an estimate of the true FDR E(Q), the realized FDR may be quite different for various reasons (including high variance and violation of assumptions for the BH procedure to yield an unbiased estimate). From a practical perspective, a far more important difference is the one between the target FDR and the realized FDR. Only the latter is a valid performance metric.

RESULTS:
Results
Data
MS/MS data were acquired in 12 separate replicate runs for each of the different concentrations of the UPS1 standard set of human proteins, which were mixed with a constant background of yeast (S. cerevisiae) proteins. Peptide identity and corresponding quantities were next derived from these data, as described in the Methods. Six different concentrations were used for the spiked-in protein set (see Table 1), additional runs being performed for the sole yeast protein background (equivalent to a null concentration for the standard). Each sample replicate was acquired in batches of three injections to minimize batch effects, as described in the Methods. Our acquisition was thus different than previous approaches that acquire all sample injections from lowest to highest concentration to minimize carryover when running samples sequentially. For example, UPS1 proteins were detected in the yeast control samples run in between each batch as a result of sample carryover despite blank injections between sample sets. In the original CPTAC protocol, UPS1 concentrations followed a linear three-fold stepwise increase; we included an additional UPS1 concentration in the middle of the range (condition C4, see Table 1), so as to obtain a real life concentration and more difficult comparison, allowing for a finer resolution among methods, with one pair of conditions at a 1.5-fold concentration change (C3 vs. C4) and one at a 2-fold change (C4 vs. C5; see Table 1 and Methods).
There were between 2841 and 4826 peptides identified per sample, with the average number of observed peptides per condition and total number of UPS1 peptides observed in one condition described in Supplementary Table S1. Peptides that were assigned to more than one protein were discarded from the analysis; these represented 1312 peptides from a total of 10406 peptides, with e.g. 1151 peptides assigned to 2 proteins and 25 peptides assigned to more than five proteins. Overall, 9094 peptides were considered for analysis.
Performance of CSNorm-PI
We applied our score (CSNorm, Eq. 2) to PI data in order to detect proteins with differential abundance across samples. We also used a reference score, CSLog (see Methods), to represent direct class-based aggregation of the log-transformed data, which resembles the classical fold-change analysis. Summing peptide values within class, as in these two scores, produces a score with more resolution than fold-change based scores, since a difference between class is always defined, unlike a ratio.
The performance of our method was first evaluated on three ‘hard’ comparisons, C0 (no spike-in) vs. C2, C1 vs. C2 and C3 vs. C4 (1.5x-fold change; see Table 1), as well as an easier detection, C4 vs. C5 (higher concentrations). For each comparison, all identified proteins were ordered by increasing p-value according to the permutation-based procedure, and we considered the first ND proteins for their UPS1 or yeast origin. When considering the 60 first discoveries (ND = 60) produced by our methods, CSNorm-PI detected 31 UPS1 proteins when comparison condition C0 to condition C2, 30 when comparing C1 to C2, 40 when comparing C3 to C4 (1.5x-fold change) and 46 when comparing C4 to C5 (2x-fold change) (Figure 2). The CSLog-PI score yielded 28, 29, 36 and 43 correct detections for the same four pairs of conditions, respectively (Figure 2). In particular, when considering higher amounts of spiked-in UPS1 proteins, both methods detected nearly all proteins (46 out of 48) at ND = 100 for comparison C3vsC4. For C5vsC6, CSNorm-PI detected all 48 UPS1 proteins at ND = 60 (Table 2), whereas CSLog-PI missed 4 UPS1 proteins among its 60 most significant ones and only 1 among its 100 most significant ones. Consequently, CSNorm-PI reaches its peak performance with substantially fewer total discoveries, and therefore with a much smaller real FDR. In the remaining comparisons both scores produced exactly the same number of true discoveries when setting ND = 60 (Supplementary figure S1).
When examining the protein list obtained using CSNorm-PI in more detail, it was observed that the missed proteins at ND = 60 in comparison C4vsC5, UPS1 human proteins Interleukin-8 (8.4 kDa) and Thioredoxin (12.4 kDa), were both observed with only one peptide across these conditions. In comparison C5vsC6, these two proteins were detected as differentally abundant by CSNorm-PI at ND = 60 (protein p-value < 10−5), with 2 peptides observed for each of them. As expected, differential detection was thus easier when additional peptides were identified.
Checking for the direction of variation
In multiple recent biomarker discovery studies (see e.g.), the relative direction of variation of a detected protein does not appear explicitly in the descriptions and it is not clear whether this direction is taken into account. Nevertheless, the knowledge of whether a protein concentration increases or decreases across two phenotypes is usually critical to understanding the underlying biological rationale for the observed variation.
In the present dataset, all protein concentrations evolve in the same direction from one condition to another, e.g. [prot]C1 < [prot]C2 < [prot]C3… due to our experimental design. In clinical experiments, the concentrations of the desired markers can be either increasing or decreasing across two phenotypes or clinical conditions. Hence there is no a priori knowledge about the direction of variation of a putative marker protein.
Here, the direction of variation was assumed unknown and taken into account when measuring performance. The lists of proteins detected as significantly changing across two conditions was split into two disjoint subsets, depending on whether the class score for the protein was going up or down from one condition to the other. Any detection of a UPS1 protein for which the direction of variation was opposite to the spiked-in amounts (Table 1) was declared a false positive. Overall, none of the UPS1 proteins detected were assigned the wrong sense of variation (Table 3). The symmetry of the equation defining our statistics (Eq. 2) ensures that the same be true when considering proteins whose concentrations decrease from the first to the second condition, which was e.g. verified on comparison C4vsC3 (Table 3, lower half).
Detection results as a function of target FDR
A common way of determining a list of differentially abundant proteins is to specify a target FDR. For example, in, the “nominal” FDR is set at 0.05, and the BH method for correcting for multiple testing is used to determine a corresponding p-value threshold or, equivalently, the number of proteins detected as significantly differentially abundant at this target FDR. Requiring a small realized FDR is useful in assigning peptide sequences to spectra, in which a large proportion of a spectra set are expected to have correct sequence assigned. However, such constraints are unrealistic in the context of finding differentially abundant proteins, in which the small n, large d scenario has pronounced effect, particularly because most candidates are true negatives. Sensitivity cannot be adequately evaluated under the constraint of a small realized FDR threshold.
To illustrate this point, we show the results of selecting a range of target FDR levels for score CSNorm-PI (Figure 3). On the left panel is plotted the total number of discoveries ND and the number of true discoveries TD as a function of target FDR values, over the interval 0 < FDRtarget ≤ 0.25, for comparison C3vsC4. The realized FDR is (ND−TD)/ND, which is plotted in the right panel for 0 < FDRtarget ≤ 0.65. For target FDR values inferior to 2.3×10−2, the number of discoveries remains low (< 3); this is most likely due to the difficulty of this comparison, with a 1.5-fold increase in UPS1 proteins concentrations from C3 to C4. The number of discoveries then jumps to 19, with 18 true discoveries, the number of false discoveries remaining low (realized FDR<0.1) until a target FDR of about 0.09. The number of false discoveries then increases abruptly, with a second bump in the curve of the total number of discoveries at a target FDR of about 0.18.
Table 4 shows similar comparisons between target FDR and realized FDR for other comparisons, at the most commonly used target FDR thresholds. At a fixed target FDR of 5 %, realized FDR values undergo a regular increase with the concentration of the samples that are being compared; it thus increases from 0.111 for comparison C0vsC1 to 0.455 for comparison C5vsC6. Note that for all 3-fold comparisons, discoveries were also obtained at a target FDR of 0.001, with realized FDR ranging from 0.083 for comparison C1vsC2 to 0.213 for comparison C5vsC6. In addition, for comparison C5vsC6, a 3-fold increase between the highest concentrations of UPS1, perfect recall was achieved at a target FDR of 0.001 (0.213 realized FDR); at increasing target FDR values, it becomes increasingly difficult to have both high sensitivity and low realized FDR (equivalently, high precision).
Overall, the realized FDR values are thus controlled for all the comparisons considered (1.5x-fold change to 3x-fold change), with an increasing difference between target FDR and realized FDR at increasing concentrations of UPS1 proteins.
Comparison with other methods
The results above are consistent with previous findings, using similar ground-truth data sets, that showed realized FDR to be higher than target FDR, and that better recall was achieved by accepting a higher FDR, particularly among proteins at low concentrations.
More specifically, the difficulty in maintaining high sensitivity at high precision is demonstrated in a comprehensive series of simulated experiments in, with target FDRs set at 0.01 and 0.05: none of the seven methods tested achieves high sensitivity together with high precision on most experiments, including two corresponding to C0vsC1 and C0vsC2, albeit with only three samples per class. Indeed, several methods return no protein with differential detection on these comparisons, and even the best-performing method, the SAM nonparametric test inherited from genomics, can only reach high sensitivity at the expsense of a very high realized FDR; compare our Table 4 with Table 3 in reference.
Methods based on peptide Spectral counts (SC) have been proposed in multiple studies, and were used here for the sake of comparison. Since SC values are not on a log scale, the scores that were tested are CSPep and CSNorm. The application of these scores to SC values produced very similar results on the four pairs of conditions tested, hence only the results obtained using CSNorm-SC are shown (Supplementary Figure S2). When compared to CSNorm-PI, the SC-based scores returned between 1 (C1vsC2 and C4vsC5) and 5 (C3vsC4) fewer true detections than CSNorm-PI.
The performance of the CSNorm-PI score in detecting differential abundance was further compared with a protein-based method, NSI, and the peptide-based linear regression model MSstats. Performance was assessed on comparisons C0vsC1, C0vsC2 and C3vsC4, which best discriminated among the methods; these are among the most difficult comparisons, the first two due to the low concentrations in UPS1 proteins, the third due to the low fold change (1.5x).
NSI was initially proposed as a plain quantification measure, which performed well across technical replicates. Here, we implemented it as described in the Methods section. On comparison C0vsC1, method NSI detected 7 and 9 UPS1 proteins respectively at ND = 30 and ND = 90, while method CSNorm detected, respectively, 9 and 12 UPS1 proteins at these ND values (Figure 4). On comparison C0vsC2, NSI performed well at ND = 30 discoveries, with 24 UPS1 proteins detected. However, between 60 and 150 discoveries, the number of discovered UPS1 proteins remained constant at 27. In comparison, CSNorm-PI was constant at 31 UPS1 discoveries over the same range. Method CSLog-PI also performed better than NSI over the whole range of number of discoveries Figure 4).
By considering all the proteins to which a p-value was assigned by MSstats, this method could detect one UPS1 protein for comparison C0vsC1 at ND = 30, three UPS1 proteins for comparison C0vsC2 at ND = 30 and four among its 120 best discoveries for the latter comparison. This is much below the NSI-based detection as well as both our scores (Figure 4, top and middle). On comparison C3vsC4, MSstats detected 27 UPS1 proteins for ND = 30, sitting between our reference method (26) and CSNorm-PI (28 true discoveries), and it detected 45 UPS1 proteins for ND = 60, while CSNorm-PI needed 120 discoveries (110, exactly) to detect 44 UPS1 proteins. MSstats also performed better than NSI in this setting (Figure 4, bottom). It should be noted that MSstats only assigns a p-value to proteins with observed values in both conditions, hence its poorer performance on comparisons involving C0.
Score CSNorm was further compared to method NSAF. Again, CSNorm performed much better than this score on comparison C0vsC1, better than it on C1vsC2, and similarly on comparison C3vsC4, with NSAF largely outperformed at ND = 30, but performing better by one to two true discoveries at higher ND values (Supplementary figure S3).
Overall, CSNorm is the only score that performs well over all the range of concentrations used, thus making this method a good candidate algorithm for biomarker detection over the dynamic range observed in clinical samples.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
A primary objective of quantitative proteomics-based analysis is to identify proteins and protein modifications whose abundances vary significantly between sets of samples. In proteomics experiments employing data-dependent analysis (DDA) (i.e., shotgun or bottom-up analysis), protein samples are first subjected to enzymatic proteolysis. The resulting peptides are then fractionated by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RPHPLC) and analysed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS). In label-free quantitation methods, protein abundance is inferred by measuring constituent peptide signal intensity or by spectral counting, which measures the frequency of peptide selection. Such inferred values are subsequently analyzed in order to identify those proteins that best differentiate between the classes of experimental interest, using some statistical methodology. Our focus here is on the elaboration and statistical analysis of quantitative values to identify possible protein markers, and on an exploration of fold changes detectable by proteomic analysis between phenotypic states.
Multiple statistical methods have been described for the efficient determination of differentially abundant proteins from label-free DDA proteomic experiments. A widespread approach is to directly construct surrogate values at the protein level from either spectral counts or peptide ion intensities, in a process coined ‘summarization’, and to compare these values between classes using a statistical procedure. Summarization-based methods do not usually account for peptide-to-peptide differences in detectability and may involve ad hoc parameter choices. Recent publications suggest superiority of peptide-based measures with respect to protein-based, summarized measures.
Most of these methods utilize either standard parametric models or variations developed in applications of high-dimensional statistics to fields outside biology. Peptide-based stochastic modeling, such as standard linear regression, is a common strategy to test for a significant class effect. Still, stochastic modeling generally makes assumptions on the distribution of the observed data, such as normality, which are evidently inappropriate due to a high proportion of zero values, often as high as 50% or more, in proteomics data. Moreover, it usually requires estimating many parameters with a very small number of samples. It is therefore hardly surprising that many current methods are unable to control both the sensitivity (or recall) and the false discovery rate at the same time.
Statistical methods for feature selection and performance evaluation which are better suited to proteomics data have been developed in other fields, notably computational genomics. Both fields indeed have many objectives and challenges in common, as pointed out nearly ten years ago. For example, summarization-based protein quantitation methods employ the same type of statistical tests as those used in computational genomics to identify differentially expressed genes. Nonetheless, even recent work in computational proteomics rarely takes this literature into account, despite nearly twenty years of experience addressing similar goals (e.g., biomarker discovery) and facing similar technical barriers (e.g., sample size), with some exceptions (see). More specifically, in both genomics and proteomics, phenotypes are identified from a small number of samples (n) with a large number of variables (d). In statistical inference and learning, this is referred to as the “small n, large d” dilemma. As a result, model complexity must be tightly controlled in order to prevent “over-fitting” the data, a consequence of which is the lack of robustness of the FDR (False Discovery Rate) analysis; in such cases, the realized FDR may differ largely from the target (or nominal) FDR. With nonparametric methods, such as Wilcoxon and permutation-based tests, no assumptions are made about the data distribution, e.g. that of normality. Thus, distribution-free methods are more reliable, and hence very widespread in genomics.
With these considerations in mind, we propose to analyze shotgun proteomics data using statistical tests which have the following properties:
There are no parameters to choose or estimate; in particular, there are no menus to select from (as in, e.g., MaxQuant Perseus), or parameters to estimate from the data (e.g., as in linear regression models with normal errors).
No surrogate value is assigned to proteins; instead, the analysis is peptide-centric.
No assumptions are made about the probability distribution of either the data or the test statistics; instead, all p-value calculations are permutation-based, meaning that all p-values are relative to a null distribution obtained by randomly permuting class labels.
The approach we propose satisfies criteria (i)-(iii). Each peptide value is first re-scaled across samples to a value comprised between 0 (min across samples) and 1 (max across samples). For each protein, we combine these normalized values over all replicates and peptides to produce a statistical descriptor for each condition. Then, given two conditions, for each protein, the two corresponding statistical descriptors are combined into one test statistic whose significance is determined by permutation testing. Peptide values used in the initial step of the algorithm can be precursor ion intensity (PI) as well as spectral count (SC) values; however, the present analysis primarily focuses on PI, since these values enable one to better identify differential changes.
We have applied our approach to finding differentially abundant proteins on a controlled dataset consisting of variable amounts of human proteins mixed into a yeast protein background. Our novel, enlarged dataset resembles one constructed in a CPTAC (Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium, cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu) study, with efforts made to overcome some limitations of that dataset. Indeed, recent efforts have sought to extend the utility of the original CPTAC collection by expanding the quantitation standard using more dilutions levels and more modern instrumentation. Anticipating the permutation testing procedure and corresponding effect of sample size on statistical resolution, we collected data for twelve repetitive injections for each concentration, as opposed to only three or four in previous studies. In this manner, more meaningful comparisons can be made than in previous methods without relying on severely undersized “ground truth” datasets. Our method does obtain a better tradeoff between sensitivity and FDR than previously published, parametric methods; for instance, we reach higher sensitivity levels at FDR values equivalent to other studies. This method should thus prove useful for unbiased, robust proteomics-based discovery of differential protein abundance.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8mo00077h
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.