PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Cells; Human

ABSTRACT:
Nrf2 is a transcription factor playing an essential role in stress response. A knowledge of the significance of Nrf2 in cell function has not, as yet, reached out beyond transactivation of gene expression. This paper shows that GDF-15 and SDF-1-induced angiogenesis strongly depends on Nrf2 presence, but is not related to its transcriptional activity. We propose, that Nrf2 serves as a protein restraining Keap1, its known transcriptional repressor. Deficiency of Nrf2 protein available for Keap1 leads to overabundance of RhoGAP1, the protein regulating Cdc42 activity, and impairs podosome assembly, thereby indisposing actin rearrangements, preventing migration and angiogenesis. These activities can be rescued by concomitant deletion of RhoGAP1 or Keap1. We suggest that a new Nrf2 function of a Keap1 scavenger implies revising the established murine model of Nrf2 deficiency as a transcriptional knock out (tKO) mouse. The N-terminal fragment of Nrf2, containing Neh2 domain binding Keap1, is present in these animals. Thus, regarding the function of Nrf2 as a protein sequestering Keap1, both published and unpublished data on Nrf2-Keap1 duet may gain new interpretation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Nrf2 sequesters Keap1 preventing podosome disassembly

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mass Spectrometry analysis. Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 100 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced with 0.5 M (5 mM f.c.) TCEP for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 200mM MMTS (10mM f.c.) for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 ng/ml trypsin (CAT NO V5280, Promega) at 37°C. Finally, to stop digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added at a final concentration of 0.1%. Mixture was centrifuged at 4°C, 14 000 g for 30 min, to remove solid remaining. MS analysis was performed by LC-MS in the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry (IBB PAS, Warsaw) using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent MS2 mode, and data were acquired in the m/z range of 300-2000. Peptides were separated by a 180 min linear gradient of 95% solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 35% solution B (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The measurement of each sample was preceded by three washing runs to avoid cross-contamination. The final MS washing run was searched for the presence of cross-contamination between samples.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data were analyzed with the Max-Quant (Version 1.6.0.1) platform using mode match between runs (Cox and Mann, 2008). The reference human proteome database from UniProt was used (downloaded on 2017.08.20). Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) intensity values were calculated using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Statistic analysis was performed using Scaffold 4 ProteomeSoftware.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Aims</h4>Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-like 2) is a transcription factor known to modulate blood vessel formation. Various experimental settings, however, attribute to Nrf2 either stimulatory or repressive influence on angiogenesis. Our findings unveil the mechanism of Nrf2-dependent vessel formation, which reaches beyond transactivation of gene expression and reconciles previous discrepancies.<h4>Results</h4>We provide evidence that growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF-15)- and stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1)-induced angiogenesis strongly depends on the presence of Nrf2 protein but does not rely on its transcriptional activity. Instead, Nrf2 serves as a protein restraining Keap1 (Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1), its known transcriptional repressor. Angiogenic response is abrogated in Nrf2-deficient endothelial cells but not in cells expressing dominant negative form or Keap1-binding fragment of Nrf2. Deficiency of Nrf2 protein available for Keap1 leads to the overabundance of RhoGAP1 (Rho GTPase-activating protein 1), the protein regulating cell division cycle 42 (Cdc42) activity. This impairs podosome assembly and disrupts actin rearrangements, thereby preventing angiogenesis. Effects of Nrf2 deficiency can be rescued by concomitant knockdown of RhoGAP1 or Keap1. Importantly, in the established murine model of Nrf2 deficiency, the N-terminal fragment of Nrf2 containing Keap1 binding domain is preserved. Thus, this model can be used to characterize Nrf2 as a transcription factor, but not as a Keap1-sequestering protein. Innovation and Conclusion: To date, the significance of Nrf2 in cell function has been ascribed solely to the regulation of transcription. We demonstrate that Nrf2 serves as a protein tethering Keap1 to allow podosome assembly and angiogenesis. Moreover, we emphasize that the new Nrf2 function of a Keap1 scavenger implies revisiting the interpretation of some of the previous data on the Nrf2-Keap1 system.