PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Primary cell
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Ipatasertib; rhabdomyosarcoma; target therapy; pediatric cancer; myogenic differentiation.

ABSTRACT:
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is marked by a myogenesis differentiation blockade, and while the AKT/mTOR pathway is universally activated, its pharmacological inhibition has shown limited success. This study stems from an effort to understand the failure to translate preclinical findings to clinical application. Here, we evaluated the activity of two pan-AKT inhibitors: Ipatasertib, an ATP-competitive inhibitor, and Miransertib, an allosteric AKT inhibitor. In vitro and in vivo efficacy assessment was conducted in RMS cell lines and fusion-positive/negative patient-derived xenografts (PDX). Unlike Miransertib, Ipatasertib showed significant antitumor activity against a subset of RMS. Besides AKT, the other kinase target of Ipatasertib, but not of Miransertib, is PRKG1, a cGMP-dependent protein kinase that shares the ATP binding pocket with AKT. The role of PRKG1 in RMS was investigated in PRKG1-depleted RMS cells and in xenograft models by transcriptomic approaches. PRKG1 silencing in RMS cells reduced tumor formation in xenograft models and induced a differentiated myogenic transcriptome. RMS showed higher PRKG1 expression compared to any other developmental cancer, akin to fetal skeletal muscle. Importantly, PRKG1 expression in RMS correlates with mesodermal transcriptional signature and enhanced sensitivity to Ipatasertib, regardless of the fusion oncogene status. The antitumor activity of Ipatasertib is dose-dependent, reaching an effective intra-tumor concentration when administered at 25 mg/kg daily. This study unveils the role of PRKG1 in myogenesis and highlights the potential of PRKG1 as a clinical biomarker for Ipatasertib therapy in RMS.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
PRKG1 hinders myogenic differentiation and predicts response to AKT inhibitor Ipatasertib in Rhabdomyosarcoma

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were lysed using BeatBox with 2% SDS, 100mM DTT, 100mM Tris/HCl. Digestion was performed following FASP standard protocol with LysC/Trypsin (1 µg/µL, Promega). Digested peptides were cleaned up with MonoSpin C-18 (type S) spin columns and phosphopeptides enriched in an immobilized metal affinity chromatography (MagReSyn® Zr-IMAC HP Zirconium ion (Zr4+) functional magnetic microparticles, Resyn biosciences).   Peptide and phosphopeptide samples were dried and reconstituted in 3 % ACN and 1% FA, then loaded onto the EVOTIPs (EV-2013 EVOSEP) following the manufacturer's instructions.  The  samples were injected into a nanoLC-MS system: EVOSEP One (EVOSEP, Odense, Denmark) chromatograph connected to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via a nanoEasy Spray Source interface with a stainless steel emitter (EV-1086 EVOSEP). The Evosep One method was 15 SPD (88 minute gradient), and the flow rate 0.22 µL/min with a Dr Maisch C18 AQ, 1.5 µm beads (EV-1137 EVOSEP) analytical column (oven set at 40ºC). The mass spectrometer was operated in DIA mode using 33 variable precursor isolation windows (14.5 to 105.5 m/z) with 0.5 m/z overlap. Full MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a scan range of 350 - 1200 m/z and a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1x106 and a maximum injection time of 56 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z). A higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) method (28% NCE) was applied with an AGC target of 5x104 and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Orbitrap Eclipse Tune Application 4.2.431 and Xcalibur version 4.7.69.37 were used to operate the instrument and to acquire data.

DATA PROCESSING:
The spectrum files were analyzed in DirectDIA mode using the Spectronaut software from Biognosys (v. 19.0.240604.62635), searching against the reviewed Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (SwissProt Human, released on 2024/01) and common contaminants. Oxidation in methionine, acetylation, methionine excision in protein N-terminal and phosphorylation in STY (only for phosphopeptide samples) were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation  in cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The maximum number of tryptic missed cleavages and the maximum number of variable modifications allowed were set to 2 and 5, respectively. The m/z range for the precursors and the fragment ions were set to 350 - 1200 and 200 - 3000, respectively. The remaining Spectronaut parameters were kept at their default values.