PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Ubiquitin-proteasome system; Nrf1; Protein quality control; Protein aggregates; Protein turnover; Ube3c

ABSTRACT:
A hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s Disease is the progressive loss of proteostasis, leading to the conversion of misfolded proteins into aggregates and subsequent cytotoxicity. To combat this toxicity, cells have evolved degradation pathways (ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy) that detect and degrade misfolded proteins. Here, we find that aggregation burden dictates the activation of proteasome-dependent quality control pathways. Initial misfolded proteins, enriched in oligomers, utilize UBE3C-dependent proteasomal degradation, while higher aggregation levels, enriched in larger insoluble structures, activate the NRF1 transcription factor to increase proteasome subunit transcription, and subsequent degradation capacity of cells. The role of UBE3C and NRF1 in aggregation clearance may provide therapeutic targets aimed to preventing neurodegenerative disease.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Temporal control of acute protein aggregate turnover by UBE3C and NRF1-dependent proteasomal pathways

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteasome purification was performed using an established protocol with GST-UBL as an affinity resin in HEK29T cells.

DATA PROCESSING:
Purified and eluted proteasomes, as described above, were treated with 10 mM TCEP, 15 mM iodoacetamide, and 10 mM DTT to reduce and alkylate proteins. Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed on proteins at ratios of methanol to chloroform to water of 4:1:3. Precipitated proteins were washed once with methanol, then spun at 16,000xg, and methanol was removed. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 100 μL of 200 mM EPPS (pH = 8.0) and digested overnight with endoproteinase Lys-C at 23°C, followed by addition of Trypsin for 6 hours at 37°C, both with a mass ratio of 1:100 protease to total protein. Samples were labeled with 6 μL of TMTpro reagents at a stock concentration of 10 ng/μL and addition of 30 μL of acetonitrile for 1 hour at RT and then quenched with 0.5% vol/vol final concentration of hydroxylamine. Samples were then combined, acidified with 1% formic acid to achieve a pH ~1.5, then subjected to StageTip fractionation, then dried again and resuspended in 1% formic acid 5% acetonitrile for mass spectrometry analysis. Mass spectra were collected on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a gradient of acetonitrile from 3 to 13% for the first 83 minutes, then 13 to 28% for the final 5 minutes. An SPS-MS3 method was employed using Real Time Search as previously described (11, 12). Mass spectra were searched using the Comet (13) using a reference human proteome from UniProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2019). A 2% FDR was applied to peptide-spectrum matches (PSM). Protein abundance was quantified from a globally protein-normalized sum of the PSM reporter ion intensity with a signal:noise ratio > 100. Normalization ratios for these proteasome-specific samples were calculated as the average of  and  proteasome subunits in each TMT channel and multiplied to each channel.