PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Embryonic kidney cell line
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Fragmentation; Intrinsically disordered regions; Er-phagy; Mitochondria; Endoplasmic reticulum

ABSTRACT:
Organelle fragmentation is crucial for the onset of autophagic programs that control lysosomal clearance of portions of organelles to be removed from cells. It is driven by membrane-bound organello-phagy receptors that display cytoplasmic intrinsically disordered modules (IDRs) containing short LC3-interacting regions (LIRs). Studies on ER-phagy receptors of the FAM134 family revealed the importance of transcriptional induction, and receptors phosphorylation, ubiquitylation and clustering for execution of the ER-phagy programs. In this model, ER fragmentation is promoted by the membrane-remodeling function of FAM134 reticulon homology domains (RHDs)18,19. However, RHDs are not conserved in ER-phagy receptors, nor in receptors for autophagy of other organelles that also require fragmentation such as the mitochondria. Thus, membrane remodeling by RHDs is unlikely to be a conserved mechanism to regulate organelle turnover.  Here, we show that the membrane-tethering modules of ER-phagy receptors (RHDs for FAM134B, single/multi spanning transmembrane domains for TEX264 and SEC62) determine the sub-compartmental distribution of the receptors but are dispensable for ER fragmentation, regardless of their propensity to remodel the ER membrane. Our experiments reveal that the information encoding for ER fragmentation is contained in the cytoplasmic IDR modules of the ER-phagy receptors, which also control delivery of the ER fragments within degradative acidic compartments upon engagements of lipidated LC3/GABARAP proteins via their LIRs. Notably, the transplantation of ER-phagy receptors IDRs at the mitochondrial membrane induces DRP1-driven mitochondrial fragmentation and mitophagy, and the transplantation of mitophagy receptors IDRs at the ER membrane induces ER fragmentation and ER-phagy. Our work reveals the functional conservation of membrane-exposed IDRs in promoting organelle fragmentation and offers a method to control integrity and activity of intracellular organelles by surface activation of IDR modules with net negative charges.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The intrinsically disordered regions of organellophagy receptors control organelle fragmentation, ER-phagy and mitophagy flux

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were digested on beads following a modified version of the iST method (Kulak, et al., 2014) (named miST method). 25 ul of miST lysis buffer (1% Sodium deoxycholate, 100mM Tris pH 8.6, 10 mM DTT), were added to the beads. After mixing and dilution 1:1 (v:v) with H2O, samples were heated 5 min at 75°C. Reduced disulfides were alkylated by adding 13 ul of 160 mM chloroacetamide (33 mM final) and incubating for 45min at 25°C in the dark. After digestion with 0.5 ug of Trypsin/LysC mix (Promega #V5073) for 2h at 25°C, sample supernatants were transferred in new tubes. To remove sodium deoxycholate, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added to the digests, and the samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol/1%TFA, peptides were eluted in 200ul of 40% MeCN, 59% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia, and dried by centrifugal evaporation.

DATA PROCESSING:
Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Vanquish Neo nanoHPLC system interfaced via a nanospray Flex source to a high resolution Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn PepMap100 C18 (5 mm x 1.0 mm ID, 5 μm, Thermo Fisher) before separation on a C18 custom packed column (75 μm ID × 45 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch), using a gradient from 2 to 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for peptide separation at a flow rate of 250 nl/min (total time: 130 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 2 s. Peptides were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized energy of 30 % at 15’000 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.6 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis.