PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Skin; Keratinocyte
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: TMT
keywords: Tocopherol; Mass spectrometry; Quantitative proteomics; Skin keratinocytes; Pollution

ABSTRACT:
Environmental air pollution such as diesel smoke emission has been shown to have an adverse effect on human skin. Although epidemiological studies showing adverse effects such as oxidative stress-induced aging exists, studies showing the cellular and molecular response to such stress are rare. Using a primary skin keratinocyte model and TMT-based quantitative proteomics strategy, we studied the effects of chronic exposure to diesel particulate matter (DPE) and DPE vapor on the cellular proteome and the ability of a known anti-oxidant Vitamin E in ameliorating such changes. LC-MS3 analysis of DPE and/or its vapor exposed skin keratinocytes resulted in quantification of 4,490 proteins of which 201 and 374 proteins were significantly dysregulated (≥1.5 fold, p-value ≥0.05) in each condition, respectively. We observed distinct molecular alterations in chronic DPE and DPE vapor exposure models. Dysregulation of several cellular processes such as cell cycle and gene regulation, oxidative stress response proteins, skin barrier integrity and skin hydration were observed in both DPE and DPE vapor exposed cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome-wide changes in primary skin keratinocytes exposed to diesel particulate extract – a role for antioxidants in skin health

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Adult normal human epidermal keratinocytes (NHEK-Ad) cells were exposed to DPE (0.05% v/v) [NHEK-Ad-DPE] or DPE-vapour [NHEK-Ad-DPE-V] for 3 weeks. For proteomics experiment  cells were grown to 80% confluency and starved for 8 hours in media devoid of growth factors. Vitamin E treatment was done 72 hours prior to serum starvation for all three cell models. Following serum starvation, cells were washed thrice with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (pH 7.2) and harvested in lysis buffer [2% SDS, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC)]. The cell lysates were sonicated, centrifuged and protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay kit as per manufacturer’s protocol. Equal amount of cell lysate from each condition was reduced using 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (at 60°C for 20 mins) and alkylated using 20mM Iodo-Acetic Acid (IAA) (at ambient temperature for 20 mins in dark). After reduction and alkylation, proteins were precipitated using chilled acetone (1:5 v/v of the sample) at -20oC overnight followed by centrifugation at 12000 x g for 15 mins. The samples were subjected to trypsin digestion at 37°C for 16 h. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides from from NHEK- Ad parental, NHEK-Ad-Vit-E, NHEK-Ad-DPE-V, and NHEK-Ad-DPE-V-Vit-E and NHEK-Ad- DPE, and NHEK-Ad- DPE-Vit- E were labeled with TMT tags 126, 127N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131, respectively. Further, the samples from all the conditions were pooled and subjected to basic reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRPLC) fractionation. LC-MS3 analysis of 12 concatenated bRPLC fractions was performed in triplicates on  Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS/MS analysis was searched against Human RefSeq database (Version 75 containing 36,690 protein sequences and known contaminants) using SequestHT and Mascot (version 2.2) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage allowed. Oxidation of methionine and deamidation (N, Q) were set as a dynamic modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) and TMT modification at N-terminus of the peptide and at lysine (K) were included as static modifications. The mass error of parent ions was set to 20 ppm and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using PercolatorTM node and peptides scoring better than 1% FDR score cut-off were considered for further analysis. Proteins with quantification in all six channels across replicates and a significant p-value were used for further analysis.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Background</h4>Skin acts as a protective barrier against direct contact with pollutants but inhalation and systemic exposure have indirect effect on keratinocytes. Exposure to diesel exhaust has been linked to increased oxidative stress.<h4>Objective</h4>To investigate global proteomic alterations in diesel particulate extract (DPE)/its vapor exposed skin keratinocytes.<h4>Methods</h4>We employed Tandem Mass Tag (TMT)-based proteomics to study effect of DPE/DPE vapor on primary skin keratinocytes.<h4>Results</h4>We observed an increased expression of oxidative stress response protein NRF2, upon chronic exposure of primary keratinocytes to DPE/its vapor which includes volatile components such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics led to identification 4490 proteins of which 201 and 374 proteins were significantly dysregulated (≥1.5 fold, p≤0.05) in each condition, respectively. Proteins involved in cellular processes such as cornification (cornifin A), wound healing (antileukoproteinase) and differentiation (suprabasin) were significantly downregulated in primary keratinocytes exposed to DPE/DPE vapor. These results were corroborated in 3D skin models chronically exposed to DPE/DPE vapor. Bioinformatics analyses indicate that DPE and its vapor affect distinct molecular processes in skin keratinocytes. Components of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation machinery were seen to be exclusively overexpressed upon chronic DPE vapor exposure. In addition, treatment with an antioxidant like vitamin E partially restores expression of proteins altered upon exposure to DPE/DPE vapor.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Our study highlights distinct adverse effects of chronic exposure to DPE/DPE vapor on skin keratinocytes and the potential role of vitamin E in alleviating adverse effects of environmental pollution.