PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Lymphocyte; Cell culture
diseases: T-cell large granular lymphocyte leukemia
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Nkl; Exosomes; Lc-ms; Label-free; Lgll; Motn-1

ABSTRACT:
Large granular lymphocyte leukemia (LGLL) is a rare lymphoproliferative malignancy caused by clonal expansion of granular lymphocytes. Two subgroups, (cytotoxic) T-cell LGLL and natural killer (NK) cell LGLL, are defined based on their cellular origin and expression of characteristic surface molecules. In this study, we performed a comparative proteome profiling of isolated extracellular vesicles (EV) from the T-LGLL cell line MOTN-1 and the NK-LGLL line NKL.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Analysis of extracellular vesicles from large granular lymphocytic leukemia cell lines

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
EV samples were provided in 100 µL PBS buffer, and SDS was added to a final concentration of 1% w/v. Samples were lysed in a Bioruptor Pico and BCA analysis was performed. Per sample, 10 µg protein were subjected to reduction and alkylation (12 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 1 h at 25 °C) and desalting performed according to the SP3 protocol. SP3 beads were added to each sample (1:20 w/w protein to beads ratio) and ethanol added to 50 % v/v to induce protein binding (15 min at 25 °C). Beads were immobilized using a magnetic rack, supernatants discarded, and beads washed three times with 80 % v/v ethanol. Pellets were resuspended in 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.5) with 0.2 µg trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio), incubated for 16 h at 37 °C, and supernatants acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for LC-MS/MS measurement. Samples were injected in triplicates on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer. Per injection, 1 µg protein was loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C-18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å) and washed for 5 min with 3 % ACN/0.1 % TFA at a flow rate of 30 μl/min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C-18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å). A flow rate of 300 nL/min using eluent A (0.05 % formic acid (FA)) and eluent B (80 % ACN/0.04 % FA) was used for gradient separation (5 - 50 % eluent B). A spray voltage of 1.5 kV was applied via a liquid junction emitter, with a source temperature of 250 °C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired between 300 to 1800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and top ten most intense precursor ions selected for MS/MS analysis (charge state: ≥+2, isolation window: ±1.5 m/z, HCD fragmentation: 27 NCE). MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with fixed first mass at m/z 100, lock mass enabled and dynamic exclusion list of 40 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) using the Sequest HT algorithm against a human protein database with additional common contaminating proteins (only reviewed sequences) from the UniProt database. Enzymatic processing was set to trypsin (full-specific), maximum missed cleavage events: 2, min. peptide length: 6 AA, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da and false discovery rate set to q = 0.01 by Percolator node. Label free quantification was performed by Minora feature detector with subsequent feature mapper (minimum trace length: 5, maximum RT shift: 4 min, mass tolerance: 10 ppm, parameter tuning: fine). Three technical injections were used as replicates for the quantification strategy and data filtered for high confidence proteins with minimum two peptides/one unique peptide identification.

METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Cell Lines
Notably, only a few established cell lines are available for the study of NK-LGLL biology. For our studies, we used NK-92 (ACC 488), which was established in 1992 from the peripheral blood of a 50-year-old male with LGL-non-Hodgkin lymphoma and NKL (CVCL_0466), which was established in 1996 from the peripheral blood of a 63-year-old patient with a more aggressive CD3−, CD16+, and CD56+ LGL leukemia. Both cell lines are now categorized as NK-LGLL and are supposed to display strong cytotoxicity. This also holds true for KHYG-1 (ACC 725), an ANKL cell line established in 1997 from the peripheral blood of a 45-year-old woman with aggressive NK leukemia. The T-LGLL line MOTN-1 (ACC 559) was established in 2001 from the peripheral blood of a 65-year-old woman with chronic T-LGLL; in this case, no cytotoxic activity for expanded cells was described. All cell lines were kept at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. The culture medium was RPMI 1640 with 2 mM glutamine and 25 mM HEPES (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin/100 μg/mL streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum (FCS, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for NKL and KHYG-1 or 20% (v/v) FCS for MOTN-1. NK-92 cells were cultured in Minimal Essential Medium α (MEM α, #32561029, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 12.5% (v/v) horse serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 12.5% (v/v) FCS. Since growth of LGLL cell lines is strictly IL-2-dependent, recombinant IL-2 (rIL-2, Novartis, Basel, Switzerland) was added at 50 U/mL for NKL, 100 U/mL for NK-92 and MOTN-1, and 200 U/mL for KHYG-1 expansion.
2.2. Immunofluorescent Staining
FasL and CD26/DPP4 surface expression was checked by conventional flow cytometry. A total of 105 cells were centrifuged in 96-well V-bottom plates, washed, and stained with PE-conjugated anti-FasL monoclonal antibody (mab) (clone NOK-1, Fisher Scientific) or anti-CD26/DPP4 mab (clone BA5b, BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA). After incubation for 30 min on ice, the cells were washed twice, fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde, and analyzed on a FACS Canto flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). For staining of intracellular antigens by flow cytometry, cells were washed, fixed, and permeabilized using the Cytofix/Cytoperm kit (BD-Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After fixation, the cells were analyzed on an FACS Canto flow cytometer. The following antibodies were used: PE-conjugated anti-granzyme A mab (clone CB9, BioLegend), PE-conjugated anti-granzyme B recombinant ab (clone QA16A02, BioLegend), PE-conjugated anti-perforin mab (clone dG9, BioLegend). For granulysin staining, we also used an unconjugated anti-Gnly mab (clone RF10, MBL International, Woburn, MA, USA) with Alexa-Fluor 555-conjugated goat anti-mouse polyclonal antibody (pab) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and unconjugated anti-Gnly pab from goat (RD Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) with Alexa-Fluor 555-conjugated donkey anti-goat pab, respectively. PE-conjugated isotype-matched antibodies from BioLegend and unconjugated antibodies from Abcam (Cambridge, UK) served as controls.
For imaging flow cytometry, 0.5 × 106 cells were washed and suspended in 100 µL LIVE/DEAD Fixable Far-Red stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 15 min, washed again, and permeabilized in 50 µL of Cytofix/Cytoperm. After 30 min, the cells were washed and incubated with a FITC-conjugated anti-CD107a mab (clone H4A3, BioLegend) for another 30 min. Two additional washes were followed by addition of PE-conjugated anti-granzyme A, anti-granzyme B, anti-perforin, or anti-CD107a as a control. For granulysin staining, we also used unconjugated anti-Gnly mab RF10 or unconjugated anti-Gnly pab with Alexa-Fluor 555-conjugated secondary reagents and modified the staining procedure accordingly. Finally, cells were fixed in 1% paraformaldehyde.
2.3. Imaging Flow Cytometry
Imaging flow cytometry was performed exactly as described before with an ImageStream X Mark II (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) one-camera system with 351, 488, 562, 658, and 732 nm lasers. Analyte-positive cells were discriminated based on controls. The Bright Detail Similarity R3 feature was used to quantify the degree of colocalization in double-positive cells only.
2.4. Subcellular Fractionation
Lysosome-related effector vesicles (LREVs) were enriched from expanded cell lines as described before, employing a commercial lysosome isolation kit (Merck/Sigma-Aldrich) and differential centrifugation and ultracentrifugation.
2.5. Immunoprecipitation and Western Blot
To obtain cell lysates for Western blotting, 10 × 106 cells were washed in PBS and lysed in NP40 lysis buffer (1% (v/v) Nonidet®P40 (Sigma-Aldrich), 20 mM Tris-buffer, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors for 30 min. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 14,000× g rpm and 4 °C for 10 min and supernatants were boiled in reducing sample buffer. To precipitate granulysin from supernatants of unstimulated or stimulated LGLL cells, 10 × 106 cells were washed in PBS and suspended in X-vivo medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific). TPA and/or ionomycin (both from Merck) were added at 20 or 500 ng/mL, respectively, to stimulate the cells for up to 2 h in the presence or absence of 4 mM EGTA and 4 mM MgCl2. Following stimulation, the cells were pelleted, washed with PBS, and lysed in NP40 lysis buffer. Supernatants were centrifuged at 3400× g to remove residual cells and subjected to immunoprecipitation. To this end, NP-40 lysates or supernatants were precleared with protein G-sepharose beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 h and incubated overnight with 0.5 μg of the polyclonal anti-Gnly antibody (R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) and protein G-sepharose beads at 4 °C. After three washes, samples were boiled in reducing sample buffer and subjected to gel electrophoresis on Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare, Munich, Germany) and membranes were blocked with bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) in TBST (5%, w/v). The polyclonal anti-Gnly antibody was then used for detection with HRP-conjugated donkey anti-goat IgG antibodies (Abcam) and ECL chemiluminescence reagents and Hyper Film (GE Healthcare).
2.6. Generation of Extracellular Vesicles for Proteome Analyses
To compare extracellular vesicles from T and NK-LGLL cells, we focused on NKL and MOTN-1. First, 4 × 108 cells were washed twice with PBS before expansion and cultivation for 72 h in 100 mL exosome-reduced culture medium in the presence of rIL-2. To deplete exosomes, RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 20% FCS and penicillin/streptomycin was centrifuged at 4 °C and 100,000× g (Beckman XL-80 centrifuge, SW 32.1 Ti rotor, Krefeld, Germany) for 18 h. For NKL cell cultures, the EV-depleted supernatant was filtered and further diluted with serum-free RPMI 1640 medium containing penicillin/streptomycin to a final concentration of 10% FCS. Particle concentrations in exosome-depleted culture media were occasionally tested via nanoparticle tracking analysis, as detailed before.
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated by differential centrifugation and ultracentrifugation as described in. Briefly, culture supernatants of NKL or MOTN-1 cells kept in EV-reduced medium were centrifuged for 10 min at 300× g, 30 min at 2000× g and for 45 min at 10,000× g to remove intact cells and cell debris. EVs were pelleted by ultracentrifugation at 100,000× g for 1.5 h, washed once with filtered (0.1 nm) PBS at 100,000× g for 1.5 h, and resuspended in 0.3 mL filtered PBS. EVs’ size and concentration were determined via nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) with a NanoSight 300 (NS300) using NanoSight software version 3.40 (Malvern Panalytical, Malvern, UK).
2.7. LC-MS-Based Proteome Analysis
EV samples were provided in 100 µL PBS buffer, and SDS was added to a final concentration of 1% w/v. Samples were lysed in a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode, San Diego, CA, USA) at 4 °C (10 × 30 s on, 30 s off) and 20 µL was used for BCA analysis (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (MOTN-1: 0.255 µg/µL, NKL: 0.224 µg/µL). Per sample, 10 µg protein was subjected to reduction and alkylation (12 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 1 h at 25 °C) and desalting performed according to the SP3 protocol. SP3 beads were added to each sample (1:20 w/w protein to beads ratio) and ethanol was added to 50% v/v to induce protein binding (15 min at 25 °C). Beads were immobilized using a magnetic rack, the supernatants were discarded, and the beads washed three times with 80% v/v ethanol. The pellets were resuspended within 50 mM TEAB buffer (pH 8.5) with 0.2 µg trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio, Promega, Madison, WI, USA), incubated for 16 h at 37 °C, and the supernatants were acidified using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for LC-MS/MS measurement.
Samples were injected in triplicate on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Per injection, 1 µg protein was loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C-18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and washed for 5 min with 3% ACN/0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 30 μL/min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C-18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex). A flow rate of 300 nL/min using eluent A (0.05% formic acid (FA)) and eluent B (80% ACN/0.04% FA) was used for gradient separation (5–50% eluent B). A spray voltage of 1.5 kV was applied via a liquid junction emitter (MS Wil Fused silica emitter, CoAnn Technologies LLC, Richland, WA, USA), with a source temperature of 250 °C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired between 300 and 1800 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, and top ten most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS analysis (charge state: ≥+2, isolation window: ±1.5 m/z, HCD fragmentation: 27 NCE). MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 with fixed first mass at m/z 100, lock mass enabled (m/z 445.120025), and a dynamic exclusion list of 40 s.
MS raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Sequest HT algorithm against a human protein database with additional common contaminating proteins (only reviewed sequences) from the UniProt database. The enzymatic processing was set to trypsin (full-specific); maximum missed cleavage events: 2; minimal peptide length: 6 AA; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; and false-discovery rate set to q = 0.01 by a Percolator node. Label-free quantification was performed by a Minora feature detector with a subsequent feature mapper (minimum trace length: 5; maximum RT shift: 4 min; mass tolerance: 10 ppm; parameter tuning: fine). Three technical injections were used as replicates for the quantification strategy and data filtered for high-confidence proteins with a minimum of two peptides/one unique peptide identification. Abundance values were median normalized and statistical testing was performed by a two-sided Welch t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR calculation (4e = 0.01) in Perseus. GO annotations were added and 1D enrichment analysis and Fisher’s exact test were performed with a 5% FDR level. All proteomics raw data have been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD053228.

RESULTS:
3. Results
3.1. Phenotypic Peculiarities of LGLL Cell Lines Analyzed by Flow Cytometry
It was reported that LGLL cells display a characteristic surface decoration of lineage-specific markers and a constitutive expression of functionally dysregulated FasLigand (FasL, CD95L, CD178) and Fas (CD95). However, according to our analyses, the four well-characterized cell lines (NK-92, NKL as NK-LGLL, KHYG-1 as ANKL and MOTN-1 as T-LGLL) used in the present study did not display any (membrane) mFasL, but high amounts of CD26 (DPP4), which we had previously associated with the degranulation of lysosome-related effector vesicles (LREVs) (Figure 1).
To analyze the presence of cytotoxic effector molecules, we permeabilized the cells for intracellular staining of granzymes (Grz) A and B and perforin (Prf). We used PE-conjugated monoclonal antibodies as specified before or respective isotype control antibodies (Figure 1). The two NK-LGLLs, NK-92 and NKL, were positive for all effectors, with a slightly higher fluorescence intensity for GrzA in NKL. In KHYG-1, we detected GrzA and Prf, but no GrzB. As expected from the characterization of MOTN-1, not showing any cytotoxic activity, we did not detect any of the tested effector proteins by intracellular staining (Figure 1).
3.2. Analysis of Granulysin and Granzyme B in Enriched LREVs
We have shown before that granulysin (Gnly) species might be used as markers for distinct entities of lysosome-related effector vesicles (LREVs) since, in untransformed T-cell blasts, they segregate to different secretory compartments and become mobilized by either classical or non-classical degranulation. In order to characterize the distribution of LREVs in LGLL cells, we thus analyzed enriched LREVs for the presence of Gnly, GrzB, and LAMP-1 (Figure 2). To our surprise, the Western blot results were quite heterogeneous and indicated a differential distribution of LREVs carrying individual effector molecules. In all cells, we detected LAMP-1 as a marker for lysosomes in the complete lysosomal fraction and in all individual fractions after density gradient and ultracentrifugation. Notably, in NK-92 cells, most LAMP-1 was detected in fractions 3 and 4, whereas in the other preparations, more LAMP-1 was detected in fractions 2 and 3. The distribution of GrzB and Gnly was quite different in the individual cell lines. GrzB was not detected in MOTN-1 but was present in the crude lysosomal fractions of the two NK-LGLLs and the ANKL cell lines. However, the subcellular distribution of GrzB differed in NK-92 and NKL or KHYG-1. Whereas in NK-92, GrzB was enriched in heavy fractions and especially in fraction 6 vesicles, it was much less intense in KHYG-1 and hardly detectable in NKL LREVs. For Gnly, the patterns seen in NK-92 corresponded to what has been described for untransformed T cells. The 9 kDa Gnly, representing the mature form, was detected primarily in heavier fractions associated with GrzB, whereas the 15 kDa form was more abundant in the lighter fractions 1 to 3. Notably, both Gnly species were stained in the crude lysosomal fraction of all four cell lines. Interestingly, in KHYG-1 and in NKL, although in distinct fractions, both 9 and 15 kDa Gnly were associated with GrzB. In NKL, KHYG-1 and MOTN-1, 9 kDa Gnly, however, was primarily associated with the lighter fractions 1 to 4. Given the high similarity in protein distribution in LREVs from untransformed cells, these results might indicate that subcellular sorting and distribution of effector proteins are altered in LGLL cells.
3.3. Imaging of the Intracellular Distribution of Cytotoxic Effector Proteins
We next employed imaging flow cytometry to analyze the subcellular localization of LAMP-1, GrzB, and Gnly in NK-92 and NKL cells (Figure 3 and Figure 4). Notably, almost all cells stain positive for LAMP-1 (NK-92 97.7%, NKL 99.4%), and 97.1% of NK-92 cells and 97.3% of NKL cells stain positive for GrzB. To differentiate between the 15 and 9 kDa forms of Gnly, we employed established Gnly detection reagents with differential binding properties. The monoclonal antibody (mab) RF10 exclusively binds to the full-length 15 kDa variant, whereas the polyclonal antibody (pab) termed pc almost exclusively recognizes the 9 kDa form in PFA-fixed samples. The 15 kDa variant of Gnly is expressed by only 3.2% of NK-92 cells and 83.1% of NKL cells, whereas the 9 kDa form is found in 28.7% of NK-92 cells and 54.3% of NKL cells. We also quantified the degree of colocalization of cytotoxic effector proteins with LAMP-1 in double-positive cells in NK-92 (Figure 3) and NKL (Figure 4) cells.
As expected, LAMP-1 is located in granular structures within both NK-92 and NKL cells and, as a positive control, nearly all cells display a bright detail similarity score >2 for the colocalization of FITC- and PE-labeled anti-LAMP-1 ab. Surprisingly, the cytotoxic effector protein GrzB hardly colocalizes with LAMP-1 since less than 10% of double-positive NKL and hardly any NK-92 cells show a BDS score >2 for the GrzB/LAMP-1 costaining. In NK-92 cells that express both the 15 and the 9 kDa form of Gnly, only about 10% of double-positive cells store 9 kDa Gnly in LAMP-1-positive intracellular granula, whereas 44% of the cells display a BDS >2 for RF10/LAMP-1-costainings, indicating a storage of 15 kDa Gnly in LAMP-1+ LREVs (Figure 3). Notably, in Gnly+ NKL cells, both the 15 and 9 kDa form colocalize with LAMP-1, with the 15 kDa Gnly/LAMP-1 colocalization being more pronounced (Figure 4). Thus, compared to untransformed cytotoxic CD8+ αβ-TCR+ and to γδ-TCR+ T cells where granzymes and the 9 kDa Gnly but usually not the 15 kDa Gnly associate with intracellular LAMP-1+ granular structures, the LGLL cells analyzed here apparently have a more heterogeneous and altered effector protein storage machinery.
3.4. Differential Activation-Induced Release of 9 or 15 kDa Granulysin
We previously reported that in untransformed T cells, individual LREVs containing either 15 kDa or 9 kDa Gnly utilize different routes for mobilization and release referred to as Ca2+-independent non-classical and Ca2+-dependent classical degranulation, respectively. Given the heterogenous and altered effector protein storage patterns in LGLL cells, we next analyzed the signal requirements for the release of the two forms of Gnly. The release of Gnly into cell culture supernatants was addressed by immunoprecipitation and Western blotting after stimulation with phorbolester (TPA, non-classical degranulation) or phorbolester and calcium ionophore (TPA/ionomycin, classical degranulation) in the absence or presence of the Ca2+ chelator EGTA (Figure 5).
We used the polyclonal anti-Gnly antibody (pc) as a primary antibody for Gnly detection in Western blots after immunoprecipitation of Gnly from supernatants to determine which form of Gnly is secreted into the culture supernatant upon stimulation with either phorbol ester and/or calcium ionophore. NKL cells hardly released any Gnly, although both forms were apparently expressed, as evidenced by the Western blot of whole cell lysates in Figure 5A. In contrast, we readily precipitated Gnly with the polyclonal anti-Gnly (pc) antibody from culture supernatants of unstimulated or TPA- and TPA/ionomycin-stimulated NK-92 cells. TPA activation resulted in an increased and selective release of the 15 kDa variant into the culture supernatant, whereas TPA in combination with ionomycin also induced the release of the 9 kDa form. Importantly, this Ca2+-dependent release triggered by TPA and ionomycin could be partially abrogated by Ca2+-chelation with EGTA. These results again highlight the more heterogenous and altered storage and release patterns of cytotoxic effector proteins in LGLL cells.
3.5. Proteomics Analysis of NKL- and MOTN-1-Derived Extracellular Vesicles
We previously reviewed the close relationship between intra- and extracellular effector vesicles in T and NK cells. To characterize and compare the protein load of extracellular vesicles (EV) from T- and NK-LGLL cell lines, a bottom–up proteomics analysis was performed with constitutively produced EV from MOTN-1 and NKL. To this end, 4 × 108 cells were washed with PBS before expansion and cultivation for 72 h in 100 mL exosome-reduced culture medium in the presence of rIL-2. EVs were collected and enriched as described and characterized by nanoparticle-tracking analyses (NTAs). The final concentration of particles was comparable in both preparations (6.45 × 1010 ± 2.59 × 109 particles/mL for NKL and 5.87 × 1010 ± 2.49 × 109 particles/mL for MOTN-1), as was the size of the enriched EVs (mean: 237.6 ± 3.6 nm for NKL and 218.6 ± 0.9 nm for MOTN-1; mode: 171.5 ± 6.8 nm for NKL; and 183.9 ± 8.2 nm for MOTN-1). As depicted in Figure 6A, the EV/exosome preparations were quite homogeneous, containing mainly small extracellular vesicles (sEVs) of around 200 nm in diameter and only minor fractions of larger vesicles.
The proteomics analysis of the samples in three technical injections revealed 1742 high-confidence protein identifications, of which 1174 proteins were quantifiable (see Supplementary Table S1 for comprehensive information). Exosome proteins were markedly enriched within the dataset, with 766 proteins being associated with the GO term “extracellular exosomes” (GO:0070062). These included common marker proteins such as the tetraspanins CD63 and CD81, as well as other EV-related proteins such as syntenin-1, TSG101 or the programmed cell death 6-interacting protein/Alix. Notably, the tetraspanin CD9 was missing in the dataset and was not identified in any sample (Table 1).
Other proteins which are typically present in EVs of different cell types include flotillins, annexins, and heat shock proteins. Several members of these protein families were also detected in EVs from NKL and MOTN-1. Moreover, cell adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1 (CD54), VCAM-1 (CD106) and DNAM-1 (CD226) as well as various integrins (integrin α-4, integrin β-1, -2, -7) were detected. The list of identified proteins also includes several Rab GTPases associated with vesicle transport (such as RAB5B, RAB7A, RAB11B, and RAB27A), ADAM proteases that are known to be associated with intra- and extracellular vesicles (such as ADAM8 and ADAM10), and lysosome-associated membrane proteins LAMP-1 (CD107a) and LAMP-2 (CD107b) (Table 1). In addition, numerous transmembrane or cytosolic receptors and signaling proteins and various nuclear or ribosomal proteins were identified in the enriched EVs (Supplementary Table S1).
Quantifiable proteins were subjected to statistical testing by a two-sided Welch t-test to identify proteins with altered abundance levels between both samples (Figure 6B). Relative differences were considered biologically relevant at a 2-fold difference (log2(FC) ≥ 1 or ≤−1, strict filter) or at a 1.4-fold difference (log2(FC) ≥ 0.5 or ≤−0.5, moderate filter), both including statistical significance at q = 0.01. This analysis provided 186 proteins with significantly higher abundance levels in MOTN-1 samples (strict: 119, moderate: 67), as well as 263 proteins with higher abundance levels in NKL samples (strict: 173, moderate: 90). The MS analysis also identified 34 proteins, which were exclusively identified within MOTN-1 samples and 21 exclusively in NKL samples (Supplementary Table S2).
Proteins with higher abundance levels in NKL-derived EVs included, for example, granzyme B (GZMB), Zyxin (ZYX), and the ubiquitin-like protein ISG15 (ISG15), but also other cytotoxic effector proteins including perforin (PRF1) and granzyme A (GZMA). MOTN-1-derived EVs presented more peroxiredoxin-2 (PRDX2), the T-cell surface glycoprotein CD4 (CD4), plexin-B2 (PLXNB2), and TNF-receptor 2 (TNFRSF1B) (Table 2). Interestingly, granzyme K (GZMK) was instead exclusively identified in EVs of the T-LGLL MOTN-1. The proteins with the largest fold changes (FC log2) within both samples were the beta chains of the major histocompatibility complex HLA-DR: MOTN-1 contained DRB1–8 with a log2(FC) of 7.45, while NKL contained DRB1-1 with log2(FC) of −8.99. Both proteins provide a high sequence homology, with the MS-based quantification being restricted to a few sequence-unique peptides.
Notably, LAMP-1 showed increased abundance levels in MOTN-1 samples, whereas no significant difference in protein abundance was seen for LAMP-2. Further, the EV-associated dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4, CD26) was also detected without significant difference in protein abundance in both types of EVs. The activating NK cell receptors “Natural killer cell receptor 2B4” and “Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor 2DL4 (KIR2DL4)” were identified in EVs of both NKL and MOTN-1 without significant fold changes, while the inhibitory receptor “immunomodulatory receptor leukocyte immunoglobulin-like receptor B1” was detected with a higher abundance level in NKL. The death receptor Fas was detected in EVs of both cell lines; however, its abundance was significantly increased in the MOTN-1-derived vesicles (Table 1).
For further characterization of the proteins, GO terms were linked to each individual protein and those were analyzed by Fisher’s exact test and 1D enrichment analysis (Supplementary Tables S3 and S4). The Fisher’s exact test uses the enrichment factor (EF) to test the enrichment of protein groups among those with significant changes between MOTN-1 and NKL. In EV of MOTN-1, significantly enriched GO terms were detected as chaperonin-containing T-complex and protein folding, both terms subsuming proteins associated with protein folding. In addition, the terms sperm–egg recognition and binding of sperm to zona pellucida were enriched, as well as the term antigen presentation. Proteins associated with membranes (external side of plasma membrane, intrinsic to endoplasmic reticulum membrane, and integral to the organelle membrane) were also increased in MOTN-1. In EVs of NKL, the following terms were detected as significantly enriched: protein–DNA complex and nucleosome, which include proteins that interact with DNA and are involved in its packaging, e.g., histones. In addition, terms that can be attributed to the cytoskeleton and cell movement were enriched in the EVs of NKL cells. For the proteins mentioned in Table 1 and Table 2, GO-terms are summarized in Supplementary Table S5.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Large granular lymphocyte leukemia (LGLL) is a rare chronic lymphoproliferative disorder with heterogeneous clinical presentation. It is characterized by clonal expansion of lymphocytes with granulated cytoplasm. The fifth edition of the WHO classification of hematolymphoid tumors places LGLL in the category of mature T-cell and NK cell leukemias with three major subtypes: T-large granular lymphocytic leukemia (T-LGLL), NK-large granular lymphocytic leukemia (NK-LGLL), and aggressive NK-cell leukemia (ANKL). A further distinction can be made between CD4+ or CD8+ T-LGLL and αβ- or γδ-T-LGLL. LGL leukemia accounts for approximately 2–5% of chronic lymphoproliferative diseases in the US and Europe. The incidence is reported to be 0.2–0.72 per one million per year. The median age of onset is 60 years and both sexes are similarly affected. Chronic T-LGLL accounts for 85% of cases, while NK-LGLL accounts for less than 10%. Aggressive NK-LGL leukemia (ANKL) occurs more frequently in Asia and affects slightly younger patients, particularly those with a history of EBV infection.
Diagnosis and characterization of LGLL-subtypes are based on cytology, immunophenotype, and evidence of monoclonality. The phenotype of T-LGLL is heterogeneous, being CD2+, CD3+, CD8+, CD57+, CD45RA+, CD16+, and CD4−, with or without expression of CD56. As mentioned, αβ-TCRs are often expressed, but γδ-TCR+ cases have also been described. Overall, this T-cell phenotype corresponds to a constitutively active mature memory T effector cell. In T-LGLL clones, cytotoxic effector proteins including granzymes and perforin are frequently expressed, although in different combinations. A less frequent subtype occurs in 10–15% of cases and is CD4+, CD57+, CD8− or CD8+dim. NK-LGLL are mostly CD2+, CD3−, CD8+, CD16+, CD56+ and also express cytotoxic effector molecules.
Although significant progress has been made in our understanding of genetic and molecular alterations associated with LGLL (see recent overviews for details), the contribution of the LGLL-associated cytotoxicity and respective effector molecules has only been poorly addressed. Initially, it became evident that dysregulated apoptosis may represent a key event in the development of LGL malignancy and autoimmunity. Perzova and Loughran reported that seven out of the seven LGLL patients tested displayed constitutive expression of FasL gene transcripts. It was then observed that leukemic cells from 9 out of 11 T-LGLL patients constitutively expressing both Fas and FasL at high levels were completely resistant to anti-Fas- and anti-CD3-mediated apoptosis. Interestingly, the LGLL T cells did not show apparent mutations in Fas and in most cases underwent apoptosis after PHA and IL-2 stimulation. Over the years, FasL was also associated with other LGLL symptoms, including neutropenia. The serum level of (soluble) sFasL, which is involved in preventing Fas-mediated apoptosis, was proposed as a marker for LGLL activity.
For other cytotoxic effectors, data pointing to dysregulation are hardly available. In fact, granzyme (Grz) B and perforin (Prf) are often mentioned as additional markers to ascertain a diagnosis of LGLL, especially for histological staining of bone marrow biopsies. Surprisingly for granulysin (Gnly), another key effector of T and NK cells, the distribution, release, or impact in LGLL has apparently never been addressed. The presence of elevated levels of sFasL in LGLL patients’ sera might, however, indicate a substantial production and release of cytotoxic granules from leukemic cells. Although sFasL has been correlated with the prevention of apoptosis in leukemic cells, the exposure or release of vesicles carrying the death ligand might have broader implications. In particular, the unsafe exposure of molecules transported in secretory vesicles or a release of vesicles carrying effectors as extracellular vesicles might contribute to immune dysfunction and the development of autoimmune diseases.
As a first attempt to tackle these issues, we addressed the distribution and release of cytotoxic effector molecules in established LGLL cell lines. Previously, we compared intracellular effector vesicles from the patient-derived NK LGLL line NKL with those from the NK cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma line YTS and from untransformed cells. We reported heterogeneous profiles of functionally relevant proteins including cytotoxic effector proteins in leukemic and activated human NK cells.
We now followed this route and analyzed patient-derived LGLL cells, in particular MOTN-1, representing a T-cell LGLL; NKL and NK-92, representing two NK-LGLLs; and KHYG-1, representing an ANKL. For those cell lines, all individual cellular characteristics have been described in detail before. As stated above, individual LGLL subtypes differ in the expression of lineage-specific surface markers, display different mutations in genes of either the STAT3/5B or the NOTCH1 pathway, and might produce different immunomodulatory cytokines.
Interestingly, in our hands, all cell lines did express comparable levels of CD26, but did not express (membrane) mFasL. When we analyzed the distribution of effector proteins by conventional and imaging flow cytometry or Western blotting, we detected major differences in the abundance of granzyme A, granzyme B, perforin, and granulysin. Similar differences were also seen in cytotoxic granules enriched as lysosome-related effector vesicles (LREVs). In untransformed T and NK cells, such LREVs, previously also described as secretory lysosomes, form the basis for a differential release of individual cytotoxic effector proteins depending on the strength of stimulation. As an example, we demonstrated that granulysin (Gnly) species might be used as markers for distinct entities of lysosome-related effector vesicles (LREVs) since in untransformed T-cell blasts, they segregate to different secretory compartments with granzyme B or FasL and become mobilized by either classical or non-classical degranulation.
Due to a potential relation of LREVs or secretory lysosomes to extracellular vesicles released as exosomes or microparticles, we performed a comparative proteome profiling of isolated EV from MOTN-1 and NKL to obtain a deeper insight into individual proteins’ composition and to address the potential role of LREVs as intra- and extracellular components for disease manifestation or pathology.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at , Supplementary_Proteomics_Tables, containing Supplementary Table S1—List of high-confidence protein identifications; Supplementary Table S2—Results of statistical Welch t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR, q = 0.01; Supplementary Table S3—Results of Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR, q = 0.05; Supplementary Table S4—Results of 1D annotation enrichment analysis with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR, q = 0.05; Supplementary Table S5—Results of Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR, q = 0.05 (selected EV proteins).
Data Availability Statement
All proteomics raw data have been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD053228.