PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Sperm
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Peptide counting
keywords: Autoanti-sperm antibodies; Serum; Treg depletion; Immune tolerance; Epididymal fluid

ABSTRACT:
We characterized the sperm proteins recognized by the antibodies in mouse serum and epididymal fluid after immune tolerance disruption by performing mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics. For this, we immunoprecipitated sperm cell protein extractions with serum and epididymal fluids from the proximal and distal epididymis of WT and Foxp3-DTR transgenic mice 2 weeks after Treg depletion.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Chronic inflammation drives epididymal tertiary lymphoid structure formation and autoimmune fertility disorders

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Serum and proximal and distal epididymal fluids were collected from WT and Foxp3-DTR mice two weeks following DT treatment. These samples were incubated with Dynabeads® Protein G, washed, and then incubated with protein extracts,derived from proximal or distal sperm cells of WT naïve mice, following the manufacturer’s protocol (Immunoprecipitation Kit – DynabeadsTM Protein G, 10006D, Invitrogen). Eluates were run on a 10% bis-acrylamide gel (NuPAGETM 10% Bis-Tris Gel, NP0302BOX, Invitrogen), then stained with Coomassie dye R-250 (ImperialTM Protein Stain, 24615, Thermo Scientific), bands were cut and submitted to the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School, Building C, Room 523, 240 Longwood Ave. Boston, MA 02115.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences, and the data were filtered to < 1 % peptide false discovery rate (FDR). Only proteins identified with at least 1 unique peptide and detected in at least one sample from each group (WT and Foxp3-DTR groups) were considered for further analysis.  Proteomic datasets of each group were compared using VENNY 2.1 Venn Diagram online tool (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). Differentially expressed proteins were defined based on the criteria ± 2 FC in protein abundance with a p-value < 0.05. For protein abundance, the sum of intensity values was used. The sum of intensity is calculated as the sum of the intensities of all peaks from the same protein. The web-based software Morpheus (https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus) was used to plot the heat-maps.