PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
diseases: Prostate cancer
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Palbociclib; Lapc4; Ribociclib; Cdk4/6; Prostate cancer; Lncap

ABSTRACT:
CDK4/6 kinase inhibitors have shown great promise in clinical trials in various cancer types and have recently entered clinical trial for advanced prostate cancer. Although patients are expected to respond well to this class of drugs, development of resistance in some patients is anticipated. To pre-empt this and study how prostate cancer may evade CDK4/6 inhibition, new resistance models were generated from LNCaP and LAPC4 prostate cancer cells cells by prolonged culturing in presence of 0.5uM palbociclib. A shotgun phosphoproteomics approach was utilized and integrated with RNA sequencing data to unravel the molecular underpinnings of acquired resistance to palbociclib and resultant broad CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance in prostate cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment were performed as previously described(Humphrey, Azimifar, and Mann 2015; Drake et al. 2012; Zimman et al. 2010) with minor modifications. Briefly, LNCaP or LAPC4 prostate cancer cell lines that were sensitive or resistant to palbociclib were lysed in 6M guanidium hydrochloride buffer (6M Guanidinium chloride, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 10mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40mM 2-chloroacetamide, 2mM Vanadate, 2.5mM NaPyrophosphate, 1mM Beta-glycerophosphate, 10mg/ml N-octyl-glycoside). The lysate was sonicated, cleared, and protein was measured. 5 mg of protein was digested with trypsin and the resulting phosphopeptides were subjected to phosphotyrosine antibody-based enrichment via immunoprecipitation. The immunoprecipitate was washed and pY peptides were eluted. The supernatant from the pY immunoprecipitations was kept for pST peptide enrichment. 2.5 mg of pST peptides were de-salted using C18 columns and then separated using strong cation exchange chromatography. In separate reactions the pY and pST peptides were then further enriched using titanium dioxide columns to remove existing non-phosphorylated peptides. The pY and pST peptides were then de-salted using C18 tips prior to submission on the mass spectrometer. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a dual pump nanoRSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA) interfaced with a Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA)(Kelstrup et al. 2012; Scheltema et al. 2014). Samples were run in technical duplicates, and data were searched using MaxQuant Andromeda version 1.5.3.30(Cox and Mann 2008) against the Uniprot human reference proteome database with canonical and isoform sequences (downloaded September 2016 from http://uniprot.org). MaxQuant Andromeda parameters were set as previously described(Drake et al. 2016).

DATA PROCESSING:
MS Data Analysis MS data analysis was performed as previously described(Drake et al. 2016). For clustering, pY data were filtered using an FDR-corrected ANOVA p-value of 0.2, pS/pT data were filtered using an FDR-corrected ANOVA p-value of 0.05. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the Cluster version 3.0 with the Pearson correlation and pairwise complete linkage analysis(Eisen et al. 1998). Java TreeView version 1.1.6r4 was used to visualize clustering results(Saldanha 2004).  Kinase Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA) KSEA was performed as previously described(Drake et al. 2012). Briefly, the phosphopeptides were rank-ordered by average fold change between palbociclib resistant LNCaP cell lines and sensitive cells. The enrichment score was calculated using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic. Statistical significance was calculated via permutation analysis. The normalized enrichment score (NES) was calculated by taking the enrichment score and dividing by the mean of the absolute values of all enrichment scores from the permutation analysis. We used the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to calculate false discovery rate for each kinase.

METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tissue culture and establishing resistance lines
LNCaP and LAPC4-derived cells were cultured in improved minimum essential media (IMEM; Corning, Manassis, VA) or Iscove’s modified Dulbecco media (IMDM; Corning, Manassis, VA), respectively, supplemented with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; HyClone, USA), 1% L-glutamine and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Unless otherwise described, cells were plated overnight, and treated with 0.5μM PD0233991 (PD, palbociclib, SelleckChem), LEE011 (LEE, ribociclib, Novartis) or U0126 (Promega). Palbociclib resistant cell models were generated from LNCaP and LAPC4 cells by sustained treatment with 0.5μM PD (Schematic in Figure 1A), and maintained under selection when resistance, measured via BrdU incorporation, was achieved after ~3 months. Cells were authenticated by ATCC and checked for mycoplasma upon thawing and at termination of maintenance after <20 passages (ATCC 30-1012K).
Trypan Blue Exclusion
Cells were treated with a dose range of indicated doses of PD, LEE or U0126 for up to 6 days, with drugs refreshed every other day. Cells were trypsinized, counted twice on a hemacytometer using the Trypan blue exclusion method, normalized to a drug-free control. Experiments were performed at least twice in quadruplicate.
Flow Cytometry
Cells were treated with 0.5μM PD or LEE for 24h, and after a 2-hour pulse labeling of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU; Amersham, RPN201), adherent cells were harvested and fixed with 100% ethanol. Proliferation was measured by bivariate flow cytometry using BrdU and propidium-iodide (PI) staining. A Millipore Guava EasyCyte flow cytometer captured 10,000 BrdU/PI events and the Millipore InCyte software was used to gate for the percentage of BrdU incorporation. Experiments were performed at least twice in biological triplicate.
RT-PCR
Cells were treated with 0.5μM PD or CTRL for 24h, and processed to assess RB1 expression, as described previously, performed at least twice in biological triplicate.
Immunoblotting
Protein harvesting and immunoblotting were performed as previously described, quantified in ImageJ. Antibodies used are mouse-α-RB (BD-Biosciences, 554136), rabbit-α-GAPDH (Santa Cruz, SC-25778), rabbit-α-CyclinA (Santa Cruz, SC-596), rabbit-α-ERK1 (Santa Cruz, SC-94), rabbit-α-phospho-p44/p42(T202/Y204) (Cell Signaling, 4370S), goat-α-LaminB (Santa Cruz, SC-6217). Phospho-blots were blocked and immunoblotted in 2.5% BSA, all other blots with 5% milk in PBS-Tween.
Migration and Invasion Assays
Corning FluoroBlok 24-Multiwell and Corning BioCoat Tumor Invasion System plates were utilized for migration and invasion assays, according to protocols provided by the company, performed at least twice in quadruplicate. Bottom wells were filled with IMEM/20%FBS. 50,000 cells (passed 2x, 40um cell strainers) were seeded in the top compartment of each well in serum-free IMEM and incubated for 48h (migration) or 72h (invasion). Cells were stained with Corning Calcein AM Fluorescent Dye and measured on a BioTek SynergyHT plate reader.
Clonogenic Assays and FIJI
The bottom layer of 1% agar/PBS was mixed 1:1 with culture media supplemented with 20% FBS and poured into 6-well plates, after which a second layer with 0.6% agar/FBS mixed with a cell-media/20%FBS suspension was poured on top. Where mentioned, drugs were mixed into both agar layers. 200ul media +/− drugs was added on top and refreshed twice a week. 5000 cells were seeded per well in triplicate. Plates were incubated for 3 weeks, after which each well was photographed. Images were analyzed with FIJI (ImageJ) as follows: select each well transform to gray scale, adjust the threshold to remove background, and detect colonies, Analyze Particles to count total colonies and pixel sizes of each colony. Experiments were performed at least twice in triplicate.
In vivo studies
Xenograft studies were performed in accordance with NIH Guidelines and animal protocols were approved by IACUC at Thomas Jefferson University. Cells (3×106 per injection) suspended in PBS were combined 1:1 with Matrigel (BD Biosciences, 354234) and injected subcutaneously into the flanks of 5-6-week-old, intact-male athymic nude mice (Charles River Laboratories). Tumor development was monitored over time by palpation. Where indicated, mice received AIN-76A diet laced with 6.7mg/kg trametinib or control (kindly provided by the laboratory of Dr Andrew Aplin, Thomas Jefferson University).
RNA sequencing (RNAseq) and GSEA analyses
RNA was extracted with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen) from PDR and parental LNCaP or LAPC4 cells pre-treated 24h with 0.5μM PD or vehicle (CTRL). 100-200 ng of total RNA was used to prepare RNAseq libraries using the TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kit V2 (Illumina, San Diego, CA), following the protocol described by the manufacturer. High throughput sequencing (HTS) was performed using an Illumina HiSeq2500 with each sample sequenced to a minimum depth of ~50 million reads. A paired end 2×125 cycle sequencing strategy was employed. Data were subjected to Illumina quality control (QC) procedures (>80% of the data yielded a Phred score of 30). Secondary analysis was carried out on an OnRamp Bioinformatics Genomics Research Platform (OnRamp Bioinformatics, San Diego, CA). OnRamp’s advanced Genomics Analysis Engine utilized an automated RNAseq workflow to process the data, including data validation and quality control, read alignment to the human genome (hg19) using TopHat2, which revealed >90% mapping of the paired end reads, generation of gene-level count data with HTSeq, and differential expression analysis with DEseq2, which enabled the inference of differential signals with robust statistical power. (Genomics Research Platform with RNAseq workflow v1.0.1, including FastQValidator v0.1.1a, Fastqc v0.11.3, Bowtie2 v2.1.0, TopHat2 v2.0.9, HTSeq v0.6.0, DEseq v1.8.0).
The resulting BAM files were sorted and inputted into the Python package HTSeq to generate count data for gene-level differential expression analyses. To infer differential signal within the data sets with robust statistical power, DEseq2 was utilized. Transcript count data from DESeq2 analysis of the samples were sorted according to their adjusted p-value or q-value, the smallest false discovery rate (FDR) at which a transcript is called significant (q<0.1). FDR is the expected fraction of false positive tests among significant tests and was calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing adjustment procedure. LNCaP (LN) and LAPC4 (L4) sequencing data are deposited NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus, accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE99675.
Analysis of Phosphotyrosine, Phosphoserine and Phosphothreonine Peptides by Quantitative Mass Spectrometry
PDR and parental LNCaP or LAPC4 cells were treated 24h with 0.5μM PD or CTRL, scraped, pelleted, and snap frozen. Protein digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment were performed as previously described with minor modifications. Briefly, cells were lysed in 6M guanidinium hydrochloride buffer (6M Guanidinium chloride, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 10mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40mM 2-chloroacetamide, 2mM Vanadate, 2.5mM NaPyrophosphate, 1mM Beta-glycerophosphate, 10mg/ml N-octyl-glycoside). Lysates were sonicated, cleared, and protein was measured. 5 mg of protein was digested with trypsin and the resulting phosphopeptides were subjected to phosphotyrosine antibody-based enrichment via immunoprecipitation. The immunoprecipitate was washed and phospho-Tyrosine (pY) peptides were eluted. The supernatant from the pY immunoprecipitations was kept for phospho-Serine/Threonine (pST) peptide enrichment. 2.5 mg of pST peptides were de-salted using C18 columns and then separated using strong cation exchange chromatography. In separate reactions the pY and pST peptides were then further enriched using titanium dioxide columns to remove existing non-phosphorylated peptides. The pY and pST peptides were then de-salted using C18 tips prior to submission on the mass spectrometer. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a dual pump nanoRSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA) interfaced with a Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA). Samples were run in technical duplicates, and data were searched using MaxQuant Andromeda version 1.5.3.30 against the Uniprot human reference proteome database with canonical and isoform sequences (downloaded September 2016 from http://uniprot.org). MaxQuant Andromeda parameters were set as previously described. Data are deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortion via the PRIDE partner repository, accessible through dataset identifier PXD006561.
MS data analysis was performed as previously described. For clustering, pY data were filtered using an FDR-corrected ANOVA p-value of 0.2, pS/pT data were filtered using an FDR-corrected ANOVA p-value of 0.05. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the Cluster version 3.0 with the Pearson correlation and pairwise complete linkage analysis. Java TreeView version 1.1.6r4 was used to visualize clustering results.
Kinase Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA)
KSEA was performed as previously described. Briefly, phosphopeptides were rank-ordered by average fold change between PDR and parental cells. The enrichment score was calculated using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic. Statistical significance was calculated via permutation analysis. The normalized enrichment score (NES) was calculated by taking the enrichment score and dividing by the mean of the absolute values of all enrichment scores from the permutation analysis. The Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was utilized to calculate false discovery rate for each kinase. For pY analyses, cutoffs of FDR<0.05, hits>4, and NES>1.3 were used. For pST analyses, cutoffs of FDR<0.02, hits>5, and NES>2 were used.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
While CDK4/6 inhibitors have shown promise in clinical trials for cancer treatment, acquired resistance is common. Thus, the present study interrogated the underpinnings of therapeutic resistance, to identify markers for therapeutic outcome and develop new strategies when resistance develops.
Acquired resistance to palbociclib results in broad CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance
Palbociclib-resistant (PDR) PCa cell models generated from hormone-therapy sensitive PCa cells (LNCaP and LAPC4) demonstrated retained BrdU incorporation after PD treatment (LNCaP-parental: 5.3%; LN-PDR1: 32.3%; LN-PDR2: 34.2%), indicative of a G1/S cell cycle checkpoint bypass (Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure 1A). Retained Cyclin A (an RB/E2F target gene) protein levels after 24 hours treatment with 0.5 μM PD confirmed acquired resistance (Figure 1B, Supplementary Figure 1B). Ribociclib (LEE011, LEE) is similar to PD in chemical structure and likewise targets the ATP binding pocket, and thus it was not surprising that the PDR models were resistant to LEE, as observed via retained BrdU incorporation (LNCaP-parental: 9.8%; LN-PDR1: 35.4%, LN-PDR2: 37.9%) and Cyclin A (Figure 1A/B, Supplementary Figure 1A/B). Dose response curves confirmed that PDR models continued to proliferate, while the parental cells were arrested at sub-micromolar doses of PD or LEE (Figure 1C/D). These findings indicate that acquired resistance to palbociclib confers broad resistance to this class of agents, suggestive of common mechanisms of bypass.
Acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance is associated with rewired transcriptional programs
To identify transcriptional alterations underlying CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance, PDR and parental cells were treated for 24 hours with 0.5μM PD or control (CTRL), and RNA sequencing was performed. The MA plots in Supplementary Figures 2A (right) and 3A represent the log ratio (M) of the PD versus CTRL values over the average log intensity (A) of each transcript, visualizing a global reduction of differentially expressed genes in PDR models compared to the parental cells after PD treatment. Strikingly, the large cluster of downregulated genes in the parental model (indicated by the blue arrow) was absent in the resistant cells, confirming that PD is unable to significantly inhibit this gene cluster. When comparing PDR1 and PDR2 profiles to parental cells, in both PD-treated and CTRL conditions, vast transcriptomic changes were observed in both the total number of differentially expressed transcripts and log ratio amplitudes (Figure 2A, left, Supplementary Figure 3B). While PD treatment showed limited impact on the transcriptome of the PDR lines compared to parental cells, these models demonstrated extensive alteration in the transcriptome to adapt to extended PD exposure. The majority of transcripts (>1.5-fold, q-value<0.1) were common between the two independently generated LNCaP PDR models in both CTRL and PD conditions (Figure 2A, right). Although the PDR models showed a few distinctions, deregulated signaling pathways common between PDR models are most likely to contribute to resistance.
To identify common pathways enriched in the PDR models, complete transcriptional profiles were utilized in Gene Set Enrichment Analyses (GSEA: www.broadinstitute.org/GSEA) interrogating the predefined Oncogenic Signatures and Hallmarks from the Molecular Signature Database (MSigDB) (Figure 2B; Supplementary Figures 2B/3D). Gene sets enriched in both PDR models under at least one condition were selected to highlight pathways that are most likely to contribute to acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance. Enriched Hallmark gene sets included G2M Checkpoint, supporting the contention that resistant cells bypass the G1/S checkpoint and progress through cell cycle. Enrichment of E2F Targets in PDR lines suggests increased E2F activity, potentially mediated through a bypass of RB. Genomic RB loss has been observed in ~30% of advanced PCa across different patient cohorts, and as RB is the main target of CDK4/6-mediated phosphorylation, loss of this gene has been attributed to resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors. Concordantly, RB knockdown Oncogenic Signatures were also enriched, further highlighting that RB function may be reduced (Figure 2B). RT-PCR and immunoblotting demonstrated that total RB mRNA and protein were retained in all PDR lines, albeit reduced to 29-56% (Supplementary Figures 2C/3C top). Retained RB protein in the PDR models remained hyperphosphorylated (Supplementary Figures 2C/3C bottom, upper band total RB (tRB)) in presence of a CDK4/6 inhibitor, which attenuates RB function, confirming aberrant inactivation of RB in presence of CDK4/6 inhibitors that likely causes bypass of the G1/S checkpoint and activation of E2F transcription factors. As the kinome forms an intricate network of interactions, it was postulated that bypass of CDK4/6 inhibition likely causes kinome rewiring. Notably, RNA sequencing uncovered enrichment of numerous kinase related signatures (Figure 2B/C, Supplementary Figure 4A). These findings served as the impetus for further exploration to identify specific kinase pathway(s) that could present novel targets for therapeutic intervention.
MAPK activation is a hallmark for CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance
Phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry profiling provided an unbiased approach to investigate the PDR-associated kinome. Cells were treated for 24h with either 0.5μM PD or control, lysed and digested (Figure 3A). Phospho-Tyrosine (pY) peptides were immunoprecipitated with an anti-pY antibody, while phospho-Serine/Threonine peptides (pST) remained in the supernatant, allowing analysis of both peptide populations via Liquid Chromatography with tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Hierarchical clustering revealed altered phosphorylation levels of peptides across models and treatments, while duplicate samples cluster together (Figure 3A, Supplementary Figure 4B). Phospho-peptide profiles were subjected to kinase substrate enrichment analyses (KSEA). The pY peptides unveiled multiple motifs targeted by Src and its SH2-domain (Figure 3B, Supplementary Figure 4C), which is linked to cancer progression. The pST peptides were strongly enriched for motifs targeted by ERK1 and ERK2 (aka MAPK3 and MAPK1; Figure 3C, Supplementary Figure 4D). To prioritize changes in the phosphoproteome most likely to link to CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance, results were compared with the gene expression data. Intriguingly, KRAS and RAF kinases, both of which were highly represented in the Oncogenic Signatures from the RNAseq data, regulate ERK1/2 via Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinase, or MEK. These data suggest that kinase-signaling cascades play an important role in acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance in these models. Moreover, the MAPK pathway is targetable with clinically tested pharmacologic agents, such as MEK inhibitors that are already FDA-approved for some cancers (e.g. melanoma), nominating this pathway for further study. Together, these data indicate that acquired resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors was associated with induced MAPK pathway activity.
Activated ERK is associated with aggressive phenotypes
As described above, Oncogenic Signatures representative of altered KRAS and RAF signaling were highly enriched as a function of acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance. KRAS acts upstream of RAF family kinases, regulating their activity, and in turn the RAF family kinases directly activate ERK1/2 kinases through phosphorylation. Indeed, while overall ERK1/2 levels were unchanged, ERK1/2 kinases were hyper-phosphorylated in the resistance models (Figure 4A, Supplementary Figure 5A), which would explain the observation that ERK1/2 motifs are differentially phosphorylated in the phosphoproteomics analysis. While canonical MAPK activating growth factor receptors (EGFR and FGFR families) displayed no consensus in differential expression, EGF transcripts were consistently upregulated in the PDR models, which was associated with altered EGFR activity in the phosphoproteomic data (Figure 3B and Suppl. Figure 4C). Elevated EGF protein levels were confirmed via western blotting, which likely causes MAPK activation in these models (Figure 4B, Supplementary Figure 5B). Combined, these data strongly suggest that acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance results in increased EGF production, leading to hyperactivation of the MAPK pathway.
As activated MAPK signaling is known to induce proliferation via induction of D-type Cyclins and prevent apoptosis, and thus can drive cancer progression, the PDR models were further characterized biologically. Baseline growth (off PD selection) was compared to the parental cells, demonstrating an almost three-fold higher growth rate for the LNCaP-derived models (Figure 4C; no growth difference was observed for LAPC4 cells, data not shown). Trans-well chemotaxis assays from 0% to 20% serum conditions revealed an increased migratory capacity and enhanced invasion in the PDR models (Figure 4D, Supplementary Figure 5C). Consonantly, transcriptome data revealed enrichment of the GSEA Hallmark for Epithelial Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) in the PDR lines (Supplementary Figure 2D/3E), which could underlie the aggressive, migratory and invasive characteristics these models have obtained upon acquiring PD resistance. To assess clonogenic growth capacity, cells were suspended at low density in agar-containing culture media and incubated for three weeks to allow colony formation. HRAS-transformed Mouse Adult Fibroblasts (MAF cells) served as a positive control due to previously described capacity to grow 3D colonies. Representative images of culture wells for each cell line are shown in Figure 4E (left). To utilize an unbiased approach for colony formation analyses, a macro was developed for FIJI (ImageJ), which counts total colonies per well and measures the pixel size of each colony. Although there was no significant difference in total colonies formed by the LN-PDR or parental LNCaP cells (Supplementary Figure 5D; note that LAPC4 and derivatives did not form colonies after >1 month), median colony sizes in the LN-PDR1 and LN-PDR2 models were significantly larger than the parental cells (p=0.0008 and p=0.0001 respectively, One-way ANOVA; Figure 4E, right). Combined, these findings reveal that acquired resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors is associated with phenotypes linked to aggressive tumor behavior.
To challenge these concepts in vivo, cells were injected subcutaneously on the flanks of athymic nude mice (n=6 per group) and monitored over time for tumor take. Strikingly, the PDR models reached a 50% tumor take after only 13-14 days, while the first parental tumor formed after 20 days, and a 50% tumor take was not reached until 47 days post-injection. Moreover, 100% of the mice injected with PDR cells formed palpable tumors, compared to only 67% in the parental model (Figure 4F). Combined, acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance is associated with hyperproliferation, enhanced migration and invasion, enlarged colonies, and accelerated, more efficient in vivo tumor take, thus promoting aggressive tumor phenotypes.
Acquired CDK4/6i resistance leads to dependence on MAPK signaling
With clinical trials testing a MEK inhibitor already underway for PCa (trametinib: NCT01990196, NCT02881242), and the observation that the direct downstream targets of MEK (i.e. ERK1/2) are hyperactivated upon CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance, the PDR models were assessed for sensitization to MEK inhibition. Cells treated overnight with a pre-clinical MEK inhibitor (U0126) showed reduction in phosphorylation of ERK1/2, the primary target proteins for MEK kinases (Figure 5A, Supplementary Figure 6A). To assess sensitivity to MEK inhibition, cells were treated for 6 days with U0126, and quantified via Trypan blue exclusion, demonstrating that the CDK4/6 inhibitor resistant cells are sensitized to MEK inhibition (Figure 5B, Supplementary Figure 6B). Additionally, MEK inhibition reduced the invasion capacity of the PDR lines, whereas the parental cells were unresponsive (Figure 5C). The MEK inhibitor hampered the clonogenic capacity in the PDR models, reducing not only the size of the colonies, but also total numbers of colonies formed, while the parental cells were not affected (Figure 5D). Combining MEK and CDK4/6 inhibitors resulted in a cooperative effect (Figure 5E). Sensitization to MEK inhibition was validated in vivo (Figure 5F), wherein mice with palpable xenograft tumors received a diet laced with trametinib (6.7mg/kg AIN-76A diet) or control diet (AIN-76A). These data demonstrated that tumor growth of the CDK4/6 inhibitor resistant models was reduced, while parental tumors were unresponsive. Together, these findings suggests that activation of the MAPK pathway not only promotes cell growth in the PDR models, but also the more aggressive, invasive phenotypes observed. Additionally, the CDK4/6i resistant cells appear to have become more reliant on MAPK signaling and as such are sensitized to MEK inhibition.
Although KRAS activating mutations are not commonly observed in PCa, the MAPK pathway can be activated via other mechanisms, such as RAF fusions and overexpression. To investigate the clinical relevance of potential MAPK activation in prostate cancer, human primary PCa (TCGA) and metastatic CRPC (SU2C/PCF) datasets were interrogated for alterations of the following components of the MAPK signaling pathway (Figure 6AB): RAS family (KRAS, HRAS, NRAS), RAF family (c-RAF/RAF1, ARAF, BRAF), MEK family (MAP2K1, MAP2K2) and ERK1/2 (or MAPK3 and MAPK1). The primary PCa dataset displayed alterations (mutations, CNA, mRNA z-score:2.0) in any of these kinases in 38% of all patients, the majority of which were mRNA upregulation (Figure 6A/B, Supplementary Figure 7). The frequency of MAPK related upregulation was confirmed in the metastatic CRPC cohort, in which 47% presented with alterations, including RAF amplifications and gene fusions that may lead to MAPK activation. Interestingly, RAF alterations are more common than RAS perturbations in either cohort (Figure 6B). Taken together, data herein suggest that acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance is associated with reduced RB expression and loss of function, and this coincides with MAPK activation that may bypass CDK4/6-RB signaling to induce phenotypes of aggressive features and metastasis; however, this dependence confers sensitivity to MEK inhibitors that may be exploited therapeutically.

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
Dysregulation of the cell cycle is a hallmark of cancer. While initial attempts to target the cell cycle with non-specific Cyclin Dependent Kinase (CDK) inhibitors were clinically unsuccessful, a new generation of selective CDK4/6 inhibitors has emerged that has shown clinical promise across multiple cancer types, including breast, melanoma and colorectal cancer. Currently, three CDK4/6 inhibitors have entered clinical trials: palbociclib (Ibrance), ribociclib (Kisqali) and abemaciclib. Notably, these three inhibitors have recently received accelerated FDA-approval for treatment of hormone-receptor positive (HR+), Her2-negative breast cancer in combination with endocrine therapy based on the PALOMA-2 (palbociclib), the MONALEESA-2 (ribociclib), and the MONARCH-2 (abemaciclib) Phase III clinical trials.
Despite evidence of clinical response, development of resistance is common, and the underlying mechanisms that lead to resistance, are poorly understood. Consistent with the known functions of CDK4/6 in promoting cell cycle progression through phosphorylation and inactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (RB), CDK4/6 inhibitors require an active RB pathway to elicit anti-tumor effects. As such, resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors can occur through disruption of the RB pathway, as mediated by loss of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (RB), Cyclin D1 and CDK6 amplification, and Cyclin E-CDK2 activation. Other mechanisms of resistance have also been reported that are independent of RB pathway alteration, including alterations or activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Given the promise of CDK4/6 inhibitors in the clinical setting, there is an increasing need to discern mechanisms of bypass, and identify mechanisms to anticipate and prevent therapeutic resistance.
Therapeutic opportunities for implementation of CDK4/6 inhibitors in the clinical setting are widest in tumors for which RB pathway disruption is infrequent or occurs late in tumor progression. As such, studies herein were conducted using prostate adenocarcinoma (PCa) as a tumor paradigm, in which a functional RB pathway is largely intact in early stage disease. Prior to androgen deprivation therapy, which is the first line of therapeutic intervention for disseminated disease, almost all tumors retain RB function, with 5% RB loss observed in primary tumors. By contrast, RB loss is enriched in metastatic disease, occurring in 37% of metastatic cases in a retrospective cohort, and in 21% of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), and is found to be causative for the transition to CRPC, the lethal stage of disease. Thus, CDK4/6 inhibitors are under clinical testing in both hormone-naïve metastatic PCa (NCT02059213) and metastatic CRPC (NCT02555189) as adjuvant therapy for first- and second-line hormone therapy, respectively.
As shown herein, acquired palbociclib resistance not only rendered cancer cells broadly resistant to CDK4/6 inhibitors, but also promoted aggressive phenotypes, including accelerated growth in vitro and in vivo, as well as enhanced invasion and clonogenic capacity. Unbiased global gene expression and phosphoproteomic profiling were utilized to interrogate the molecular alterations of acquired resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition in multiple models of palbociclib resistance. These integrated approaches revealed a reduction of RB function resulting in CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance. Additionally, acquired CDK4/6 resistance was associated with activation of the MAPK signaling pathway, which conferred sensitization to MEK inhibitors. In sum, these studies demonstrate partially retained, hyperphosphorylated Rb in acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance, and nominate MEK inhibitors as a new treatment strategy for advanced cancers upon developing CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
COI: The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.
TRANSLATIONAL RELEVANCE
In light of recent successes with the clinical application of Cyclin Dependent Kinase-4/6 (CDK4/6) inhibitors in breast cancer and with clinical trials underway in multiple tumor types, it is anticipated that this class of drugs will become standard of care for a variety of malignancies. Unfortunately, development of therapeutic resistance is common, and therefore it is imperative to understand mechanisms allowing cancer progression. This study demonstrates in preclinical models that acquired CDK4/6 inhibitor resistance is associated with a rewired kinome, which includes activation of the MAPK signaling pathway as a common occurrence across models, which conferred aggressive in vitro phenotypes, pro-metastatic signaling, and enhanced tumor take in vivo. However, this MAPK signaling dependence resulted in sensitization to MEK inhibitors, nominating MEK inhibition as a potential therapeutic approach to treat CDK4/6 inhibitor resistant cancers.