PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Blood cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human s26 proteasome; Crosslinking mass spectrometry

ABSTRACT:
Proteins play a central role in most biological processes within the cell and deciphering how they interact is key to understand their function. Cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry is an essential tool for elucidating protein-protein interactions. Despite its importance, we still know surprisingly little about the principles that underlie the process of chemical cross-link formation itself and how it is influenced by different physicochemical factors. To understand the molecular details of cross-link formation, we have set-up a comprehensive kinetic model and carried out simulations of protein cross-linking on large protein complexes. We dissect the contribution on the cross-link yield of parameters such as amino acid reactivity, cross-linker concentration, and hydrolysis rate. Our model can compute cross-link formation based solely on the structure of a protein complex, thereby enabling realistic predictions for a diverse set of systems. We quantitatively show how cross-links and mono-links are in direct competition and how the hydrolysis rate and abundance of cross-linker and proteins directly influence their relative formation. We show how cross-links and mono-links exist in a “all-against-all” competition due to their simultaneous formation, resulting in a non-intuitive network of interdependence. We show that this interdependence is locally confined and mainly limited to direct neighbors or residues in direct vicinity. These results enable us to identify the optimal cross-linker concentration at which the maximal number of cross-links are formed. Taken together, our study establishes a comprehensive kinetic model to quantitatively describe cross-link formation for protein-protein interactions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Kinetic principles of chemical cross-link formation for protein-protein interactions

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Purified human 26S proteasome (40 ug, 0.8 μg/μL, Proteasome Pprotein Ccenter, Kibutz Ranat Yohana) was cross-linked with isotopically labeled bis(sulfosuccinimidyl) suberate d0/d12 (BS3-H12/D12, Creativemolecules Inc.) at a molar ratio of 1:10, 1:2, 1:1, 2:1, 5:1 and 10:1 crosslinker to lysines for 45 min at 25 °C while shaking at 650 rpm in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf). The reaction was quenched with ammonium bicarbonate at a final concentration of 50 mM for 15 min at 25 °C and 650 rpm. Cross-linked samples were dried (Eppendorf, Concentrator plus), resuspended in 50 μL of 8 M Urea, reduced, alkylated, and digested with trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were purified by solid-phase extraction (50-mg SepPak cartridges, Waters), and cross-linked peptides were enriched by size exclusion chromatography using an ÄKTAmicro chromatography system (GE Healthcare) equipped with a SuperdexTM Peptide 3.2/30 column (column volume = 2.4 mL). For each cross-linked sample, six fractions (0.7-0.8, 0.8-1.0, 1.0-1.1, 1.1-1.2, 1.2-1.4, 1.4-1.6 mL) were collected, the absorption levels at 215 nm of each fraction were used to normalize peptide concentration and the fractions were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in technical duplicates.

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, San Jose, CA). Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over a 35 min gradient optimized for each fraction (3 % to 5-14 % for 2 min, 5-14 % to 20-32 % in 17 min, 20-32 % to 28-36 % in 5 min and 28-36 % to 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid in 1 min). Full scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000, a scan range of 400–1500 m/z, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Most intense precursor ions (intensity ≥5.0 × 103) with charge states 2–8 and monoisotopic peak determination set to “peptide” were selected for MS/MS fragmentation by CID at 35 % collision energy in a data-dependent mode. The duration for dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s. MS/MS spectra were analyzed in the Ion Trap at a rapid scan rate and maximum injection time in dynamic mode. For the crosslink analysis, a database was compiled which contained the 33 proteins of the human 26S proteasome and the data was analyzed using the XQuest/xProphet pipeline  allowing a maximum number of 3 miss cleavages. All unique cross- and mono-links with an ld-score > 20 and an FDR < 0.05 were considered for evaluation. The experiment was carried out in duplicates.