PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Spleen; Bone marrow; Skin; Lymph node; Colon; Liver; Lung; Kidney; Brain; Heart; Placenta; Testis
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Biological fluid proteome; Tissue proteome; Mass spectrometry; Brain regions; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Here, we performed label-free liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to profile the normal human proteome. In total, we analyzed 117 samples from 46 histologically normal tissues and organs at autopsy. Our high-resolution MS approach allowed for the quantification of 10,438 unique proteins. In order to expand our coverage of the human proteome, we combined our previously published biological fluid proteomic data from healthy individuals. We considered data from seven biological fluids, including urine, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, seminal plasma, sweat, cervical vaginal fluid, and nipple aspirate fluid. Overall, we generated tandem mass spectra corresponding to 13,028 unique human protein-coding genes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Profiling of the Human Tissue and Biological Fluid Proteome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tissue protein extraction Fresh frozen human tissue sections collected at autopsy were cut and weighed (~150 mg wet weight). Tissues were individually pulverized in liquid nitrogen with a mortar and pestle to yield a fine powder. Proteins were extracted and solubilized using 0.2% RapiGest (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Briefly, the pulverized tissue samples were vortexed every 5 minutes on ice, for 30 minutes, and then sonicated on ice three times for 15 s with the MISONIX immersion tip sonicator (Q SONICA LLC, CT, USA). The tissue sample was centrifuged at 15,000 x g at 4°C for 20 minutes and the supernatant was collected. A Pierce BCA Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, California) was performed on each tissue lysate protein extract for total protein quantification.  Trypsin digestion  Tissues (N = 117) were pooled according to tissue type and an equal amount (50 µg) of protein from each pool was processed in duplicate. Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) added to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated for 40 minutes at 56°C. Proteins were alkylated with 500 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) added to a final concentration of 15 mM and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature, in the dark and with constant shaking. Samples were then digested overnight (18 hours) with trypsin (50:1 protein/trypsin) at 37 °C with constant shaking. Trypsin digestion was stopped the next day with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were incubated at 37°C for 45 minutes and centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes, to allow the RapiGest (0.2%) to precipitate. The supernatant was then removed and stored at -20°C until further processing.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data analysis  XCalibur software v.2.0.6 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to generate raw files. Raw files were uploaded into Proteome Discoverer v. 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with Sequest HT search engine against the Human 5640 Swiss-Prot protein database (January 2018). Search parameters included trypsin (full) enzyme digestion, a maximum of two missed cleavages, static modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, dynamic modification of methionine oxidation, precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein level using the Percolator node.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
In-depth analysis of the human genome sequence has led to the annotation of approximately 20,000 human protein-coding genes. Although mass spectrometry (MS)-based workflows have made a great headway in achieving near genome-wide coverage, an equivalent complete map of the human proteome remains elusive. Delineating the spatial distribution of all human proteins at the organ, tissue, and cellular level can offer insight into health and disease and represents an excellent reference for the discovery of biomarkers and therapeutic targets. Here, we performed label-free liquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) to profile the normal human proteome. In total, we analyzed 117 samples from 46 normal tissues and organs at autopsy. Our high-resolution MS approach allowed for the quantification of 10,438 unique proteins. In order to expand our coverage of the human proteome, we combined our previously published biological fluid proteomic data from healthy individuals. We considered data from seven biological fluids, including urine, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid, seminal plasma, sweat, cervical vaginal fluid, and nipple aspirate fluid. Overall, we generated tandem mass spectra corresponding to 13,028 unique human protein-coding genes. Although our analysis did not accomplish complete proteome coverage, it should be an important complementary resource for future biomarker discovery.

SDRF SUMMARY:
Total runs: 92
organism: Homo sapiens
organism part: Seminal Vesicle; adipose; adrenalgland; anus; appendix; bladder; bone marrow; brain; breast; cerebellum; cervix; colon; duodenum; endometrium; epidymis; esophagus; fallopian tube; frontal cortex; gallbladder; heart; kidney; liver; lung; lymph node; medulla oblongata; occipital cortex; ovary; pancreas; parathyroid gland; parietal; placenta; prostate; salivary gland; skeletal muscle; skin; small intestine; spinal cord; spleen; stomach; temporal lobe; testis; thyroid; tonsil; trachea; ureter; uterus
disease: none
developmental stage: adult
instrument: Q Exactive HF-X
cleavage agent details: Trypsin
modification parameters: Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
label: label free sample
dissociation method: HCD
precursor mass tolerance: 7 ppm
fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da