PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Machine learning; Biliary atresia; Dia; Prm; Plasma; Cholestasis

ABSTRACT:
Early diagnosis of biliary atresia (BA) is crucial for improving the chances of survival and preserving the liver function of children with BA. To explore potential biomarkers for early diagnosis of BA with other non-BA jaundice cases, we performed proteomic analysis with data-independent acquisition (DIA) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). With this approach we were able to detect and validate differential protein expression in plasma of patients. Bioinformatics analysis revealed the enrichment biological processes, characteristic of BA by identifying differential expression of specific proteins of which with 10 were up- and 23 down-regulated. Signaling pathway analysis demonstrated changes in protein expression associated with an alteration in immunoglobins levels, which is indicative immune dysfunction in BA. When polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) expression was combined with an immunoglobulin lambda variable chain (IGL c2225_light_IGLV1-47_IGLJ2), revealed by machine learning, they provided a useful early diagnostic model for BA, which had a sensitivity of 0.8, specificity of 1, accuracy of 0.89, and AUC value of 0.944. Our study not only identified a possible effective plasma biomarker for the early diagnosis of BA but may also help to further elucidate the underlying mechanisms of BA.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomics defines plasma biomarkers for the early diagnosis of biliary atresia

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
In this study, aliquots from each sample obtained from 32 children with BA and 35 children with IHC in the BA group, respectively, were mixed to generate a DDA library. Immuno-removal of the 14 most abundant human plasma proteins was performed on 100 µL of mixed plasma using an Agilent Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) coupled to high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Shimadzu LC-10AT). Protein removal was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions and buffer exchange with 25 mM carbamate was performed using a rotary column with a 10 kDa molecular weight cutoff. High and low abundance protein fractions were collected and concentrations determined. Determination of protein concentration will be based on the Bradford method according to the manufacturer's (BioRad) instructions. Protein digestion was performed according to the FASP procedure by adding 200 µg of plasma proteins to 30 µl of STD buffer (containing 150 mM TrisHCl pH 8.0, 100 mM DTT, and 4% SDS) followed by repeated ultrafiltration with UA buffer (containing 8 M urea and 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) (Microcon units, 30 kD) to remove other components such as detergents. Subsequently, 100 µl of iodoacetamide was added to block reduced cysteine residues and incubated away from light. After 30 min of incubation, 2 washes each with 100 µL UA buffer and 100 µL NH4HCO3 (25 mM) were performed sequentially. Finally, the protein suspension was digested with 2 µg trypsin (Promega) in 40 µl 100 mM NH4HCO3 buffer at 37°C overnight. The resulting peptides were collected as filtrate. Peptide content was estimated by spectral density of UV light at 280 nm. Digest pool peptides of low abundance proteins were then separated and 10 separations were performed using the Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ High pH Reversed Phase Peptide Separation Kit. Each isolate was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 10 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Collected peptides were desalted on a C18 column (Empore™ SPE C18 column (standard density), 7 mm inner bed diameter, volume 3 ml, Sigma) and redissolved in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The iRT standard peptide calibration kit (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) was added 1:3 by volume for subsequent DIA assays to directly determine the iRT values of the peptides and for calibration of the chromatographic system.

DATA PROCESSING:
In the process of generating a DDA library, all fractions, including those containing low-abundance and high-abundance proteins, were subjected to DDA runs. The runs were performed using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF/HF-X mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Initially, a peptide sample (1.5μg) was loaded onto an EASY-SprayTM C18 Trap column (Thermo Scientific, P/N 164946, 3um, 75um2cm). Subsequently, the sample was separated on an EASY-SprayTM C18 LC Analytical Column (Thermo Scientific, ES803, 2um, 75um50cm) using a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over a duration of 90 minutes. The MS detection method employed positive ion mode with a scan range of 300-1650 m/z. The resolution for the MS1 scan was set at 60000 at 200 m/z, and the target Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was 1e6 with a maximum IT of 50ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30.0s. For each full MS–SIM scan, 20 ddMS2 scans were performed. The resolution for the MS2 scan was 15000, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT of 25ms. The normalized collision energy used was 27eV.

METHODS:
Methods and Materials
Materials and Reagents
Glycerol, bovine serum albumin, and bromophenol blue were purchased from Sangon (Shanghai, China). Iodoaceamide, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), dithiothreitol (DTT), and urea were purchased from Bio-Rad (California, U.S.A.). Tris, NH4HCO3, trifluoroacetic acid, and a C18 Cartridge were purchased from Sigma (Darmstadt, Germany). The BCA Protein Assay Kit was purchased from Beyotime (Guangzhou, China). Trypsin was purchased from Promega (Shanghai, China). Formic acid was purchased from Fluka (Shanghai, China). Acetonitrile was purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ultrafiltration tubes (5 kDa) were purchased from Sartorius (Beijing, China). Multiple Affinity Removal LC Column, Human 14/Mouse 3 was purchased from Agilent (Beijing, China). Lysing matrix A and 1/4 ceramic spheres were purchased from Shanghai Haoran Biological Technology (Shanghai, China). An SCX Chromatography Column: Polysulfethyl 4.6 × 100 mm column and a C18 LC Analytical Column were purchased from Thermo Scientific (Massachusetts, U.S.A.). Detailed information can be found in Supplementary Table 1.
Study Participants
In total, 154 cases of infant cholestasis were collected from inpatient and outpatient first visits at Guangzhou Women and Children’s Medical Center (China) during 2018–2020, of which 81 patients with BA and 71 patients with IHC were finally diagnosed. A total of 34 patients with BA and 36 patients with IHC were randomly included in the discovery cohort, and the remaining 49 patients with BA and 35 patients with IHC were included in the validation cohort. The detailed clinical information on the participants is shown in Table 1. All trials were conducted with family consent, and informed consents were signed. The study protocol followed the ethical guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics Committee of Guangzhou Women’s and Children’s Medical Center (ID: 34500).
The inclusion criteria for participants in this study were (1) age <60 days, (2) DBIL ≥34.2 μmol/L, and (3) direct bilirubin/total bilirubin (DBIL/TBIL) ≥20%. The gold standard for the diagnosis of BA was intraoperative cholangiography and postoperative pathology. For patients without surgery, the final regression results were obtained via outpatient follow-up. BA was excluded if at least one of the following conditions was met: (1) cholangiogram indicates that the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts are patent; (2) the clinical biochemical bilirubin indexes on review decreased to the normal range, and the follow-up participants had regressed yellow skin and mucous membranes and normal stools. The workflow of the study design is detailed in the Table of Contents graphic.
Plasma Sampling
Sampling criteria: Samples were collected according to the plasma proteomics standard. Fresh peripheral blood was collected from patients with cholestasis at the initial diagnosis and stored in tubes containing ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. Then, the samples were centrifuged at 2000 × g and 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was retained and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen for 15 min and then stored at −80 °C.
Sample Processing and Fractionation for Data-Dependent Acquisition Library Generation
The aliquots of each sample obtained from 34 patients with BA and 36 patients with IHC in the discovery cohort were mixed to generate a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) library. High- and low-abundance protein fractions were collected, and concentrations were determined. The determination of protein concentration was based on the Bradford method according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Bio-Rad). Protein digestion was performed according to the filter-aided sample preparation procedure by adding 200 μg of plasma proteins to 30 μL of STD buffer (containing 150 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM DTT, and 4% SDS) followed by repeated ultrafiltration with UA buffer (containing 8 M urea and 150 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0; Microcon units, 30 kDa) to remove other components, such as detergents. Subsequently, 100 μL of iodoacetamide was added to the mixture to block reduced cysteine residues and incubated without light. After 30 min of incubation, two washes each with 100 μL of UA buffer and 100 μL of NH4HCO3 (25 mM) were performed sequentially. Finally, the protein suspension was digested using 2 μg of trypsin in 40 μL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 buffer at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate, and the peptide content was estimated based on the absorbance of ultraviolet light at 280 nm. Pooled digested peptides of low-abundance proteins were subsequently separated via 10 separations performed using the Thermo Scientific Pierce High pH Reversed Phase Peptide Separation Kit. Each isolate was concentrated via vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 10 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The collected peptides were desalted on a C18 column (Empore SPE C18 column [standard density], 7 mm inner bed diameter, 3 mL volume; Sigma) and redissolved in 40 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The iRT standard peptide calibration kit (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland) was added to a 1:3 volume volume for subsequent DIA assays to directly determine the iRT values of the peptides and calibrate the chromatographic system.
DDA Mass Spectrometry Assay
In the process of generating a DDA library, all fractions, including those containing low- and high-abundance proteins, were subjected to DDA runs. These were performed by using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF/HF-X mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy nLC 1200 chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). Initially, a peptide sample (1.5 μg) was loaded onto an EASY-Spray C18 Trap column (Thermo Scientific, P/N 164946, 3 μm, 75 μm, 2 cm). Subsequently, the sample was separated on an EASY-Spray C18 LC Analytical Column (Thermo Scientific, ES803, 2 μm, 75 μm, 50 cm) using a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 90 min. The MS detection method employed positive ion mode with a scan range of 300–1650 m/z. The resolution for the MS1 scan was 60,000 at 200 m/z, and the target automatic gain control (AGC) was 1e6 with a maximum IT of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was observed for 30.0 s. For each full MS–SIM scan, 20 ddMS2 scans were performed. The resolution for the MS2 scan was 15,000, with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum IT of 25 ms. The normalized collision energy was 27 eV.
Measurement of Discovery Cohort Plasma Proteome Using DIA–Mass Spectrometry
Liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis was performed on individual peptide samples using DIA mode. Each DIA cycle comprised a single full MS–SIM scan, and a total of 30 DIA scans were conducted to cover the mass range of 350–1650 m/z. The settings for the SIM full scan were a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, AGC set to 3e6, maximum IT of 50 ms, and profile mode. DIA scans were performed at a resolution of 30,000, with an AGC target of 3e6 and auto maximum IT. The normalized collision energy used was 30 eV. The total runtime for the analysis was 90 min, employing a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. To monitor the performance of the MS instrument, quality control samples, which were pooled samples obtained by combining equal aliquots from each experimental sample, were injected in DIA mode at the beginning of the MS study and then after every six to eight injections throughout the experiment.
Sequence Database Search and Data Processing
To process DDA library data, MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.17) was used to search the FASTA sequence database. The database was obtained from the web site . The iRT peptides sequence, denoted as (>Biognosys|iRT-Kit|Sequence_fusion LGGNEQVTRYILAGVENSKGTFIIDPGGVIRGTFIIDPAAVIRGAGSSEPVTGLDAKTPVISGGPYEYRVEATFGVDESNAKTPVITGAPYEYRDGLDAASYYAPVRADVTPADFSEWSKLFLQFGAQGSPFLK), was added. The parameters were configured as follows: the enzyme was specified as trypsin, the maximum allowed missed cleavages were set to two, the fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C), and the dynamic modifications included oxidation (M) and acetyl (Protein N-term). All reported data were based on protein identification with a confidence level of 99%, determined using the false discovery rate (FDR = N(decoy) × 2/(N(decoy) N(target)) ≤ 1%). A spectral library was constructed by importing the original raw files and the results of DDA searching into Spectronaut Pulsar X TM_12.0.20491.4 (Biognosys).
For DIA data analysis, Spectronaut Pulsar X was employed to search the constructed spectral library. The main software parameters were as follows: retention time prediction type was defined as dynamic iRT, interference on MS2 level correction was enabled, and cross-run normalization was enabled. All results were filtered based on a Q value cutoff of 0.01 (equivalent to FDR <1%).
Bioinformatics Analysis
After screening 33 differential proteins identified via DIA data, the quantitative information was first normalized to the (−1,1) interval. Then, the two-dimensional abundances of the differential proteins were constructed by the Euclidean distance clustering algorithm, and heat maps were generated by ComplexHeatmap R package (Version 2.15.1). SIMCA-P (version 14.1) software was applied for pattern recognition. Pareto scaling preprocessing of the data was performed, followed by principal component analysis and multidimensional statistical analysis. Functional annotation of differential proteins was performed using the Gene Ontology (GO) database, including Biological Process, Cellular Component, and Molecular Function, and pathway analysis of differential proteins was performed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database ().
LC–PRM/MS Quantitative Validation of Candidate Biomarker Proteins
According to the described criteria, a total of 84 samples were collected, including 49 samples from the BA group and 35 samples from the IHC group. Each sample contained approximately 200 μg of protein. DTT was added to a final concentration of 100 mM, and samples were incubated in a boiling water bath for 15 min and then cooled to room temperature. Subsequently, 200 μL of UA buffer was added and the mixture was thoroughly mixed. The mixture was then transferred to a 10 kDa ultrafiltration tube and centrifuged at 14,000g for 30 min. The supernatant was discarded, and 200 μL of UA buffer was added, followed by centrifugation at 14,000g for 30 min. The filtrate was discarded. Next, 100 μL of IAA solution (50 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added and the mixture was shaken at 600 rpm for 1 min and then incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The mixture was then centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min. The supernatant was discarded, and this step was repeated three times using 100 μL of UA buffer and centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 20 min each time. Following this, 100 μL of NH4HCO3 buffer (50 mM) was added and the mixture was centrifuged at 14,000g for 20 min. This step was repeated twice. Then, 40 μL of NH4HCO3 buffer containing trypsin at a 1:50 ratio was added, and the mixture was shaken at 600 rpm for 1 min and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The mixture was transferred to a fresh collection tube and was centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 15 min. Subsequently, 40 μL of NH4HCO3 buffer (50 mM) was added and the mixture was centrifuged at 14,000g for 30 min to collect the filtrate. The resulting peptide segments after enzymatic digestion were desalted, freeze-dried, and reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid. The peptide concentration was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm.
PRM quantitative analysis was conducted on the identified target peptide segments of the 16 target proteins initially identified. The list of peptides targeted in the PRM analysis is shown in Supporting Information Table 2. The suitable peptide segment information for PRM analysis was inputted into the Xcalibur software to set up the PRM method. Approximately 1 μg of peptide segments was extracted from each sample, along with the addition of 20 fmol of the reference peptide (PRTC: TASEFDSAIAQDK), which were used for detection. Chromatographic separation was performed via high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), with solution A (0.1% formic acid aqueous solution) and solution B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile [84%]). The column was equilibrated with 95% solution A. Samples were injected into the chromatographic analysis column for gradient separation at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The liquid phase separation gradient proceeded as follows: 0–2 min, a linear gradient of solution B from 5 to 10%; 2–45 min, a linear gradient of solution B from 10 to 30%; 45–55 min, a linear gradient of solution B from 30 to 100%; and 55–60 min, 100% solution B.
Following HPLC separation, the samples underwent PRM–MS analysis using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The analysis lasted for 60 min, and the detection mode was set to positive ion mode. The first-level MS scan range was 300–1800 m/z, with a mass resolution of 60,000 (at m/z 200), an AGC target of 3e6, and a maximum IT of 200 ms. After each full MS scan, 20 PRM scans (MS2 scans) were obtained based on the inclusion list. The isolation window was set at 1.6 Th, with a mass resolution of 30,000 (at m/z 200), an AGC target of 3e6, a maximum IT of 120 ms, high-energy collisional dissociation selected as the MS2 activation type, and a normalized collision energy of 27. PRM detection was performed on the 84 samples, and the PRM raw files were analyzed by using Skyline 3.5.0 software for data analysis.
Skyline (Version 3.5.0) software was used to analyze the raw PRM data from the validation cohort of 84 patients. Consecutive high-intensity peptides were imported into this software for analysis (peptide settings were consistent with MaxQuant search parameters), and the number, sequence, parent ion charge, and peak area of the target peptide were determined. The total peak areas were then calibrated against internal standard peptides, and target peptides were quantified by using a heavy isotope absolute quantification method.
Machine Learning
The machine learning component of this study aimed to identify a panel of biomarkers to distinguish BA from cholestasis. Before screening the biomarkers, missing values were filled with 1/2 of the minimum of all abundance values, and the features were normalized by using the Z-score. Then, an ensemble method combined with multiple feature selection approaches based on fivefold cross validation was used for identifying robust potential biomarkers. A voting procedure was used for amino acids that rewards features that occur in the optimal subsets generated by the ensemble method. Selected features were ranked in decreasing order by their votes. The two most voted features were considered as potential biomarkers. A Bayes logistic regression classifier was built and tested based on the potential biomarkers. Predictive performance was assessed using subject receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and a Bayesian logistic regression model to construct a panel model for biomarker diagnostics. The Jordan index was calculated to determine the optimal critical value for the diagnostic decisions. All algorithms were implemented in R version 4.1.0.
Statistical Analysis
Comparisons between the BA and IHC groups were statistically analyzed using unpaired t tests. Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the GO classification or KEGG pathway distribution of the target protein set with the overall protein set, and enrichment analysis was performed for the GO classification or KEGG pathway of the target protein set. The χ2 test was used for composition ratio analysis, and t test or analysis of variance was used for parametric data. Scatter plots were plotted with GraphPad Prism 8 software, and ROC curve analysis was performed with MedCalc software. Target proteins were significantly correlated with GGT by Spearman correlation analysis defined as r < – 0.3 or r > 0.3 using two-tailed p-values (p < 0.05).
Data Deposition
MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE 33 partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD048938.

RESULTS:
Results
Demographic and Clinical Characteristics of the Study Participants
This study included pediatric patients with cholestasis aged less than 60 days who were randomized into a discovery cohort (34 patients with BA and 36 patients with IHC) and a validation cohort (49 patients with BA and 35 patients with IHC) for DIA and PRM analyses. The clinical data of the participants were summarized, and in the discovery cohort, the mean age of the patients with BA was 44.1 (44.1 ± 10.9) days and that of the patients with IHC was 40.9 (40.9 ± 15.6) days. In the validation cohort, the mean age was 46.8 (46.8 ± 12.4) days for the patients with BA and 26.3 (26.3 ± 26.4) days for the patients with IHC. The ratio of the sex of the patients in both groups did not significantly differ. In addition, the statistical analysis of the biochemical parameters (DBIL, TBIL, and GGT) of the patients at the initial consultation showed that DBIL and TBIL did not significantly differ in either cohort. However, the levels of GGT were significantly higher in the BA group than those in the IHC group in the cohorts (Table 1).
Plasma DIA-Based Proteomics Analysis in the Discovery Cohort
The differential expression of proteins between the BA and IHC groups in the discovery cohort were screened and quantified via DIA. Overall, 1093 proteins were identified and 1071 proteins were shared between the two groups (Figure 1A). Differential clusters were generated with proteins presenting a >1.5- or <0.67-fold change and p-value of <0.05. In total, 33 differentially expressed differential proteins (DEPs) were identified between the BA and IHC groups (Table 2), with 10 upregulated proteins and 23 downregulated proteins (Figure 1B,C). Among them, 15 of the 33 proteins were immunoglobulin related, such as IGL, IGH, or polymeric immunoglobulin receptor, indicating that altered immune function is important in the pathogenesis of BA.
Bioinformatics Analysis of DEPs
Functional enrichment analyses were performed on the identified DEPs. KEGG analysis revealed that the DEPs in the BA group with differential expression compared to that in the IHC group primarily play important roles in immune responses, oxidative respiratory, and glutathione metabolism. Only one significantly upregulated pathway was detected, namely, the intestinal immune network for immunoglobulin A (IgA) production and the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR, UniProt accession: P01833), a gene highly enriched in this pathway (Figure 2). GO analysis revealed that the enriched DEPs exhibited enzymatic and immune activities and were chiefly located on the membrane and in the cellular and extracellular regions (Figure 3).
PRM Verification
Among the 33 DEPs identified via DIA, 16 were selected and used in PRM analysis. We selected 16 proteins based on the p-value and fold change, and these are all closely related to autoimmunity.− The screening criteria were formulated as proteins having a high area under the curve (AUC) values or significant p-values. The results demonstrated that the abundance of four proteins was elevated and that of 12 proteins was reduced in the BA group compared with that in the IHC group. Of the 16 common proteins, eight presented similar expression trends while the others showed different variation trends in BA vs IHC by DIA and PRM (Figure 4 and Table 3), thus supporting the plausibility and reliability of the proteomics results.
Machine Learning Builds Panel Models for Disease Diagnosis and ROC Analysis
Machine learning was used for the eight candidate DEPs selected above to construct a diagnostic panel model: PIGR combined with IGL c2225_light_IGLV1-47_IGLJ2 (UniProt accession: A0A5C2G2P9). To evaluate the diagnostic efficacy for BA, multifactor logistic regression analysis and ROC curve analysis were performed, revealing that at a cutoff value of 0.53, the accuracy was 0.78, specificity was 0.83, sensitivity was 0.73, and the AUC value was 0.824 in the training set. The diagnostic model had an accuracy of 0.89, specificity of 1, sensitivity of 0.8, and AUC value of 0.944 in the test set (Figure 5A). These data indicate that the diagnostic model of plasma PIGR combined with A0A5C2G2P9 has a robust diagnostic efficacy for BA.
We further analyzed the abundance of PIGR and IGL c2225_light_IGLV1-47_IGLJ2, which was significantly upregulated (P = 3.98 × 10–06, fold change = 1.78; Figure 5B) and downregulated (P = 0.039, fold change = 0.53; Figure 5C), respectively, in the BA group compared with that in the control non-BA cholestatic group.
Pearson Correlation Analysis
To validate the clinical utility of this diagnostic panel, we performed a correlation analysis between plasma proteomics and GGT, a clinical biochemical index closely related to BA. The abundance of PIGR was significantly and positively correlated with the level of GGT in the BA cohort, whereas IGL c2225_light_IGLV1-47_IGLJ2 was not correlated with GGT (Figure 6). These results demonstrate a new potential clinical use of plasma proteomics in identifying potential biomarkers for BA that are different from GGT.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Biliary atresia (BA) is a severe cholestatic disease that can cause neonatal liver failure with a poor prognosis and a high mortality rate. BA can be pathologically characterized by the autoimmune response directed against the bile ducts, with subsequent damage to the bile duct epithelial cells, causing intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile duct atresia. The incidence of BA in the Caucasian population is ∼1/20,000 live births, whereas the Chinese population has a higher prevalence of BA, with an incidence of ∼3.7:10,000 live births. Although Kasai hepatoportoenterostomy can alleviate the cholestasis symptoms in a proportion of patients with BA, most will still rapidly develop fibrosis, causing portal hypertension, end-stage liver disease, and eventually death within 2 years of birth. Early diagnosis of BA is key in advancing the diagnosis, clinical intervention for restore bile flow, and prognosis.− Moreover, other causes of intrahepatic cholestasis (IHC), such as idiopathic cholestasis, Alagille syndrome, and progressive familial IHC, have symptoms similar to those of BA, and a differential diagnosis is therefore required. While noninvasive laboratory tests and imaging are currently used for diagnosing BA, novel diagnostic methods with high efficacy are needed to distinguish jaundice pathogenesis at an early stage.
Currently, γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) is one of the most used indicators in the biochemical examination and can differentiate BA and non-BA cases with an accuracy of 76–88% at a cutoff value of 300 IU/L. Zheng et al. developed a nomogram diagnostic model based on sex, weight, direct bilirubin (DBIL), GGT, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) with a sensitivity of 85.7% and a specificity of 80.3%. Imaging tests (e.g., ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging, and hepatobiliary imaging) also reportedly help differentiate BA from other obstructive cholestasis; however, these tests are time-consuming and expensive.− In addition, serum MMP7 has been suggested as a valid noninvasive diagnostic indicator of BA.− However, none of these studies have examined the diagnostic efficacy in the early stages of the disease. Previously, we reported that CD177+ cells could promote BA formation by releasing excess neutrophil extracellular traps, and subsequently, we used the peripheral blood CD177+ cells/CD45+ cell ratio as a valid early diagnostic indicator for BA in a multicenter cholestasis cohort. However, the flow cytometric analysis of CD177+ cells is technically challenging as a diagnostic tool for many hospitals.
Blood has a complex proteome reflecting numerous tissue proteomics subgroups and can provide a wider range of proteins than any single tissue or organ. Serum (including plasma) proteomics has attracted increasing interest, as it enables large-scale and in-depth study of protein–protein interactions. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) is characterized by high coverage, reproducibility, and accuracy, allowing the quantification of low-abundant proteins. It is suitable for extensive screening and qualitative and quantitative analyses of large numbers of samples. Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) is a new targeted quantitative method that can validate relative protein abundance with a high resolution and high-quality accuracy. The combination of DIA with PRM analysis has been used for biomarker mining and validation. Machine learning enables the selection of potential target molecules as biomarkers to differentiate between disease groups and controls. Integrated learning methods for biomarker selection maximize biomarker stability by integrating the use of multiple identical or different types of machine learning algorithms to select the potential targets that frequently appear in classification models with high accuracy for analysis. Herein, we used these methods to explore plasma biomarkers for early diagnosis in BA.
Pediatric patients with cholestasis who were less than 60 days old were included in this study. The quantitative proteomics approach of DIA was employed to detect changes in the plasma protein profiles of patients with BA or IHC and validate candidate differential proteins in combination with PRM analysis, followed by the application of machine learning to construct a model for the early diagnosis of BA. This study reveals a proteomics analysis model for identifying potential biomarkers for the early diagnosis of BA and adds to our knowledge regarding the mechanisms of BA pathogenesis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD048938.
Supporting Information Available
ROC analysis for GGT in discovery cohort and validation cohorts; experimental materials, instruments, and software; and list of peptides targeted in the PRM analysis (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.3c00873.
Supplementary Material