PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Kidney
diseases: Membranous glomerulonephritis
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: : kidney disease; membranous nephropathy; autoimmunity; proteomics; computational analysis.

ABSTRACT:
Background: In recent years, an innovative strategy using laser microdissection and mass spectrometry markedly expanded the landscape of antigens associated with membranous nephropathy (MN). Specific associations with phenotypes, diseases and sometimes reversible triggers led to a novel antigen-based classification of MN, paving the way for precision medicine and stressing the need for more routine use of proteomics in MN. Methods: To explore the proteomic landscape of human glomeruli and identify podocyte antigens and disease mechanisms in MN, we expanded the original technique to an integrative approach combining laser capture microdissection, next-generation mass spectrometry and computational analysis. Next to conventional data-dependent acquisition (DDA), we used and assessed the diagnostic yield of the more comprehensive data-independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry, which enables the detection and quantification of every peptide in a sample irrespective of its level of abundance or m/z value. Our proteomic pipeline was applied to residual material from kidney biopsies in 64 individuals, including 31 healthy controls; 5 disease controls; 5 PLA2R-associated MN; and 23 PLA2R-negative MN. Results: Unbiased analyses confirmed the significant enrichment in PLA2R, IgG4 and complement proteins in glomeruli from patients with PLA2R-MN compared with healthy and disease controls, while molecular characterization of complement fragments provided evidence for complement activation in PLA2R-MN. Compared to DDA, DIA mass spectrometry increased the number of glomerular proteins (~3800 vs. ~1200) identified in healthy glomeruli; allowed the detection all known antigens except NELL1 in normal glomeruli; and increased the detection rate of podocyte antigens from 50% to >80% in PLA2R-negative MN.  Conclusions: This proof-of-concept study suggests that an integrative approach combining laser microdissection, DIA mass spectrometry and computational biology is a powerful tool, with translational potential, to identify podocyte antigens and unravel disease mechanisms in MN.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Unbiased Proteomic Analysis for Real-Life Identification of Podocyte Antigens and Disease Mechanisms in Membranous NephropathyUnbiased Proteomic Analysis for Real-Life Identification of Podocyte Antigens and Disease Mechanisms in Membranous Nephropathy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The technique was adapted from a protocol developed by Sethi et al. (Sethi, JASN 2019). For each case, 10 µm-thick formalin fixed paraffin embedded sections were mounted on a polyethylene naphtalate slide (Zeiss MembraneSlide 1.0). LCM was performed using a Zeiss Palm Microbeam microscope to collect glomeruli and/or tubulointerstitium from cases and controls. A total of 15-20 glomeruli was obtained for each case, to reach a total area of 250,000 to 500,000 µm2, and similar areas of tubulointerstitium, randomly selected, were microdissected in controls. Collected fragments were digested using trypsin and analyzed by tandem MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States). Conventional DDA was used to quantify proteins in (i) glomeruli and tubulointerstitial specimens from healthy controls; and (ii) glomeruli from disease controls, PLA2R-MN and a first series of 14 PLA2R-negative MN cases. DIA was performed on (i) the same microdissected samples from the 14 cases of PLA2R-negative MN, and on (ii) a second series of 9 cases of PLA2R-MN, along with corresponding controls

DATA PROCESSING:
Results are presented as medians and interquartile ranges (IQR) for continuous variables and as numbers and proportions for categorical variables. Protein abundances were log2-transformed then normalized by the mean and centered around the global log2 mean abundance. An exploratory Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed with missing data imputed by regularised iterative PCA algorithm with the missMDA R package (Julie Josse, Francois Husson (2016). missMDA: A Package for Handling Missing Values in Multivariate Data Analysis. Journal of Statistical Software, 70(1), 1-31. doi:10.18637/jss.v070.i01). Proteins were removed if abundances were missing in less than 2 samples prior to the differential abundance analysis. Differential abundance analyses were performed with the R package limma (Ritchie, M.E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C.W., Shi, W., and Smyth, G.K. (2015). limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Research 43(7), e47) to compare the condition versus the control patients based on moderated t-statistics and considering the experiment as a covariate if different experiments were combined. The p-values were adjusted with false discovery rate (FDR). The resulting adjusted p-values and log fold changes are represented in the volcano plots. All tests were two-tailed and an adjusted p-value <0.05 was considered significant. Statistical analyses were performed using the R (version R-4.2.2) software (R Core Team (2023). _R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing_. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. https://www.R-project.org/) and graphed using GraphPad Prism (v9). To identify biological pathways enriched in MN, we applied g:Profiler and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), as previously