PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Ovary cancer cell; Breast cancer cell; Malignant cell
diseases: Breast cancer; Female reproductive organ cancer
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: acetylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Pi3k/akt/mtor signaling pathway in cancer; tyrosine kinase inhibitors; capivasertib (azd5363); precision medicine; genetic mutations; breast cancer; gynecological cancer; targeted proteomics; global proteomics; translational control

ABSTRACT:
Capivasertib is a potent selective inhibitor of AKT. It was recently FDA-approved in combination with fulvestrant to treat HR+, HER2-negative breast cancers with certain genetic alteration(s) activating the PI3K pathway. In Phase I trials, heavily pre-treated patients with tumours selected for activating PI3K pathway mutations treated with capivasertib monotherapy demonstrated objective response rates of <30%. We investigated the proteomic profile associated with capivasertib response in genetically pre-selected patients and cancer cell lines. We analyzed samples from 16 PIK3CA-mutated patient tumours collected prior to capivasertib monotherapy in the Phase I trial. PI3K pathway proteins were precisely quantified with immuno-MALDI-MS. Global proteomic profiles were also obtained. Patients were classified according to response to capivasertib monotherapy: “clinical benefit (CB)” (≥12 weeks without progression, n=7) or “no clinical benefit (NCB)” (progression in <12 weeks, n=9). Proteins that differed between the patient groups were subsequently quantified in AKT1- or PIK3CA-altered breast cancer cell lines with varying capivasertib sensitivity. The measured concentrations of AKT1 and AKT2 varied among the PIK3CA-mutated tumours but did not differ between the CB and NCB groups. However, analysis of the global proteome data showed that translational activity was higher in tumours of the NCB vs. CB group. When reproducibly quantified by validated LC-MRM-MS assays, the same proteins of interest similarly distinguished between capivasertib-sensitive vs. -resistant cell lines. The results provide further evidence that increased mTORC1-driven translation functions as a mechanism of resistance to capivasertib monotherapy. Protein concentrations may offer additional insights for patient selection for capivasertib, even among genetically pre-selected patients.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
mTORC1-driven protein translation correlates with clinical benefit of capivasertib within a genetically preselected cohort of PIK3CA-altered tumours

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein Extraction, Digestion, and immuno-MALDI-MS Tumour samples were processed and analysed using a multi-step workflow (Supplemental S1), beginning with xylene deparaffinization and ethanol rehydration. Samples were then extracted by high-temperature incubation and sonication. The concentration of total protein in each sample was quantified by Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit with a ThermoFisher MultiSkan Go spectrophotometer.  Quantitation of AKT by immuno-MALDI-MS was performed as previously described (13). Diluted sample aliquots containing 10 µg of total protein were prepared in an automated fashion on an Agilent Bravo Liquid Handling Robot. The calibration curve was prepared by spiking known quantities (0-20 fmol) of unlabeled standard peptide into 10 ug of bovine serum albumin. Each tumour or calibration sample was denatured with sodium deoxycholate (DOC), reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), and quenched with DTT. Digestion was performed with TCPK-treated trypsin (substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 2:1, 1 hour, 37C), prior to quenching with TLCK. A phosphatase-based phosphopeptide quantitation (PPQ) method, as described in Domanski et al (14), was performed by incubating aliquots with or without alkaline phosphatase (1U/µg total protein, 2 hours, 37C). Stable isotope-labeled internal standard peptides were added to each digested sample.  Immunoenrichment was achieved by tumbling samples overnight at 4C with anti-peptide antibodies (Signatope GmbH) coupled to magnetic beads. The AKT-depleted supernatant from this step was retained; a portion was reserved for global proteome analysis by nano-LC-Orbitrap MS. The remainder was sequentially enriched using anti-peptide antibodies for PTEN and PI3K p110α to enable quantitation via our previously-validated iMALDI method (15). Beads were washed prior to spotting on a MALDI target. HCCA MALDI matrix was applied to the dried spots, which were stored at room temperature until analysis.  Mass spectra were acquired on a Bruker MicroflexTM LRF benchtop MALDI-TOF-MS (RRID:SCR_018696). Data analysis was performed in FlexAnalysis 3.4 with Savitsky-Golay smoothing, baseline subtraction, and automated peak picking. Calibration curves were generated using a linear regression with a 1/x2 weighting. Assay performance was confirmed with quality control samples (QCs) (Supplemental Material, S2).  Nano-LC-Orbitrap MS Analysis, Protein Identification and Quantification A 2-µL aliquot of the AKT-depleted supernatant from each sample’s immunoenrichment, corresponding to 117.5 ng of total protein digest, was reserved for label-free quantitation of the global proteome. Samples were prepared using custom StageTips for desalting before drying under vacuum and resuspension in 0.1% formic acid for injection. Online liquid chromatography was performed on an Easy-nLC 1200 equipped with a pre-column (particle size, 3 µm; 2 cm x 75 µm inner diameter) and a nanoscale main analytical column (particle size, 2 µm; 25 cm x 75 µm inner diameter), both AcclaimPepMap100 C18 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was performed over a 50-minute gradient (flow rate, 300 nL/minute; 20 ºC; mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 84% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA).  Mass spectra were acquired on a Q-Exactive Plus MS with a Nanospray Flex ion source (RRID:SCR_020556, ThermoFisher Scientific). Using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method, the 15 most abundant precursor ions (charge states: 2+ to 4+) were selected for MS/MS fragmentation (dynamic exclusion, 40 s). Full scan MS were acquired for the mass range from m/z 350 to m/z 1500 (resolution, 70,000; AGC target, 1 x 106; max injection time, 50 ms). MS2 spectra were acquired following HCD fragmentation (normalized CE, 28), with an isolation width of m/z 1.2 (resolution, 17,500; AGC target, 2 x 104; max injection time, 64 ms).  MS raw global proteome data were processed using Proteome DiscovererTM 2.4 (RRID:SCR_014477, Thermo Scientific). Database searches were performed using SequestHT (RRID:SCR_000286) and a human Swissprot database (RRID:SCR_021164, January 2019; 20,414 target entries), assuming a maximum of 1 missed tryptic cleavage. Mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Scaled, normalized, abundances were exported to Microsoft Excel (RRID:SCR_016137), and filtered for protein IDs with ≥2 unique peptides.

DATA PROCESSING:
Descriptive statistics and protein concentration data were analyzed in Microsoft Excel (RRID:SCR_016137). Group differences were assessed using the common t-test and non-parametric tests to address the possibility of non-normal distributions in the protein concentration data. Multivariate statistical analysis was performed using MetaboAnalyst (RRID:SCR_015539) (17). Volcano plots, Principal Component Analysis, Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis, Variable Importance in the Projection (VIP) scores, heatmaps, and hierarchical clustering were generated based on normalized data. StringDB was used for network analysis, to identify clusters of related proteins, and to identify related publications (18). Cytoscape (RRID:SCR_003032) was used to visualize the regulation of proteins within the network (19). QIAGEN IPA (RRID:SCR_008653) software was used to map the label-free quantification data to canonical pathways. QC analyses confirmed the integrity of the data following batch integration, normalization, and scaling of features (Supplemental Material, S3).

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Full descriptions of all methods are provided in the Supplemental Materials.
Patient tumor samples
The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the Jewish General Hospital (Project #2018-663 17-004, approved March 03, 2017) in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Anonymized patient data and samples were obtained under site-specific Research Ethics Board approval as part of AstraZeneca’s registered international multicenter clinical trial of AZD5363 (NCT01226316, posted October 22, 2010; ref.). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. De-identified samples and clinical data were provided for analysis under the conditions of a legal agreement between AstraZeneca, McGill University, University of Victoria, and the funders, in accordance with the patient consent form.
The sample set was drawn from patients with breast cancer whose tumor pathology was either ER positive (ER+) or HER2-positive (HER2+), or patients with gynecological (ovarian, cervical, or endometrial) cancers for whom no standard therapy was effective. For this cohort, eligibility was restricted to patients whose tumors contained known activating PIK3CA mutation(s) detected during screening. Tumor samples obtained at the time of screening were stored at ambient temperature as slide-mounted 4-µm-thick FFPE tumor tissue slices.
The enrolled patients received capivasertib 480 mg twice daily for 4 days followed by 3 days off, repeated in 21-day cycles. Tumor volume was measured according to RECIST v1.1 criteria within 28 days of the start of treatment and at specified timepoints after the start of treatment (i.e., weeks 6, 12, 18, 24, etc.). Target lesion response was categorized into complete response (CR), partial response (PR, ≥30% decrease), stable disease (SD, volume ± <30%), or progressive disease (PD, ≥30% increase; ref.). Treatment was continued as tolerated, until evidence of disease progression. Standardized, anonymized response data were used to classify patient drug response based on PFS. CB was defined as PFS observed for a minimum of 12 weeks after starting capivasertib. “No CB” (NCB) was defined as less than 12 weeks of observed PFS while receiving capivasertib.
Cell line samples
Well-characterized hormone-receptor positive, AKT1- or PIK3CA-altered breast cancer cell lines were selected for analysis. HCC-1428 (RRID:CVCL_1252) was purchased from ATCC (CRL-2327, via Cedarlane, Feb 2022). EFM-19 (RRID:CVCL_0253) was purchased DSMZ (ACC 231, July 2022). ZR-75-30 (RRID:CVCL_1661) and MCF-7 (RRID:CVCL_0031) were gifts from the laboratory of Dr. Mark Basik at the Segal Cancer Centre (received May 2022). Cell lines underwent short tandem repeat DNA profiling and mycoplasma detection/elimination prior to the beginning of the experiments, which were conducted June to November 2022. All cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 with 10% or 15% FBS, according to manufacturer directions, with 1% P/S, for fewer than 8 passages. Samples of each cell line were collected prior to capivasertib exposure, washed with PBS, and stored at −80°C until analysis. Each cell line was tested for sensitivity to capivasertib using a standard alamarBlue cytotoxicity assay, based on at least three independent replicates.
Protein extraction, digestion, and immuno-Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization mass spectrometry (iMALDI-MS)
Tumor samples were processed and analyzed using a multistep workflow (Supplementary Methods S1), beginning with xylene deparaffinization and ethanol rehydration. Samples were then extracted by high-temperature incubation and sonication. The concentration of total protein in each sample was quantified by Pierce bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit with a ThermoFisher MultiSkan Go spectrophotometer.
Quantitation of AKT by immuno-matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (iMALDI)-MS was performed as previously described. Diluted sample aliquots containing 10 µg of total protein were prepared in an automated fashion on an Agilent Bravo Liquid Handling Robot. The calibration curve was prepared by spiking known quantities (0–20 fmol) of unlabeled standard peptide into 10 µg of bovine serum albumin. Each tumor or calibration sample was denatured with sodium deoxycholate (DOC), reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), and quenched with dithiothreitol (DTT). Digestion was performed with tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TCPK)-treated trypsin (substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 2:1, 1 hour, 37°C), prior to quenching with tosyllysine chloromethylketone (TLCK). A phosphatase-based phosphopeptide quantitation (PPQ) method, as described in Domanski and colleagues, was performed by incubating aliquots with or without alkaline phosphatase (1U/µg total protein, 2 hours, 37°C). Stable isotope-labeled internal standard peptides were added to each digested sample.
Immunoenrichment was achieved by tumbling samples overnight at 4°C with antipeptide antibodies (Signatope GmbH) coupled to magnetic beads. The AKT-depleted supernatant from this step was retained; a portion was reserved for global proteome analysis by nano-LC-Orbitrap MS. The remainder was sequentially enriched using antipeptide antibodies for PTEN and PI3K p110α to enable quantitation via our previously validated iMALDI method. Beads were washed prior to spotting on a MALDI target. α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (HCCA) MALDI matrix was applied to the dried spots, which were stored at room temperature until analysis.
Mass spectra were acquired on a Bruker Microflex LRF benchtop MALDI-TOF-MS (RRID:SCR_018696). Data analysis was performed in FlexAnalysis 3.4 with Savitsky-Golay smoothing, baseline subtraction, and automated peak picking. Calibration curves were generated using a linear regression with a 1/x2 weighting. Assay performance was confirmed with quality control samples (QC samples; Supplementary Validation Data S1).
Nano-LC-Orbitrap MS analysis, protein identification and quantification
A 2-µL aliquot of the AKT-depleted supernatant from each sample’s immunoenrichment, corresponding to 117.5 ng of total protein digest, was reserved for label-free quantitation of the global proteome. Samples were prepared using custom StageTips for desalting before drying under vacuum and resuspension in 0.1% formic acid for injection.
Online liquid chromatography was performed on an Easy-nLC 1200 equipped with a precolumn (particle size, 3 µm; 2 cm × 75 µm inner diameter) and a nanoscale main analytical column (particle size, 2 µm; 25 cm × 75 µm inner diameter), both AcclaimPepMap100 C18 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was performed over a 50-minute gradient (flow rate, 300 nL/minutes; 20°C; mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).
Mass spectra were acquired on a Q-Exactive Plus MS with a Nanospray Flex ion source (RRID:SCR_020556, ThermoFisher Scientific). Using a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method, the 15 most abundant precursor ions (charge states: 2+ to 4+) were selected for MS/MS fragmentation (dynamic exclusion, 40 seconds). Full scan MS were acquired for the mass range from m/z 350 to m/z 1,500 (resolution, 70,000; AGC target, 1 × 106; max injection time, 50 ms). MS2 spectra were acquired following HCD fragmentation (normalized CE, 28), with an isolation width of 1.2 Da (resolution, 17,500; AGC target, 2 × 104; max injection time, 64 ms).
MS raw global proteome data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (RRID:SCR_014477, Thermo Scientific). Database searches were performed using SequestHT (RRID:SCR_000286) and a human Swiss-Prot database (RRID:SCR_021164, January 2019; 20,414 target entries), assuming a maximum of 1 missed tryptic cleavage. Mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Scaled, normalized, abundances were exported to Microsoft Excel (RRID:SCR_016137), and filtered for protein IDs with ≥2 unique peptides.
LC-MRM-MS assays
Targeted multiplexed UPLC-MRM-MS assays were developed and optimized for 54 proteins of interest using synthetic proteotypic peptides for calibration and corresponding stable isotope-labeled (SIS) peptides as internal standards for quantitation (Sobsey and colleagues, submitted). Assays were characterized in accordance with the CPTAC guidelines.
Cell line samples underwent extraction and total protein quantitation using methods similar to those used on the deparaffinized patient tumor samples. Aliquots of 80 µg of total protein were manually prepared for in-solution digestion by denaturation with DOC, reduction with TCEP, alkylation with IAA, and quenching with DTT. Tryptic digestion was performed at a substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 20:1 (Worthington, TCPK-treated, 17 hours, 37°C), prior to quenching on ice, and spiking with SIS peptides. Solid Phase Extraction (Oasis SPE HLB 1 cc cartridges, 10 mg sorbent) was performed according to manufacturer directions on a vacuum manifold. Eluates were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in H2O, 0.1% formic acid for injection. The calibration curve was prepared by adding known equimolar quantities (0–100 fmol on-column) of 54 unlabeled synthetic peptides into digested BSA spiked with SIS peptide mix. A previously quantified pooled cell lysate sample was repeatedly analyzed as a quality control.
Samples and calibration standards were analyzed via 10 μL injections (20 µg total protein digest on-column) on an Agilent 1290 Infinity liquid chromatography system (RRID:SCR_019375) with a Zorbax Eclipse plus C18 column (RRHD; particle size, 1.8 µm; internal diameter, 2.1 × 15 mm; 50°C; flow rate, 0.35 mL/minutes) coupled to a 6495B triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Elution was performed over a 46-minute gradient (B: 2%–80%; mobile phase A: H2O, 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B: acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode using a scheduled MRM-MS method targeting ≥3 transition pairs per peptide. Data were processed in Skyline (RRID:SCR_014080) for peak integration and quantitation.
Data analysis and bioinformatics
Descriptive statistics and protein concentration data were analyzed in Microsoft Excel (RRID:SCR_016137). Group differences were assessed using the common t test and nonparametric tests to address the possibility of non-normal distributions in the protein concentration data. Multivariate statistical analysis was performed using MetaboAnalyst (RRID:SCR_015539; ref.). Volcano plots, Principal Component Analysis, Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis, Variable Importance in the Projection (VIP) scores, heatmaps, and hierarchical clustering were generated based on normalized data. StringDB was used for network analysis, to identify clusters of related proteins, and to identify related publications. Cytoscape (RRID:SCR_003032) was used to visualize the regulation of proteins within the network. QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; RRID:SCR_008653) software was used to map the label-free quantification data to canonical pathways. QC analyses confirmed the integrity of the data following batch integration, normalization, and scaling of features (Supplementary Validation Data S2).
Data availability
Individual participant data associated with the clinical trials sponsored by AstraZeneca can be requested by qualified researchers via the request portal, with request evaluated according to the AstraZeneca disclosure commitment (https://astrazenecagroup-dt.pharmacm.com/DT/Home) and Responsible Data Sharing Principles. Global proteomics spectra and associated were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://www.proteomexchange.org/) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD052949. Samples of the polyclonal antibodies for AKT1 and AKT2 can be requested through the Segal Cancer Proteomics Centre (Montreal, QC, Canada). LC-MRM-MS assay information and validation data are publicly available in the CPTAC Assay Portal (https://assays.cancer.gov/available_assays, IDs: 6077-6129; see Supplementary Methods S1 for links to each assay). MRM-MS assay kits including the required peptide standards and instrument files are now commercially available from MRM Proteomics Inc. (Montreal, QC, Canada).

RESULTS:
Results
Slide-mounted FFPE tumor samples were obtained from patients with activating PIK3CA mutations in their ER+ or HER+ breast or gynecological cancers, respectively, prior to treatment in a multicenter phase I clinical trial of capivasertib (NCT01226316). Twenty-three 4-μm slides, representing 16 patient tumors, yielded sufficient material (≥25 μg total protein/slide) for the analyses. Patients were coded as “CB” (≥12 weeks of PFS after treatment initiation; n = 7) or “NCB” (<12 weeks PFS; n = 9) as described in the “Methods” section. As shown in Table 1, the two groups had similar overall clinical characteristics, but the CB group had a greater proportion of samples derived from metastatic sites compared to the NCB group.
Tumor AKT protein concentrations do not differ between CB and NCB groups
Twenty-two slides representing 16 patient tumors were analyzed by iMALDI-MS. The lower limits of quantitation (LLOQ) for AKT1 and AKT2 were 0.3 and 0.6 fmol on-spot, respectively. Among the PIK3CA mutation-positive tumor samples with AKT data (CB n = 7, NCB n = 5), the amount of AKT present per 10 µg total protein ranged from 0.6 to 4.5 fmol for AKT1 and 0.6 to 2.0 fmol for AKT2. For tumors from which multiple slides were analyzed, the AKT concentrations showed good agreement across biological replicates, even among non-adjacent slices (R2 > 0.95). Most samples did not show sufficient phosphorylation (>30%) of AKT1-Ser473 or AKT2-Ser474 to be quantified by the PPQ assay, with measurable phosphorylation observed in only three tumors (Supplementary Fig. S1). Using the AKT-depleted digest from the AKT iMALDI assay, PTEN and PI3K p110α were quantified in 14 patient tumors (CB n = 7, NCB n = 7). Within the patient sample set, the PTEN concentration values quantified by iMALDI correlated well with the PTEN histochemical scoring assessment (H-score) previously determined by immunohistochemistry (R2 = 0.86; Supplementary Fig. S2).
Using our quantitative iMALDI-MS assay, we observed significant inter-tumor variability in the amount of AKT1 and AKT2 protein, with as much as a 4-fold difference among PIK3CA-mutated tumors. However, total AKT1, AKT2, and PTEN protein concentrations did not differ significantly between the CB and NCB groups (Wilcoxon rank test, P > 0.05; Fig. 1A). We separately quantified pAKT1-Ser473 and pAKT2-Ser474 proteins using a mass spectrometry assay with high isoform specificity. However, only three samples showed pAKT stoichiometry sufficient to be precisely quantified by the assay.
We also quantified PTEN protein since it is the dominant regulator suppressing AKT phosphorylation in PIK3CA-mutated cells. All three samples with >30% pAKT1 or pAKT2 had low PTEN values (<0.36 fmol PTEN/10 μg total protein, in Q1 of the measured values), as did one other sample with 22% pAKT1, which appeared elevated but fell below the assay’s LLOQ. Nonetheless, PTEN expression levels did not differ significantly between the treatment response groups. For PI3K p110α, the large number of samples with concentrations below the lower limit of quantitation of the assay prevented a meaningful comparison between the groups. AKT2 was slightly higher in the metastatic tumors as compared to primary tumors, but the difference did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.09; Supplementary Fig. S3).
Proteins associated with oncogenic functions of AKT are differentially expressed between the CB versus NCB groups
Using a new serialized workflow, we acquired global proteomic data using nano-LC-MS-MS for 23 distinct tumor slides from 15 patient tumors (CB n = 6, NCB n = 9). The workflow permitted further analysis of previously analyzed samples from small aliquots of AKT-depleted supernatant, each containing approximately 107 ng of digested protein. We were able to achieve label-free quantification (LFQ) of up to 1,455 proteins at a false discovery rate of <1%, with a minimum of two unique peptides per protein. A total of 578 proteins were quantified across all samples for further statistical analysis. In light of the higher proportion of samples from metastatic sites in the CB group, the proteomic profiles of metastatic versus primary tumors were compared (Supplementary Fig. S3). The differences in metastatic versus primary tumors identified by PLS-DA were attributable to known markers of metastasis, indicating that biological relationships were preserved following batch integration and data normalization.
As shown in Fig. 1, unsupervised statistical analysis of the global proteome data by hierarchical clustering and by principal component analysis (PCA) confirmed the high similarity of replicates from the same tumor. Supervised statistical analysis with Partial Least Squares–Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) resulted in a clear separation of the CB and NCB groups, with little overlap. A total of 53 proteins had abundances that differed between the CB and the NCB group with fold-changes of ≥1.5 and Wilcoxon rank test P-values of ≤0.05 (Supplementary Table S1).
Of these 53 proteins, the five proteins that were upregulated in the CB group included four immunoglobulins and serum albumin. The five proteins whose expression was higher in the CB group were serum albumin (ALB), polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR), and some immunoglobulin subunits (IGHG2, IGKC, IGKV4-1). This is aligned with previous evidence linking systemic hypoalbuminuria with reduced PFS and overall survival in patients treated with TKIs. High levels of serum albumin are also associated with reduced TNFα and pro-inflammatory cytokine signaling, diminished gluconeogenesis, and increased activation of AKT to promote cell survival. This is consistent with the observation that the CB group had reduced levels of CPNE-1 (suggesting lower TNFα signaling) and inflammatory proteins (ILF-2, ILF-3). There is mixed evidence about the role of PIGR in cancer, but some evidence suggests that PIGR promotes oncogenic AKT activity with downstream effects on GSK3B/β-catenin that are reversed by AKT inhibition.
The 48 proteins that were downregulated in the CB group versus the NCB group cluster to three main nodes. The largest group includes 13 structural subunits of ribosomes. A related, strongly interconnected, node relates to regulation and processing of mRNA and DNA. The final node consists of 11 differentially expressed mitochondrial proteins. Taken as a whole, the nodes suggest strongly increased translational activity in the NCB group together with the associated energetic demands. GTP-binding protein SAR1a was the only one of the 53 differentially expressed proteins that overlapped with the proteins differentiating metastatic from primary tumors.
Protein network analysis of the 48 downregulated proteins plus AKT1, using the String-DB, found 138 high-confidence interactions between proteins within this group (Fig. 2A). The observed protein–protein interaction enrichment P-value of <1.0e−16 provides strong evidence for a meaningful biological relationship between the proteins of interest in this dataset. Network analysis shows an enrichment of ribosomal proteins, mitochondrial proteins, and proteins involved in mRNA processing.
Proteins differentially expressed between the CB versus NCB groups map to translational control pathways
To better understand the pathways responsible for the group differences observed, QIAGEN’s IPA software was used to systematically map the differentially expressed proteins, fold-changes, and P-values to canonical pathways and to statistically assess the observed patterns of regulation. Pathway enrichment analysis (Fig. 2B) identified a systematic enrichment of proteins in pathways associated with translational activity (e.g., EIF2 signaling, eIF4/p70S6K, mTOR pathway), inflammation (acute phase response signaling, LXR/RXR activation), cancer cell motility/invasion (actin cytoskeleton signaling), and altered glucose metabolism (gluconeogenesis, glycolysis). LXR/RXR was activated in the CB group. LXRs regulate glycolysis, lipid hemostasis, and possibly immune functions by enhancing the activity of GSK3β, which activates AKT and phosphorylates pathway proteins upstream (RICTOR, PTEN) and downstream (TSC) from AKT. Proteins belonging to translational control pathways directly downstream from AKT—–eIF4/p70S6K and mTOR signaling—were enriched among the proteins of interest. Expression is upregulated for the associated proteins in the NCB group, though IPA could not statistically confirm the direction of regulation.
The EIF2 signaling pathway is of particular interest in this context. eIF2α (EIF2S1) is a master regulator of translation dysregulation in cancer. By modifying the efficiency of translation initiation, PERK-phosphorylated eIF2α can selectively decrease or enhance translation, resulting in the uncoupling of mRNA abundance from protein expression for up to 90% of transcripts. Since eIF2α works hand-in-hand with AKT to control cell fate decisions, sending compensatory prosurvival signals under conditions of cell stress, eIF2α signaling has been previously identified as a possible mechanism of resistance to AKT inhibitors. Furthermore, the elevated expression of ribosomal and translational proteins observed in the NCB group could help sustain eIF2α phosphorylation by limiting ER stress that could trigger the unfolded protein response and sensitize the cells to AKT inhibition.
However, closer examination of the data shows that IPA defined its EIF2 pathway to include ribosomal proteins (RPL10A, RPL14, RPL18, RPLP0) that their EIF4 pathway does not. This led to statistical prioritization of EIF2 signaling in IPA but the authors could not find published evidence of a specific association of EIF2 signaling with these RPLs; in fact, the relationship appears to be mediated by EIF4.
Targeted analysis in breast cancer cell lines reproduces the proteomic profile seen in patient samples
To further investigate the possible association of the identified proteins and pathways with capivasertib response, we implemented a specially developed multiplexed MRM-MS assay to directly quantify many of the proteins of interest (n = 29) and related targets (n = 16) with increased precision and reproducibility. The panel was applied to samples from HR+ breast cancer cell lines with known activating PIK3CA or AKT1 alterations published in COSMIC (RRID:SCR_002260). Using a standard cytotoxicity assay, MCF-7 was confirmed to be capivasertib-sensitive (IC50 < 2 µmol/L), while HCC1428, ZR-75-30, and EFM-19 were found to be capivasertib-resistant (IC50 > 10 µmol/L; Fig. 3A). Our CPTAC-validated assays were generally found to be fit-for-purpose in that 42 of the 54 proteins of interest were successfully quantified in most cell line samples. Hierarchical clustering separated sensitive (MCF-7, n = 4) from resistant (HCC1428, n = 3; ZR-75-30, n = 3; EFM-19, n = 3) cell lines on the basis of their expression of the proteins of interest (Fig. 3B). When an FDR-adjusted t test was applied, assuming unequal variance, three proteins (CBR1, HSP90AB1, HSPB1) were found to be significantly downregulated in the resistant cell lines and 14 were upregulated (FC > 1.5; P < 0.05). The proteomic profile observed in the capivasertib-resistant cell lines closely matched the profile observed in the tumors of patients in the NCB group. Of the 22 protein concentrations that best discriminated between sensitive versus resistant cell lines, 17 (77%) showed the same trend detected in the patient study (Fig. 3E; Supplementary Table S2).
When quantified directly, expression of ATF4—a protein whose increased expression directly transduces EIF2-driven translation—is nearly identical between resistant and sensitive cell line samples. This result was further supported by the finding that combination treatment with capivasertib and an eIF2α inhibitor (ISRIB, SelleckChem, S7400) did not yield synergistic effects in the capivasertib-resistant HCC-1428 cell line (Supplementary Fig. S4). While the relationships between the analyzed proteins are complex, the sum of the evidence is consistent with increased downstream mTORC1-driven translation in capivasertib-resistance (Fig. 4). Increased upstream GSKβ/mTORC2-activation might also be associated with capivasertib sensitivity. Given that EIF2 signaling is known to manage the balance between mTORC1 and mTORC2, a role for it cannot be ruled out. Prohibitins (PHB1/2) may be important determinants, as they are known to complex with RAF1 to activate the MEK-ERK pathway, which is a known mechanism of resistance to AKT inhibition, to increase AKT activity through positive feedback, and to support ribosome biogenesis.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway has an established role in tumor cell proliferation, is mutated in more than 50% of breast cancers, and is the target of many new therapeutic agents. Although direct mutations of AKT are comparatively rare, overexpression and overactivation of AKT are key factors in cancer progression. In response to PI3K pathway activation, phospho-AKT promotes downstream oncogenic functions including cell growth, cell survival, and metabolic changes. Capivasertib (AZD5363, Truqap) competitively interacts with the ATP binding site of all three AKT isoforms (AKT1/2/3) and inhibits AKT’s catalytic activity with high potency and higher selectivity than previously developed compounds, resulting in the arrest of tumor cell growth.
Capivasertib in combination with fulvestrant was FDA approved in November 2023 for the treatment of hormone receptor (HR)-positive, HER2-negative advanced or metastatic breast cancer, with one or more confirmed genetic alterations associated with PI3K pathway activation . FoundationOne was approved as a companion diagnostic assay for the associated genetic markers, which include mutations, copy-number variation, and other alterations, in PIK3CA, AKT1, or PTEN. The eligible cohort is currently limited to adults who progressed on endocrine-based therapy in the metastatic setting or who had recurrence during or within 12 months of completing adjuvant therapy. The approval of capivasertib plus fulvestrant therapy is based on results of the CAPItello-291 phase III trial, which demonstrated a dramatically reduced hazard ratio (HR) of 0.51 on the primary endpoint of progression-free survival (PFS) for combination therapy versus fulvestrant alone in patients with PI3K-altered tumors. However, an exploratory analysis of patients whose tumors did not harbor identifiable PI3K pathway alterations found a possible benefit for the addition of capivasertib in this cohort as well, as indicated by a HR of 0.61 to 1.02 [95% confidence interval (CI)] after excluding patients with unknown next-generation sequencing results.
Previous clinical trials have delivered varying results with respect to the power and necessity of genetic biomarkers for capivasertib. In phase I trials, heavily pretreated patients, patients selected for their tumors' activating PIK3CA and AKT1 mutations had objective response rates (ORR) of 4% to 29% to capivasertib monotherapy. This represents a clinically meaningful response rate in a population of patients with advanced solid tumors who had previously progressed on standard therapies. However, higher clinical activity might be expected in a population carefully selected for a targeted agent. The FAKTION phase II trial (n = 140), which evaluated capivasertib plus fulvestrant in aromatase inhibitor-resistant estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer, initially found no effect of mutations on the response rate to combination therapy, whereas a subsequent updated analysis (n = 185) found that the benefit was greater in patients with activating mutations. In CAPItello-291, the clinical benefit (CB) rate for combination therapy of 56% among the subset of patients with PI3K-altered tumors (n = 289) was similar to the rate of 51% across the overall population (n = 708) enrolled in the study.
While the recent FDA approval doubtlessly weighed the results of all of these studies in the decision to guide patient selection with gene-based assays, we believe that this data—together with the fact that capivasertib is first-in-class—means that, like many new drugs, further investigation is merited into biomarkers to help optimize the effective use of capivasertib in clinical practice. Direct measurement of the proteome has shown unique potential for identifying and verifying active cancer-driving alterations that closely correspond to a tumors’ treatment sensitivity or resistance. To evaluate the utility of proteomics for predicting treatment response to capivasertib, we utilized modern mass spectrometry–based methods to directly analyze the protein content of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumor tissues from patients enrolled in a phase I study of capivasertib’s antitumor activity. To further verify an association between the observed proteomic profile and capivasertib response, we applied corresponding targeted assays, validated in accordance with the NCI’s Clinical Proteomics Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) guidelines, to precisely quantify proteins of interest in analogous PIK3CA-altered breast cancer cell lines with varying sensitivities to capivasertib.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
 Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer Research Communications Online (https://aacrjournals.org/cancerrescommun/).