PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: Label free; Relative quantification
keywords: Probe

ABSTRACT:
Dear Juan Francisco, Dear Pablo  we finished analyzing your latest order. In short, the data looks great! Your neg. controls behave as expected and cluster tightly. The probe (JT-195)  enriches for a lot of prey proteins. Many are shared with the cysteinome control. Replicates are very similar.  Kind regards, Tobias  *** Always reply to workflow results by using the order comments function in b-fabric! Please do NOT send emails to proteomics@ or individual people involved in workflow processing (order coach). ***  1 Downloading results packaged in a b-fabric workunits  [https://fgcz-bfabric.uzh.ch/wiki/tiki-index.php?page=WorkunitDownload]  2 General data processing logic  LC-MS raw data => Dia-NN => proLFQ/SAINTexpress => Interaction proteomics report                                     |-> ScaffoldDIA  3 Workunit guidance  3.1 Dia-NN  The main output of Dia-NN is called <WU#>_report.tsv and is a precursor-centric table in long format. It describes chromatographic features mapped to peptides. This file can be loaded in downstream processing tools like DIAgui [https://github.com/mgerault/DIAgui] or amica [https://github.com/tbaccata/amica] or a spread sheet calculator. For direct exploration of Dia-NN output we recommend using the so called matrix files named <WU#>_report.<level>_matrix.tsv These files summarize the main report for pr (precursor), pg (protein group), or gg (gene group) level by the maxLFQ algorithm in matrix-like tables (feature x sample). Be aware that maxLFQ estimates are tailored towards comparisons between experimental conditions (also called horizontal comparisions). They should not be used for rank sorting proteins, as estimator for the abs. amount of proteins. For this special estimators like topN or iBAQ should be used (available in DIAgui)  [https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN]  3.2 SAINTexpress  The main interaction scoring results are summarized in the interaction proteomics report. This report is named SaintExpressReport*_<WU#>.html and can be viewed in any web browser. All numbers shown in the report are extracted from the SAINTexpress output which is available as DIANN_<WU#>_data.xlsx. The list tab summarizes all bait-prey pairs scored by the ML model for the different comparisons. We judge preys by co-filtering in effect size (FoldChange) and significance dimension (BFDR). Suitable cutoffs are very experiment/data dependent, especially in the effect size dimension. We tend to use BFDR <5%  and FC >1 as initial thresholds. Refiltering according to known interactions is always a good approach to arrive at meaningful candidate lists. The ORA_Bait_<baitName>_<preyName>.txt files can be used to upload candidate lists to web tools like String-DB [https://string-db.org] for network/enrichment analysis. They are always filtered according to parameters shown in the interaction proteomics report.  [https://saint-apms.sourceforge.net/Main.html]  3.3 ScaffoldDIA  The main output of protein identification and quantification performed by Dia-NN is also available as ScaffoldDIA formatted file (<WU#>_result.sdia). ScaffoldDIA allows to browse LC-MS datasets using a GUI. The ScaffoldDIA app can be downloaded free of charge from [https://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold-dia] and runs on all mayor (OS) platforms. Be aware that Dia-NN matrix files might be different to ScaffoldDIA outputs, since ScaffoldDIA takes the Dia-NN main report (which describes chromatographic features mapped to peptides) and recalculates protein inference, reestimate protein quantifies. The output in the app also heavily depends on the set filter options. We do NOT recommend using ScaffoldDIA exports for statistical downstream processing, but only for interactive explorative analysis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Order 37630 - Juan Francisco Tamez Fernandez 2025-01-31

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Workflow Step 16847 - Proteomics Sample Preparation - On-beads digestion (magnetic beads) Workflow Step 16848 - Proteomics Sample Preparation - Lunatic Workflow Step 17794 - Proteomics Data acquisition - LC-MS/MS DIA

DATA PROCESSING:
Workflow Step 16919 - Proteomics Data analysis - DIA-NN Workflow Step 16974 - Proteomics Results - SAINTexpress

RESULTS:
Results
The Cytotoxicity of Hemicyanines Across Cell Types Correlates with Electrophilicity
We hypothesized that hemicyanine compounds 1–5 would display varying degrees of electrophilicity owing to the electronic properties of the substituent R in the indolenine fragment (Figure  A). These compounds were synthesized following a published procedure and characterized by 1H-,13C NMR, and HRMS (Figures S17–S49). The half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of these compounds was determined in HEK293 (embryonic kidney), HeLa (cervical cancer), and MDA-MB-231 (triple-negative breast cancer) human cells at different time points by the dimethylthiazol tetrazolium (MTT) assay (Figure  B; Figure S1). The toxicity of the compounds was significantly influenced by changes in the electronegativity of the R substituent (C3).
As the electronegativity of the substituent increased, the compounds displayed higher cytotoxicity, showing a consistent trend across all cell lines. Given that hemicyanines are Michael acceptors, we interpreted this trend as an indication that the toxicity of these compounds is related to their electrophilicity. Thus, compounds 1-5 may act as covalent ligands for nucleophilic residues in proteins such as cysteine (vide infra).   Additionally, we investigated the influence of oxygen and nitrogen atoms at the C14 position. To explore this effect, we synthesized compound 2-NH  2  (Figure S2) by replacing the hydroxyl (−OH) group in compound 2 with an amine (−NH2) group. The nitrogen-containing compound 2-NH  2  is less cytotoxic than its oxygen-containing analog 2 (Figure S2). This difference could be explained considering that the oxygen in compound 2with a pK a of 7.0 ± 0.2 (Figure S3)is largely deprotonated at neutral pH, giving an overall neutral molecule. In contrast, compound 2-NH  2  cannot be deprotonated within the biologically relevant range of pH values (Figure S3) and has a positive charge. This change in total charge decreases the membrane permeability of 2-NH  2  and affects its subcellular localization, as confirmed by fluorescence microscopy and colocalization analysis (Figure S4).
We observed that even though compound 1 should be more electrophilic than compound 2, it exhibits similar cytotoxicity across the three cell lines (Figure  B). This seemingly counterintuitive observation can be explained by considering that with increased electrophilicity, compound 1 is also more prone to reaction with glutathione (GSH) than compound 2 (Figure S5). Thus, compound 2 displays sufficient electrophilicity to potentially modify protein residues, but not enough to be substantially trapped by abundant GSH in the cell. Given its potency and favorable properties, we chose compound 2 to characterize the biological effects and identify the molecular targets of this class of electrophilic compounds.
Compound 2 Activates a Nonapoptotic Cell Death Mechanism
Cytoplasmic vacuolation has been widely associated with nonapoptotic mechanisms. To determine whether compound 2 triggered a nonapoptotic mechanism, we evaluated apoptosis induction by measuring caspase-3/7 activation in HeLa cells treated with compound 2. Caspase-3/7 cleavage was detected using the fluorescent probe CellEventTM Caspase-3/7 Green, alongside the nucleic acid stain SYTOTM Deep Red. Staurosporine (STS), a well-established apoptosis inducer, served as the positive control, while DMSO was used as the negative control, and zVAD-FMK as a pan-caspase inhibitor.
Cells treated with compound 2 exhibited no significant caspase-3/7 activation compared to the controls (Figure  A and Figure S6). As expected, cells pretreated with zVAD-FMK followed by STS did not display caspase activation (Figure  A and Figure S6). In the same experiment, we evaluated cell shrinkage and nuclear fragmentation, both well-characterized hallmarks of apoptosis. Our findings demonstrated that, in contrast to STS treatment, compound 2 did not induce nuclear fragmentation or cellular shrinkage (Figure  B). Overall, these results indicate that compound 2 does not trigger caspase activation, nuclear fragmentation, or cellular shrinkage, suggesting the involvement of nonapoptotic pathways.
Compound 2 Induces Morphological Changes in the ER and Mitochondria
We next evaluated the morphological changes of the ER and mitochondria in the three cell lines induced by compound 2. HEK293, HeLa, and MDA-MB-231 cells were incubated with 2 for 2 h and stained with ER-TrackerTM Green. Cytoplasmic vacuolation was observed in all three cell lines (Figure  A). Additionally, the vacuole membranes were stained with ER-TrackerTM Green, suggesting their ER origin. To further evaluate the origin of the vacuoles, we transfected the cells with a fluorescent protein targeted to the ER lumen using the KDEL retention sequence (KDEL-mTurquoise2) and incubated them with compound 2 for 2 h. Confocal time-lapse microscopy revealed that these vacuoles contain the fluorescent protein, confirming that they originate from ER dilation (Figure  B).
ER dilation is often accompanied by mitochondria swelling.   Thus, we monitored morphological changes in mitochondria and their role in vacuole formation by incubating compound 2 with HeLa cells stained with the mitochondrial probe PKmito DEEP RED (Figure  C). The morphology changes were evident starting at 5 min after the addition of compound 2 and a characteristic donut-shaped morphology was observed (Figure  C), indicating mitochondrial stress.   After 15 min, the PKmito DEEP RED probe began to leak to the cytosol, indicating mitochondrial depolarization. Importantly, we observed that vacuolation did not involve mitochondria as they surround the vacuoles and no PKmito DEEP RED was observed in the vacuoles (Figure S7).
Compound 2 Increases Superoxide Production
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are primarily generated in mitochondria and they have an important role in cell death mechanisms. Previous studies have shown that superoxide (O2 •‑) is closely associated with paraptosis induction.   Therefore, we assessed the production of this radical anion in HeLa cells treated with compound 2. We used a derivative of the fluorescent probe HKSOX-1 (HKSOX-1*) to detect intracellular O2 •– as shown in Figure  A. We employed Antimycin A, an inhibitor of cytochrome c reductase that increases the intracellular concentration of O2 •– as the positive control, and DMSO as the negative control. Cells treated with compound 2 displayed a significantly higher O2 •– accumulation compared to cells treated with the controls and this increase was dose-dependent (Figure  B, C, and S9).
Compound 2 Induces ER Vacuolation Independently of Caspases and O2 •– and Is Inhibited by Cycloheximide
Paraptosis is a process that does not involve caspase activation and the vacuolation process can be suppressed by the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX). We evaluated the effect of the pan-caspase inhibitor zVAD-FMK and CHX on vacuole formation induced by compound 2. This effect was evaluated by confocal microscopy in HeLa cells expressing KDEL-mTurquoise2. DMSO was used as a negative control and compound 2 in the absence of inhibitors as a positive control. The percentage of vacuolated cells was quantified and compared against controls.
After 2 h of treatment with compound 2, zVAD-FMK (20 μM) was unable to rescue cells from ER vacuolation (Figure  A and B). On the other hand, pretreatment with CHX (20 μM) partially prevented vacuole formation as evidenced by a smaller percentage of vacuolated cells (Figure  A and B). These results confirm that vacuolation is a caspase-independent process and that ER dilation is driven by the accumulation of proteins. However, this response seems to be faster than the onset of the unfolded protein response in the ER (UPRER) because upregulation of BiP/GRP78, an established indicator of UPRER, is not observed at this time point (Figure S10). These observations are consistent with a paraptotic cell-death mechanism.
We next questioned whether ER dilation and mitochondrial damage are related. We first assessed the role of O2 •‑ accumulation in the formation of vacuoles by pretreating the cells with the O2 •– scavenger Tiron (100 μM).   Prior treatment with the scavenger did not impact the process of vacuole formation, as indicated in Figure  . This observation suggests that the increase in O2 •– does not play a part in the formation of the vacuoles. We next tested whether ER dilation affects mitochondrial morphology. We transfected HeLa cells with the KDEL-mTurquoise2 plasmid and prestained them with PKmito DEEP RED. After a 2 h preincubation with CHX (20 μM), the cells were coincubated with compound 2 for an additional 2 h. Confocal time-lapse microscopy revealed that all cells displayed mitochondrial damage irrespective of whether they contained ER vacuoles or not (Figure S8). This lack of correlation between vacuolation and mitochondrial damage suggests that these processes are independent.
Compound 2 Binds to Ligandable Cysteines in the Soluble Proteome
Compound 2 is a competent electrophile that can react with thiol-based nucleophiles such as GSH (Figure S5). We next assessed whether this reactivity extends to cysteine residues in proteins by gel-based, qualitative activity-based protein profiling (ABPP).   We purified the soluble proteome from the lysate of HeLa cells and treated it with compound 2. Next, we labeled the ligandable cysteines using the reactive probe ATTO 620 maleimide (Figure S14). A control proteome was treated with ATTO 620 maleimide only. Separation of these proteomes by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) revealed that cysteine labeling by ATTO 620 maleimide (5 μM) is blocked by compound 2 in some proteins in a dose-dependent manner (10–200 μM, Figure  A). This observation strongly suggests that compound 2 reacts with ligandable cysteine residues in proteins, blocking these sites.
We posited that paraptosis triggered by compound 2 may be correlated to the covalent modification of free thiol groups of intracellular protein targets, leading to the disruption of thiol proteostasis. To test this hypothesis, we performed the competitive ABPP experiment described before for all hemicyanines 1–5 (Figure  B). This experiment revealed that the extent of cysteine labeling correlates qualitatively with the electrophilicity of the compound, its toxicity, and its ability to induce ER vacuolation (Figure  C).
A recent study found that nearly all cysteine-modifying covalent ligands induce the formation of stress granules. To verify whether this is also the case for compound 2, we transfected HeLa cells with fluorescently labeled G3BP1 protein, a validated nucleator of stress granules. We observed that indeed compound 2 induced the formation of stress granules, further validating its role as a cysteine covalent modifier (Figure S12).
Compound 2 Binds to Potential Regulators of Paraptosis
We hypothesized that compound 2 interacts with specific thiol-containing proteins involved in paraptosis. To identify these protein targets, we employed mass-spectrometry-based ABPP (Figure S13) −   and synthesized a biotinylated probe derived from compound 2 (2-biotin, Figure  A). Additionally, to identify targets potentially unrelated to thiol modification, we used a biotinylated probe based on compound 5 (5-biotin, Figure  A), which is a structural analog of 2 with diminished electrophilicity and lack of paraptosis-inducing activity. Finally, to identify general targets of electrophilic probes, we used a biotinylated iodoacetamide (IA-biotin, Figure  A) probe, which is a broad-spectrum cysteine-reactive compound. Importantly, treatment of cells with IA did not induce ER vacuolation (Figure S14) and therefore serves as a valuable control in the identification of targets that are specifically engaged by compound 2 and are involved in vacuolation.
We treated cell lysates with 2-biotin, 5-biotin, or IA-biotin for ABPP-based target enrichment. The enriched proteins were subsequently identified through proteomic analysis using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Figure S13). Proteins captured upon treatment of cell lysates with DMSO were used as a negative control, while 2-biotin, 5-biotin, and IA-biotin were used to identify specific interactors. We employed SAINT express software to identify significant targets, which we defined as those with a Bayesian false discovery rate (BFDR) threshold of 0.05 and an empirical fold-change score (EFC) threshold of 2 (log2(EFC) ≥ 1, Figure S13). Nearly 3000 proteins were enriched using either 2-biotin or IA-biotin. These results suggest that 2-biotin is a powerful electrophile capable of reacting with many proteins at the concentration used (10 μM). However, 2-biotin did not react indiscriminately with nucleophilic cysteines, e.g., while protein disulfide isomerases PDI3–6 were efficiently enriched using IA-biotin, they were not detected in the fraction enriched by 2-biotin (Figure S13).
Since IA does not induce ER vacuolation and paraptosis, we posited that proteins that react with 2-biotin but not with IA-biotin might be involved in the induction of this phenotype. We set thresholds of log2(EFC) and -log10(BFDR) of >3 for 2-biotin and <1 for IA-biotin (Figure  B) and identified 13 proteins that were strongly enriched by 2-biotin but not by IA-biotin (Figure  B and Table S2). In our ABPP experiment, we treated whole cell lysate with the biotinylated probes, and therefore the whole soluble proteome was exposed to the electrophiles. Live-cell imaging revealed that compound 2 was notably enriched in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), as indicated by colocalization with ER-specific markers (Figure S4); therefore, from the subset of 13 proteins, we focused only on those known to localize to the ER (Table S2). Based on these considerations, three proteins emerged as potential drivers of ER vacuolation: Sec23 homologue A (SEC23A), GDP-dissociation inhibitor alpha (GDI1), and oxysterol-binding protein 1 (OSBP).
SEC23A is a critical component of COPII-coated vesicles, which transport secretory proteins from the ER to the Golgi apparatus.   Interestingly, fibroblasts from individuals carrying mutant SEC23A exhibit ER dilation, confirming its role in vacuolation. GDI1 is a protein that regulates Rab GTPase activity and plays a key role in vesicular trafficking.   Although direct inhibition of GDI1 has not been associated with cytoplasmic vacuolation, its isoform GDI2, which shares similar functions, has been previously linked to paraptosis and ER vacuolation. Moreover, previous efforts to generate a GDI1/GDI2 double knockout in U2OS cells were unsuccessful, likely due to impaired cell survival and proliferation. OSBP is a lipid transporter that delivers sterol to the Golgi complex in exchange for phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate, which is degraded by the SAC1/SACM1L phosphatase in the ER. OSBP inhibition has been associated with disruption of the Golgi apparatus and impaired retrograde trafficking.   Although genetic depletion of OSBP has not been reported to significantly affect cell viability, some small-molecule inhibitors of OSBP exhibit cytotoxic effects, leading to cell death in specific cell lines.   Notably, OSBP does not appear to be directly involved in ER vacuolation or paraptosis, as knockdown experiments have failed to induce the characteristic vacuolation. Based on this precedent, we conclude that hemicyanine 2 induced ER vacuolation and paraptosis primarily through inhibition of SEC23A, with a potential contribution from GDI1.
The proteins discussed above are likely to contribute to paraptosis activation but the cytotoxic effects of compound 2 may involve additional interactions. For instance, mitochondrial proteins aspartate aminotransferase (GOT2) and mitochondrial import receptor subunit TOMM70 may lead to the observed increase in superoxide production, contributing to cell death. Additionally, thioredoxin reductase 1 (TXNRD1) was enriched in both 2-biotin and IA-biotin treatments (Figure S13). TXNRD1 contains a highly reactive selenocysteine residue, making it particularly susceptible to electrophilic compounds.    Thus, increasing the selectivity of compound 2 for SEC23A, while decreasing its overall electrophilicity, will be crucial to develop a probe that can be used to study the induction of paraptosis independently from other potentially confounding sources of cytotoxicity.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Paraptosis, a form of programmed cell death, is distinguished by unique morphological and biochemical features that set it apart from apoptosis and necrosis.   Unlike apoptosis, which involves cellular shrinkage, DNA fragmentation, and the formation of apoptotic bodies, paraptosis is characterized by extensive cytoplasmic vacuolization, mitochondrial swelling, and the absence of caspase activation or DNA fragmentation.   This form of cell death is typically accompanied by protein and Ca2+ homeostasis disruption and activation of the unfolded protein response of the endoplasmic reticulum (UPRER). Paraptosis is usually mediated through signaling pathways involving mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs).   Despite the heterogeneity of its activation mechanisms, a few studies have reported specific paraptosis-inducing targets like the insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF1R),   GDP-dissociation inhibitor beta (GDI2), and UBP10 (USP10), a member of the ubiquitin-specific protease family of cysteine proteases. Recently, VCP/p97 (SVIP) has been recognized as a paraptosis target and its inhibition triggers ER vacuolation. 
Understanding paraptosis is crucial for elucidating its role in development, disease, and therapy, −    as it provides alternative mechanisms for cell death that could be harnessed for therapeutic interventions, particularly in cancer treatment where traditional apoptosis pathways are often dysregulated. Unlike other cell death mechanisms (i.e., apoptosis, necrosis, ferroptosis, and pyroptosis), paraptosis is controlled, noninflammatory, and independent of apoptotic pathways.   These characteristics make it especially appealing for therapeutic applications, particularly in cancer and neurodegenerative disorders. Its unique morphological and molecular features complement other forms of cell death, broadening the scope of therapeutic strategies.
Exploiting paraptosis for therapeutic purposes requires the development of effective chemical probes. Various compounds have been reported to induce paraptosis in cancer cell lines at concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 40 μM, with incubation periods between 6 and 72 h −              (Table S1). However, the high concentrations and prolonged exposure required to trigger paraptosis highlight the low potency of current compounds. Moreover, many of these compounds are natural products with complex chemical structures, which complicates structure–activity relationship studies. Therefore, identifying new, structurally simple molecules with improved potency and selectivity targeting paraptosis-related proteins is crucial to explore the therapeutic potential of this cell-death mechanism. In this context, hemicyanine compounds emerge as promising candidates due to their structural simplicity, biological compatibility, and ability to interact selectively with biomolecules and respond to changes in the cellular environment. −   Their strong fluorescence, good biocompatibility, and ability to penetrate cells make them ideal candidates for bioimaging and biosensing. Additionally, their photosensitive properties enable their use in photodynamic and photothermal therapies, contributing to advancements in cancer treatment and other disease-targeted applications. 
We recently observed that hemicyanine compounds (1–5, Figure  A) induced varying levels of cytoplasmic vacuolation and exhibited significant cytotoxicity. Among them, compound 2 induced extensive vacuolation and cytotoxicity across three different cell lines. Herein, we demonstrate that compound 2 triggers hallmark features of paraptosis, including mitochondrial swelling, ER dilation, increased superoxide production, and reactivity with cysteine residues. Proteomic analysis identified Sec23 homologue A (SEC23A) and GDP-dissociation inhibitor alpha (GDI1) as targets of compound 2 and potential activators of this nonapoptotic cell death pathway. These findings establish compound 2 as a potent activator of paraptosis and highlight its potential as a lead compound for further development.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
All the raw data from this paper are available on Zenodo at DOI 10.5281/zenodo.15262773. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD062853.
Experimental details, additional results and discussion, 1H and 13C NMR spectra; HRMS spectra; and LC-MS spectra (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacs.5c07109. 
The authors declare no competing financial interest.