PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Ovary
diseases: Ovarian cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: TMT6plex; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Hyperthermia; Proteomics; Tmt

ABSTRACT:
Proteomic data from ovarian cancer cells (A2780 and SKOV3); treated cells with or without hyperthermia (46 deg C for 1 hr); 2 biological replicates for each cell line/condition

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Molecular determinants of tumor response to hyperthermia

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were digested with trypsin, labeled with 10-plex TMT, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

DATA PROCESSING:
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Our materials, HIPEC procedure, cell culture, the cell-cycle study, immunoblotting, RNA extraction, qRT-PCR, TMT Labeling and 2D-LC-MS/MS-Based Quantitative Proteomics, cDNA microarray analysis, synthesis and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of CuS NPs, and immunohistochemistry are described in Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Hyperthermic Treatment of Cancer Cells in Vitro
The details are described in Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Briefly, cells were treated with hyperthermia via heating cells in an incubator for 1 hr at indicated temperatures followed by incubation at 37°C in a regular cell culture incubator. At indicated time points, viability was determined by MTT assay. The LT50 that produced 50% cell death was calculated via curve fitting. Transfection of siRNA or pDNA, and treatment procedures are described in Supplemental Experimental Procedure.
CCLE Database Analysis
The expression data for HTR cells (SKOV3, HeyA8, ES2, and KLE) and HTS cells (A2780, Hec-1A, and ISHIKAWA) were downloaded from the CCLE website (https://www.broadinstitute.org/ccle/data). The details are available in Supplemental Experimental Procedure.
DOPC Liposome Preparation
DOPC liposomes encapsulating siRNA were prepared as described previously.
Synthesis of CuS NPs
CuS NPs were synthesized according to previously reported procedures. The details are available in Supplemental Experimental Procedure.
In Vivo Models
Orthotopic mouse models of ovarian cancer were developed as described previously and the details are available in Supplemental Experimental Procedure. SiRNA-incorporated neutral DOPC liposomes were injected intraperitoneally at a dose of 5 μg siRNA/mouse twice weekly for about 3 weeks beginning 1 week after cell injection. Photothermial ablation using CuS NPs and an NIR laser was used for in vivo local hyperthermic treatment. The details are described in Supplemental Experimental Procedure.
Protein Expression Analysis Using TMT Labeling and 2D-LC-MS/MS-Based Quantitative Proteomics
The details in proteomic sample preparation, LC-MS/MS analysis and proteomics data analysis are available in Supplemental Experimental Procedures. All raw files were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD005055 and 10.6019/PXD005055.

RESULTS:
Results
Diverse of Hyperthermia Sensitivity in Ovarian and Uterine Cancer Cell Lines
We first monitored the temperature transition in tumors during HIPEC in high grade serous ovarian cancer patients (Figure S1 and Table S1). Even though the perfusion temperature at the entrance was maintained at 42.5°C, the temperature in most of the tumors was about 40°C and the potential clinical benefit of these lower temperatures is unclear. We sought to determine the temperatures at which various cancer cells lose viability and to identify potential molecular regulators of sensitivity to hyperthermia. To address these questions, we tested hyperthermia sensitivity in a range of ovarian (A2780, A2780CP20, SKOV3, ES2, HeyA8 and PEO4) and uterine (Hec-1A, SKUT-2, KLE and ISHIKAWA) cancer cells. We treated each cell line with hyperthermia for 1 hr, equivalent to the duration of HIPEC, using an incubator at indicated temperatures and assessed cell viability (Figure 1A). We defined the temperature that produced 50% cell death as the median lethal temperature 50 (LT50) using curve fitting. Based on the calculation of LT50s, the difference between the lowest and highest LT50 was about 4°C, suggesting that the cells showed substantial variability in sensitivity to hyperthermia. The median LT50 in the tested cells was 46.5°C. We classified cells with LT50s above the median, SKOV3, HeyA8, ES2, PEO4, and KLE, as hyperthermia-resistant (HTR) cells, and below the median, A2780, A2780CP20, Hec-1A, ISHIKAWA, and SKUT-2, as hyperthermia-sensitive cells (HTS), respectively (Figure 1B). Since hyperthermia can increase blood flow, we also examined whether endothelial cells are affected by hyperthermia. For these experiments, we used RF24, endothelial cells. The LT50 of RF24 cells was approximately 45.5°C, thus these cells were classified as HTS cells (Figure S2A). Hyperthermia treatment also enhanced sensitivity of HTS A2780 and HTR HeyA8 cells to cisplatin (Figure S2B).
Specific Gene Signatures in HTR Cells as Determined using Comprehensive Gene Expression Analysis
To identify potential molecular regulators of sensitivity of cancer cells to hyperthermia, we compared the gene expression profiles for HTS and HTR cells using the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) database. Specifically, we compared the gene expression profiles of HTS (A2780, ISHIKAWA, and Hec-1A), and HTR (SKOV3, HeyA8, ES2, and KLE) cell lines. We identified differentially expressed genes between HTS and HTR lines setting the cut-off at P-value < 0.05 and fold change > 2. This identified 327 upregulated genes and 92 downregulated genes in HTR cells (Figure 2A and Table S2). Heat maps of the expression of the top 30 upregulated and downregulated genes in HTR cells are shown in Figure 2B. Enriched Gene Ontology (GO) annotations for biological processes for these top 30 genes were related to wound healing, cell motion, and cell adhesion (Figure S3A). We then examined these 30 genes using Ingenuity pathway Analysis (IPA) to identify molecules that can possibly interact with each other in HTR cells. We found that 15 genes were potentially connected with each other in HTR cells (Figure 2C). We further analyzed the expression of the 15 genes in 10 cell lines using quantitative reverse transcription (qRT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Figure S3B). The baseline expression of these genes was generally correlated with increased gene expression in HTR cells in the CCLE database. Among the 15 genes, the expression of FN1, CXCL1, and IL8 was highly increased in HTR compared with HTS cells.
Determination of the Difference in Response of Ovarian Cancer Cells to Hyperthermia Using Quantitative Proteomics
To examine the mechanisms by which HTR cells survive under hyperthermia, we first compared global changes in gene expression between HTS A2780 and HTR SKOV3 cells after hyperthermia using gene microarrays. Most genes that were significantly upregulated after hyperthermia were common between A2780 and SKOV3 cells (Figures S3C and D and Table S3). These results suggested that hyperthermia sensitivity was either not dependent on changes in gene expression or that there are changes in protein abundance in response to hyperthermia. To test this hypothesis, we subjected A2780 and SKOV3 cells treated with hyperthermia to isobaric Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) labeling and offline two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D-LC-MS/MS) to comprehensively assess changes in protein expression induced by hyperthermia. We treated the cells with hyperthermia at 46°C for 1 hr and harvested protein after incubation at 37°C for 4 hr. We identified 53 upregulated and 159 downregulated proteins in A2780 cells, and 309 upregulated and 536 downregulated proteins in SKOV3 cells (Figure 3A and Table S4). We analyzed the GO terms for biological processes for the differentially expressed proteins in A2780 and SKOV3 cells using the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and found that processes involved in glucose metabolism were specifically enriched in SKOV3 cells after hyperthermia (Figure 3B). We also found that glycolysis was the primary pathway affected by hyperthermia in SKOV3 cells according to canonical pathway analysis (Figure 3C). Expression of most of the proteins involved in the glycolysis pathway was downregulated in SKOV3 cells, suggesting that the glycolysis pathway was impaired after hyperthermia treatment (Figure 3D). Upon examining the interactions between the 15 molecules that are differentially expressed between HTS and HTR cells and the glycolysis-related molecules identified in the proteomics described here, we identified FN1, SGK1, CTGF, and CXCL1 to be the potential players regulating the glycolysis pathway in HTR cells (Figure 3E).
Genes Responsible for Hyperthermia Resistance in Ovarian Cancer Cells
According to network mapping, FN1, SGK1, CTGF and CXCL1 were likely linked with glycolysis (Figure 3E). Because CXCL1 was likely downstream from the glycolysis pathway, we focused our effort on FN1, SGK1, and CTGF. We measured FN1, SGK1, and CTGF protein expression in 10 cell lines via Western blotting (Figures 4A and S4A). The expression was increased in HTR cells, which was generally consistent with the FN1, SGK1, and CTGF gene expression profiles of the 10 cell lines (Figure S3B). We then examined potential effects of silencing CTGF, FN1, or SGK1 on response to hyperthermia in HTR (SKOV3, HeyA8, ES2, and KLE) and HTS (A2780) cells using small interfering RNA (siRNA) (Figure 4B). Silencing of FN1 and SGK1 did not sensitize HTR or HTS cells to hyperthermia (Figures S4B–E). On the other hand, silencing of CTGF sensitized the HTR cells to hyperthermia with a decrease in the LT50 by 1.0–2.5°C (Figure 4C). Downregulation of CTGF expression had no effect on sensitization to hyperthermia in A2780 cells. No sensitization was observed when HTS RF24 endothelial cells were treated with siCTGF (Figures S2C and D). Transfection of a CTGF-expressing vector enhanced CTGF mRNA levels in HeyA8 cells, which made the cells tolerant of hyperthermia with about a 2°C increase in the LT50 (Figures 4D and 4E). Because CTGF is a secreted molecule, we treated HTR cells with recombinant human CTGF (rCTGF) in a medium to examine its functional effect. HTR HeyA8 and ES2 cells treated with CTGF siRNA (siCTGF) exhibited tolerance of hyperthermia with an increase of 2.3 and 1.0 °C of the LT50 following the addition of rCTGF (Figure 4F). Conversely, anti-CTGF antibody treatment sensitized SKOV3 cells to hyperthermia (Figure S2E).
Sensitization of Tumors to Hyperthermia by CTGF Silencing In Vivo
Next, we evaluated the effect of CTGF silencing on sensitization to hyperthermia and tumor growth in orthotopic models of ovarian cancer. First, in the HeyA8 model, we administered siCTGF into the peritoneal cavity twice weekly using the 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylcholine (DOPC) nanoliposomal delivery platform (Figures 5A). This resulted in decreased CTGF expression in tumors (Figures S5A). The day before near-infrared (NIR) laser treatment, we intravenously injected CuS NPs modified with poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-CuS NPs) into tumor-bearing mice (day 18). PEG-CuS NPs with about 10 nm in diameter (Figures S5D and E) circulate in the blood for long periods after systemic administration and passively accumulate in tumors via enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. We then treated tumors with local hyperthermia using an NIR laser at 980 nm for 5 min on day 19 because CuS NPs can convert the optical energy of an NIR laser to thermal energy (Figure S5F). As temperatures of 46–60°C are associated with reversible cellular damage in proportion to the exposure time, we maintained the tumor temperature at about 50°C (Figure 5B). We harvested HeyA8 tumors on day 30, and found that local hyperthermia decreased tumor weights and nodule numbers in control siRNA (siCont)- and siCTGF-treated mice (Figures 5C–5F). Furthermore, tumor growth and metastasis were markedly suppressed by the combination of CTGF silencing and local hyperthermia with no changes in body weight (Figures 5 and S5B). A significant increase in cleaved caspase 3 positive cells was observed after hyperthermic treatment in HeyA8 tumors treated with siCTGF (Figure 5G). No obvious decrease in the number of Ki67 positive tumor cells was observed in the siCTGF plus hyperthermia treatment group compared to the siControl group (Figure S5C). Next, we used the HTR SKOV3 tumors surgically implanted into the ovary of nude mice (n = 9–10 per group). The tumor weight and metastasis were significantly decreased by the combination of CTGF silencing and local hyperthermia (Figures 5H–K). These results demonstrated that CTGF silencing in vivo sensitized ovarian tumors to local hyperthermia treatment.
Identification of the Mechanism by Which CTGF Causes Hyperthermia Resistance
To further examine how CTGF silencing sensitized HTR cells to hyperthermia, we examined CTGF levels in HeyA8 and SKOV3 cells longitudinally. Since the expression of some housekeeping genes might be affected by hyperthermia, we confirmed that β-actin and 18S could be used as reference genes in hyperthermia experiment (Figure S6A–C). CTGF expression increased after hyperthermic treatment, and the increase of CTGF after hyperthermia was suppressed by siCTGF-based treatment (Figure 6A). CTGF protein expression also increased after hyperthermic treatment in HeyA8 cells, but the increase was blocked by siCTGF-based treatment over 24 hr (Figure 6B). Silencing of CTGF increased the population of sub-G0/G1 (apoptotic) cells at 24 after hyperthermia (Figure 6C) and induced cell death at 24 hr after hyperthermia treatment (Figure 6D). As shown in Figure 3D, quantitative proteomic analysis suggested that glycolysis was impaired in the HTR SKOV3 cells after hyperthermia treatment. Inhibition of glycolysis results in energy stress. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) plays a key role in regulating cellular energy homeostasis under energy stress. AMPK is activated by phosphorylation when energy stress occurs. We observed increased phosphorylated AMPK levels induced by hyperthermia and these levels were enhanced in HeyA8 and SKOV3 cells treated with siCTGF (Figure 6E). The increase was independent of LKB1 activity (Figure S6D). The sensitization to hyperthermia was also observed when SKOV3 cells were treated with metformin (Figure S2F), which can activate AMPK phosphorylation and induce energy stress. It is possible that CTGF regulates glycolytic activity by modulating expression of glycolysis-related genes after hyperthermia. To confirm that inhibition of the glycolysis pathway affected sensitivity of HTR cells to hyperthermia, we treated HeyA8 and SKOV3 cells with a glycolysis inhibitor, 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG). This treatment sensitized HTR HeyA8 and SKOV3 cells to hyperthermia with a decrease in the LT50 by about 2°C (Figure 6F), and increased the population of sub-G0/G1 in HeyA8 and SKOV3 cells (Figure 6G).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Therapeutic hyperthermia is based on the premise of raising the temperature of tumor tissue to 40–43°C. It has been used for treatment of ovarian and other cancers. The rationale for this therapy is based on the direct-killing effects of temperatures above 41–42°C. Hyperthermia is also applied as an adjunctive therapy with various established cancer treatments, such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Some studies have suggested that hyperthermia activates the immune system against tumor cells by increasing the release of heat shock proteins (HSPs) associated with tumor-specific antigens from heat-stressed or dying tumor cells that are phagocytized by antigen-presenting cells (APCs).
As interest in hyperthermic treatment of cancer has increased, significant progress has been made in developing strategies to heat tumors via local, regional, and whole-body hyperthermia. Different types of energy has been used, including microwaves and radio waves, magnetic heating, and ultrasound. Regional hyperthermia (e.g., hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy [HIPEC] heated to 42°C), theoretically enables direct contact between tumor cells and the chemotherapeutic agent to control residual microscopic disease.
Even though hyperthermia is a promising therapeutic approach, multiple obstacles remain to be cleared. One of the major issues is that the tumor temperatures that must be reached for obtaining clinical efficacy are largely undefined. In the present study, we carried out a series of experiments to determine the molecular mechanisms of tumor response to hyperthermia. Moreover, we utilized nanoparticle-based approaches to silence key pathways to enhance tumor response to hyperthermia.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
           SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION         
Supplemental Information includes figures, tables, and Supplemental Experimental Procedures can be found with this article online.
           Author Contributions         
H.H. and A.K.S. conceived the project and designed the experiments. H.H. S.Y.W., Y.A.L., S.P., W.W., Q.H., K.A.C., F.S., Y.H., T.H., T.M., N.J., P.L.D. and L.S.M. carried out or participated in vitro and in vivo experiments. W.W., Q.H. and C.L. designed and prepared CuS NPs for in vivo hyperthermic treatment. T.L., S.N., V.A.P., A.A.S., A.K.S. and K.D.R. performed proteomic analyses. C.R.-A. and G.L.-B. prepared liposomes for in vivo studies. J.S. and J.-S.L helped with cDNA array analysis. M.P. and A.F. obtained the clinical data. H.H. wrote the manuscript. S.Y.W., M.T.-L., C.L. and A.K.S. participated in manuscript preparation. All authors edited and approved the final manuscript.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.