PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
organism parts: Phloem
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: phosphorylated residue; acetylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MaxQuant
keywords: Phloem sap; Iron; Arabidopsis

ABSTRACT:
To get further insights into the potential involvement of proteins in long distance signaling of leaves iron status to the root system, a label free experiment was done to determine the protein phloem sap composition in contrasted iron growth conditions in wild type and knock out Arabidopsis mutant of the master regulator gene URI (i.e., bhlh121).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Deciphering phloem sap protein composition to unravel long distance signaling in iron deficiency growth conditions.Deciphering phloem sap protein composition to unravel long distance signaling in iron deficiency growth conditions.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Arabidopsis thaliana wild type (Col-0) and bhlh121-2 (URI loss-of-function mutant) (Gao et al., 2020) plants were grown under short day conditions (8h/16h and 23°C/20°C, day/night) at a light intensity of 160 µmol.m-2.s-1 and 65% humidity. Following 6 weeks of growth, half of the plants of each genotype were then transferred in control Hoagland solution (+Fe WT and +Fe bhlh121) or Hoagland solution deprived of iron (-Fe WT and -Fe bhlh121) during 4 days. Twenty leaves of three plants (three replicates containing one plant each) per genotype and per condition were harvested for phloem exudation experiment according to (Tetyuk et al., 2013). After collection, phloem exudates were freeze at -20 °C, lyophilized, and solubilized in 50 µl of 1 X Laemmli solution (65 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 2% SDS; (Laemmli, 1970). 10 µl of each sample were loaded on a 10% pre-cast gel (Bio-Rad) and subjected to a 20 min migration at 100 V. Each line of the gel was cut into three parts and each part into small pieces (2 mm²). Then, the following steps of the sample preparation were done according to (Berger et al., 2020). Each sample was solubilized in 7 µl of 2% formic acid and 2.5 µl was injected for a 150 min run of LC-MS/MS analysis (Qexactive Plus, ThermoFisher Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were analyzed using the maxquant software  v2.0.3.0 with default parameters excepted minimum score set to 20 and 40 for unmodified and modified peptides respectively (Cox and Mann, 2008). Variable modifications included in protein identification and quantification were Oxidation (M),Acetyl (Protein N-term) and phospho (STY). Proteins were identified and quantified only if two peptides (at least one unique peptide) were identified in the Araport_genes_20210122 database with Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011). Following the quantification step and LFQ normalization, proteins were filtered and considered as identified and quantifiable only if they were present in the three replicates. For statistics, LFQ analyst  was used with default parameters (Shah et al., 2020). For this analysis, all LFQ intensities were converted to a log2 scale and LFQ analyst used the Bioconductor package limma to carry out the differential quantification test using the information provided in the experimental design table. Adjusted p value cut-off and Log2 fold change cutoff was 0.05 and 1, respectively. The False discovery rate (FDR) correction options used was Benjamini Hochberg (BH) method. For the label free approach on rosettes, the same pipeline was used excepted the Log2 fold change cutoff that was set to 0.5. For qualitative studies (absent/present), analysis were done with LFQ analyst with ”min” imputation type.

METHODS:
Material and Methods
Plant Material and Growth Conditions
For proteomic analysis and RNA quantification by RT‐qPCR, plants were grown under short day conditions (8 h/16 h and 23°C/20°C, day/night) at a light intensity of 160 μmol m−2 s−1 and 65% humidity.  Arabidopsis thaliana  WT (Col‐0) and bhlh121‐2 (URI loss‐of‐function mutant; Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al.) seeds were surface sterilized and sown in 0.2 mL tubes containing 0.8% agar prepared in pH 5.5 Hoagland solution with 50 μM Fe‐EDTA (control Fe condition). After 7 days of growth, the bottoms of the tubes were cut off, allowing root growth outside of the tubes, prior to transfer to 2.5 L opaque recipients containing the same Hoagland medium (Robe et al. ; Robe, Conejero, et al. ). Following 6 weeks of growth, half of the plants of each genotype were then transferred in control Hoagland solution (+Fe WT and + Fe bhlh121) or Hoagland solution deprived of iron (−Fe WT and −Fe bhlh121) for 6 days.
For the ChIP‐qPCR experiment, plants were grown under long day conditions (16 h/8 h and 23°C/20°C, day/night) at a light intensity of 160 μmol m−2 s−1 and 65% humidity. Arabidopsis transgenic lines carrying the ProbHLH121:GFP and ProbHLH121:gbHLH121‐GFP constructs (Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al.) were surface sterilized and sown on square petri dishes containing 0.8% agar prepared in half Murashige and Skoog (MS/2) media with 50 μM Fe‐EDTA (control condition). After 7 days of growth, half of the plants were transferred to MS/2 media with 50 μM Fe‐EDTA and the other half to MS/2 media without iron. Plants were harvested 4 days after the transfer.
Sample Preparation for Label‐Free Proteomic Analysis
2o leaves of three plants (three independent replicates) per genotype and per condition were harvested for a phloem exudation experiment according to Tetyuk et al. . The 20 leaves of a given plant were treated together (one replicate). Petioles were placed in 20 mM K2‐EDTA solution for 1 h and rinsed with Milli‐Q water. Phloem sap was collected by plunging the petiole of the leaves in tubes containing Milli‐Q water supplemented with a commercial antiprotease mix (cOmplete Tablets, Mini EDTA‐free, EASYpack, Roche) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After collection, phloem exudates were frozen at −20°C, lyophilized, and solubilized in 50 μL of 1 X Laemmli solution (65 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 2% SDS; Laemmli ). 10 μL of each sample were loaded on a 10% pre‐cast gel (Bio‐Rad) and subjected to a 20 min migration at 100 V. Each line of the gel was cut into three parts and each part into small pieces (2 mm2). Then, the following steps of the sample preparation were done according to Berger et al. . Each sample was solubilized in 7 μL of 2% formic acid and 2.5 μL was injected for a 150 min run of LC‐MS/MS analysis (Qexactive Plus, ThermoFisher Scientific).
Mass Spectrometry Data Processing for Protein Identification and Quantification
Raw data were analyzed using the Maxquant software v2.0.3.0 with default parameters except that the minimum score was set to 20 and 40 for unmodified and modified peptides, respectively (Cox and Mann ). Variable modifications included in protein identification and quantification were oxidation (M), acetyl (Protein N‐term), and phospho (STY). Proteins were identified and quantified only if two peptides (at least one unique peptide) were identified in the Araport_genes_20210122 database with Andromeda (Cox et al. ). Following the quantification step and LFQ normalization, proteins were filtered and considered as identified and quantifiable only if they were present in the three replicates. For statistics, LFQ analyst was used with default parameters (Shah et al. ). For this analysis, all LFQ intensities were converted to a log2 scale and LFQ analyst used the Bioconductor package limma to carry out the differential quantification test using the information provided in the experimental design table. Adjusted p value cutoff and Log2 fold change cutoff was 0.05 and 1, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) correction option used was the Benjamini Hochberg (BH) method. For the label‐free approach on rosettes, the same pipeline was used except the Log2 fold change cutoff that was set to 0.5. For qualitative studies (absent/present), analyses were done with LFQ analyst with “min” imputation type.
 ChIP Experiment
Experiments were performed as previously described (Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al.; Gao and Dubos ). The primers used are described in Supplementary Table S1.
Gene Expression Analysis
Total RNAs were extracted using the nucleospin RNA extraction kit (Macherey‐Nagel). For each sample, 1 μg of total RNA treated with DNase was reverse transcribed into cDNA using the RevertAid kit (Thermo scientific). qRT‐PCR analyses were performed using a LightCycler 480 (Roche) and TB Green Premix Ex Taq (2X; Takara). PP2AA3 (PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2A SUBUNIT A3) was used as a reference gene (Czechowski et al. ). Expression levels were calculated using the comparative threshold cycle method. The primers used are described inTable S1.

RESULTS:
Results
Phloem Sap Protein Composition of Wild‐Type Plants Grown in Control Conditions
Proteomic analysis of the phloem sap of WT plants grown in iron sufficiency (+Fe) led to the identification of a total of 1414 proteins (+Fe WT; Data S1). We first compared this protein list with two available  Arabidopsis thaliana  phloem sap proteomes obtained using the same phloem sap extraction protocol from plants grown in iron‐replete conditions (Batailler et al. ; Carella et al. ). A total of 377 and 611 proteins were identified in the Batailler et al.  and Carella et al.  studies, respectively, which represent about 27% and 43% of the total number of proteins identified in our experiment.
We then analyze the protein size distribution in the three studies and found no difference (Figure 1A). Importantly, a predominance of proteins in the range of 20 to 60 kDa was observed, which is in adequacy with the exclusion size of plasmodesmata. Comparison of the protein lists of the two previous studies highlighted that 74% (281) and 70% (428) of proteins identified in the Batailler et al.  and Carella et al.  studies, respectively, were also found in the present phloem sap proteome analysis (Figure 1B,C). Surprisingly, only 47% of the proteins are shared between the Batailler et al.  and Carella et al.  studies and only 163 are in common between the three studies.
Compared to the predicted protein proportion in each cell compartment for the whole set of proteins encoded in the Arabidopsis genome, we found that, as in Batailler et al. , the most enriched compartment in the present study was the chloroplast (Figure 1D). In contrast, it is the extracellular compartment that is overrepresented in the Carella et al.  proteome, which might explain the low proportion of common proteins with the Batailler et al.  study. Nonetheless, in the three phloem sap proteome studies, endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus, and vacuolar proteins are underrepresented. Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis of the 1414 proteins identified in the (+Fe WT) samples indicates that proteins with a predicted function associated with general metabolism (e.g., photosynthesis, TCA cycle), stress response, and RNA and protein processing (Figure 1E) are overrepresented. Such enrichment was similar to that of proteins identified in the Batailler et al.  and Carella et al.  proteomes (Supplementary Data S2).
Phloem Sap Proteome Comparison of WT Plants Grown in Contrasted Iron Conditions
The phloem sap proteome of WT plants grown under iron‐sufficient conditions (+Fe WT) was compared to the one of WT plants grown under iron‐deficient conditions (−Fe WT). A total of 692 proteins identified in all three replicates in each condition were considered for quantitative protein analysis. Among them, the accumulation of 104 and 58 proteins was decreased and increased in response to iron deficiency, respectively (Figure 2A). Qualitative variation, which correspond to proteins identified in the three replicates of one condition and not in the other three replicates of the other condition, were also observed. This is altogether 237 and five proteins that were not identified in (−Fe WT) and + Fe WT, respectively (Data S3).
The protein set whose accumulation is higher in iron deficiency (341 proteins) is highly enriched in extracellular proteins, which represents 84% enrichment compared to the whole Arabidopsis proteome, and 44% compared to the total phloem sap one (Figure 2B). For the protein set with a lower accumulation in iron‐deficient conditions (63 proteins), cytoplasmic proteins were more enriched in the phloem sap proteome compared to the phloem sap reference (+Fe WT).
GO term analysis enrichment on iron deficiency‐enriched proteins highlighted functions related to callose degradation (i.e., β‐glucosidase activity) that are associated to the extracellular location found in the subcellular localization (Figure 2C). For those whose accumulation is decreased in response to iron deficiency, GO term enrichment was observed for functions related to general metabolism and energy as well as the translation process (Figure 2D). It is noteworthy that translation‐related GO terms gather essentially ribosomal proteins (42 proteins in total; Data S4). Interestingly, it was previously reported that the expression of 81 ribosomal proteins was decreased in the roots of plants subjected to iron deficiency (Wang et al. ). We found that 16 ribosomal proteins are shared between the two analyses (Data S4) suggesting that the accumulation of these proteins can occur in an iron‐ and tissue‐specific manner.
Proteome Analysis of Rosette Leaves of Wild‐Type Plants Grown in Contrasted Iron Conditions
To better assess the specificity of the phloem sap proteome we have generated, we conducted a global label‐free proteomic experiment on rosette leaves of WT plants cultivated in the same condition than the plants used for phloem sap extraction, in iron‐sufficient and iron‐deficient conditions. It leads to the identification of 3583 proteins among which only nine were associated with iron homeostasis (Data S5). A total of 21 and six proteins displayed a decreased and increased accumulation in iron deficiency (−Fe) conditions, respectively. In addition, 33 and 15 proteins were absent and present in −Fe condition, respectively.
The protein set whose accumulation is decreased in response to Fe deficiency is predominantly composed of plastidial and extracellular proteins (60% and 24%, respectively). Conversely, the protein set whose accumulation is increased in response to Fe deficiency is composed of plastidial (13%), extracellular and plasma membrane proteins (13% each), and cytosolic proteins (26%). As expected, FERRITIN protein (i.e., FER1 and FER3) accumulation was higher in control conditions than in Fe deficiency, whereas the accumulation of NAS4 and OPT3 displayed an opposite trend. Importantly, only four proteins whose accumulations were modified in response to iron availability in the phloem sap proteome were retrieved as differentially accumulated in rosette leaves, confirming the specificity of the phloem sap proteome.
Comparison of the Wild‐Type and bhlh121 Phloem Sap Proteome in Response to Iron Deficiency
The bHLH121 transcription factor is a master regulator of iron homeostasis and consequently bhlh121 loss‐of‐function mutants display a hypersensitive phenotype to iron deficiency when compared to WT plants. Because of its central role in the transcriptional regulatory network that controls iron homeostasis in Arabidopsis, one might hypothesize that bHLH121 participates in the regulation of the shoot‐to‐root iron status signal. In support of this hypothesis, it has been shown that the expression of the phloem‐associated IMA peptides (small proteins) is under the direct regulation of bHLH121.
Therefore, the phloem sap proteome of bhlh121 mutants grown in contrasted iron nutrition was generated and analyzed. A total of 94 and 106 proteins displayed a decreased and increased accumulation in iron‐deficient conditions, respectively (Figure 3A). In addition, 30 and 102 proteins were absent and present in iron‐deficient conditions, respectively (Data S3). The 208 proteins whose accumulation is increased in response to iron deficiency were mostly composed of plastidial (45%), extracellular (18%), and cytosolic (18%) proteins (Figure 3B). For those whose accumulation was decreased (124 proteins), the predominant protein classes were plastidial (40%) and cytosolic (30%). GO term analysis revealed that most of these proteins are associated with an enrichment in metabolism, most probably associated with stress responses (Figure 3C,D).
We then compared the proteome of WT and bhlh121 plants grown in control and iron‐deficient conditions (i.e., (+Fe WT), (−Fe WT), (+Fe bhlh121), and (−Fe bhlh121)). Here, we aimed at identifying proteins whose abundance is decreased in both iron deficiency and the bhlh121 mutant background, as such proteins might be involved in the repression of iron uptake under iron‐replete conditions in a bHLH121‐dependent manner. Principal component analysis (PCA) was first used to evaluate the proximity of the different samples (Figure 4A). As expected, the analysis revealed that samples could be separated according to their genotypes (PC2, 27.5%). Surprisingly, the analysis also revealed that −Fe WT samples exhibited a higher level of similarity with the (+Fe bhlh121) ones than the others (PC1, 33.8%). This observation indicated that bhlh121 mutants grown under iron‐sufficient conditions display iron deficiency responses, which is in agreement with the iron deficiency hypersensitivity phenotype reported for this mutant (Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al.). It also indicates that in response to iron deficiency, bhlh121 mutants display a specific response that most probably reflects the exacerbated effect of this stress on this genotype. We then analyzed the accumulation profile of proteins showing quantitative variations between the four types of samples. Surprisingly, none of the proteins was displaying the searched pattern of accumulation. We then concentrated our investigation on proteins that displayed qualitative variations in WT and the bhlh121 mutant in response to iron deficiency (Data S7) and identified a cluster of 150 proteins (cluster 2) whose accumulation was higher in (+Fe WT) than in the three other conditions (Figure 4B). In terms of subcellular location, this cluster does not differ from the total phloem proteome except for a slight increase in cytosolic protein enrichment (Figure 4C). GO term enrichment analysis revealed that acetyl‐transferase activity was enriched more than 100% because three of the five pyruvate dehydrogenase subunits were enriched in this cluster. As observed previously, the translation mechanism and more precisely chaperones and ribosomal proteins were also enriched in this cluster.
Identification of Direct Targets of bHLH121 That Encode Proteins Identified in the Phloem Sap
Several direct targets of bHLH121 have been identified, notably genes encoding proteins involved in the regulation of iron homeostasis (i.e., bHLH transcription factors, hemerythrin domain containing E3‐ubiquitin ligases, IMAs; Kim et al. ; Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al. ; Gao, Robe, and Dubos ; Lei et al. ). Nonetheless, ChIP‐Seq experiments suggest that bHLH121 might regulate the expression of a larger set of genes (Kim et al. ). We therefore compared the list of cluster 2 that contains the 150 proteins whose accumulation is decreased in the bhlh121 mutant and in response to iron deficiency with the bHLH121 ChIP‐Seq dataset from (Kim et al. ).
The comparison yielded four candidates common to both lists, namely ASE2 (GLUTAMINE PHOSPHORIBOSYL PYROPHOSPHATE AMIDOTRANSFERASE 2), EPS1 (EPSIN 1, a clathrin adaptor), NAD‐ME2 (NAD‐DEPENDENT MALIC ENZYME 2), and PSBR (PHOTOSYSTEM II SUBUNIT R), among which two were chloroplastic proteins. In order to validate these potential direct interactions between bHLH121 and the promoter of the genes encoding these four proteins, ChIP‐qPCR experiments were set up. For this purpose, bhlh121 loss‐of‐function mutant lines complemented with the ProbHLH121:gbHLH121‐GFP transgene were grown together with WT lines expressing the ProbHLH121:GFP construct used as a negative control, in the presence or absence of iron (Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al.). We also included in the analysis two genes whose encoded proteins were in the selected cluster, namely GUN5 (GENOMES UNCOUPLED 5) and PORB (PROTOCHLOROPHYLLIDE OXIDOREDUCTASE B). These two plastidial proteins were chosen since they are involved in the biosynthesis of one of the chlorophyll precursors, the tetrapyrrole (Tanaka et al. ), and are thought to be part of the plastid to nucleus iron status retrograde signaling pathway (Tran et al. ). Moreover, GUN5 accumulation was observed in the leaves' proteome (Data S5). bHLH38 and S8H were also added to the analysis as positive and negative controls, respectively (Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al.). We first confirm that bHLH121 directly binds to the promoter of bHLH38 and not to the promoter of S8H, whether the plants were grown in the presence or in the absence of iron (Figure 5A). ChIP‐qPCR experiments revealed that bHLH121 was binding to the promoter of all six genes tested, in both iron‐replete and iron‐deficient conditions.
We then assessed the expression level by RT‐qPCR of the selected genes in WT and bhlh121 mutant plants grown under control and iron‐deficient conditions (Figure 5B). In this experiment, NAS4 (NICOTIANAMINE SYNTHASE 4) was used as control since it is a direct target of bHLH121 and since its expression is induced in response to iron deficiency (Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al. ). NAS4 is involved in the biosynthesis of nicotianamine that plays a key role in phloem sap to transport iron to the sink organs. As expected, NAS4 expression was induced in response to iron deficiency in the WT, and not in bhlh121. In contrast, no variation was observed between the different genotypes and conditions tested for ASE2, EPS1, and NAD‐ME2. GUN5 and PSBR transcript accumulation was lower in bhlh121 than in the WT in both iron‐deficient and ‐sufficient conditions. Conversely, PORB mRNA level was reduced in response to iron deficiency in both the WT and the bhlh121 mutant. Taken together, these observations suggest that additional bHLH transcription factors act redundantly with bHLH121 to directly regulate their expression, which is in agreement with recent studies (Gao et al. ).
Surprisingly, all the genes tested were expressed in the bhlh121 mutant and under iron deficiency, indicating that some posttranscriptional or posttranslational mechanisms are at play to regulate the accumulation of the encoded proteins in the phloem sap.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Iron (Fe) is an essential micronutrient for plant growth and development (Briat et al. ). Due to its redox‐active nature, iron is a cofactor for several metalloproteins involved in essential physiological mechanisms such as respiration or the biosynthesis of chlorophylls and amino acids (Balk and Pilon ; Chen and Browne ; Touraine et al. ). Nonetheless, iron excess can be deleterious to the cell because of its capacity to react with oxygen, producing reactive oxygen species (ROS; Connolly and Guerinot ). Consequently, cell iron homeostasis must be tightly regulated.
Most of the iron present in the soil is in the form of Fe3+ oxides/hydroxides which are hardly available for plants. Consequently, plants have developed sophisticated strategies to cope with this low iron availability. Non‐grass species use the concomitant activity of H+‐ATPASES and FERRIC REDUCTASES to solubilize and reduce Fe3+ to Fe2+ that is then taken up from the rhizosphere into the root cells by high iron‐affinity transporters from the ZRT/IRT‐LIKE PROTEIN (ZIP) family. In  Arabidopsis thaliana , these three steps are under the control of AHA2 (H+‐ATPASE 2), FRO2 (FERRIC REDUCTION OXIDASE 2), and IRT1 (IRON REGULATED TRANSPORTER 1), respectively (Robinson et al. ; Vert et al. ; Santi and Schmidt ). In addition, it has emerged that the secretion of iron‐mobilizing coumarins by the root play an important role in this process (Fourcroy et al. ; Schmidt et al. ; Sisó‐Terraza et al. ; Rajniak et al. ; Siwinska et al. ; Tsai et al. ; Vanholme et al. ; Robe, Izquierdo, et al. ; Paffrath et al. ).
Following its uptake, iron translocates from roots to photosynthetic organs via the xylem in the form of Fe3+‐citrate chelates. This process requires the activity of the FRD3 (FERRIC REDUCTASE DEFECTIVE 3) citrate transporter (Rogers and Guerinot ). Conversely, iron can be remobilized and translocated to sink tissues (i.e., young leaves, pollen, seeds, or roots) in the form of Fe2+‐nicotianamine complexes through the phloem, thanks to the activity of OPT3 (OLIGOPEPTIDE TRANSPORTER 3) and transporters of the YSL (YELLOW STRIPE LIKE) family (Stacey et al. ; Zhai et al. ). Interestingly, the opt3 mutation (loss‐of‐function) causes a constitutive activation of the iron acquisition machinery even in iron‐sufficient growth conditions. Such observation emphasizes the role played by the phloem in transmitting leaves' iron status to the roots to modulate the activity of the iron uptake machinery, and the role of OPT3 in this long‐distance signaling process (Chia et al. ).
The modulation of iron uptake, transport, and partitioning relies on the combined activity of several transcription factors that act in an intricate regulatory network, among which bHLHs play a dominant role (Gao and Dubos ; Li et al. ; Gao and Dubos ; Liang et al. ; Trofimov et al. ). In this network, FIT/bHLH29 (FER‐LIKE IRON DEFICIENCY INDUCED TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR) heterodimerized with the four clade Ib bHLH to positively regulate the expression of IRT1 and FRO2, and thus the uptake of iron (Colangelo and Guerinot ; Jakoby et al. ; Yuan et al. ). FIT and clade Ib bHLH expression is itself regulated by another set of positive regulators of the bHLH family, among which the master regulator URI/bHLH121 (UPSTREAM REGULATOR OF IRT1) acts synergistically with clade IVc bHLH (Kim et al. ; Gao, Robe, Bettembourg, et al.; Lei et al. ). The stability of these bHLHs (e.g., FIT, URI) is regulated by a hemerythrin domain containing E3‐ubiquitin ligases, whose activity is inhibited by their interaction with small proteins composed of about 60 amino acids named IMAs/FEPs (IRON MAN/FE UPTAKE INDUCING PEPTIDES; Selote et al. ; Grillet et al. ; Li et al. ). It is noteworthy that the expression of these E3‐ubiquitin ligases and IMAs is also under the control of URI.
Even if tremendous efforts have been deployed during the last two decades to decipher the molecular mechanisms that regulate iron homeostasis in plants, the nature of the long‐distance signal that conveys information of the iron status of aerial tissues to the roots in order to coordinate root growth and iron uptake with the plant's needs for iron via the phloem sap is still unclear (Grusak and Pezeshgi ). It has been demonstrated that small molecules, RNAs, peptides, or proteins can be transported via the xylem and phloem saps, allowing long‐distance signaling of several physiological or environmental cues (Takahashi and Shinozaki ). For instance, the FT protein (FLOWERING LOCUS T), identified as a component of the florigenic signal in angiosperms, is translocated through the phloem to the shoot apex where it induces flowering (Corbesier et al. ; Lin et al. ). Other studies have highlighted that proteins involved in stress and defense responses are also present within the phloem translocation stream (Walz et al. ; Castaneda et al. ). HY5 (ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5), a bZIP transcription factor implicated in photomorphogenesis, coordinates plant carbon and nitrogen acquisition by acting in shoot‐to‐root signaling (Mankotia et al. ). HY5 is also implicated in iron homeostasis regulation (Mankotia et al. ). Similarly, IMAs were associated with long‐distance signaling of leaves' iron status to roots and proposed to act as phloem‐mobile signals (Grillet et al. ; Hirayama et al. ). Nonetheless, the relationship between iron long‐distance signaling and IMAs is still unclear since their phloem translocation has not been demonstrated.
To get further insights into the potential involvement of proteins in long‐distance signaling of leaves’ iron status to the root system, a label‐free proteomic experiment was done to determine the phloem sap protein composition in wild type (WT) and knockout Arabidopsis mutants of the master regulator gene URI (i.e., bhlh121). This study first revealed that modifications in iron availability or the loss of URI activity have a profound impact on the phloem sap protein composition. Furthermore, we found that some proteins whose translocation through the phloem sap is inhibited in response to iron deficiency are also affected in bhlh121 mutants. Interestingly, we found that genes encoding such proteins are direct targets of URI, which suggests that the encoded proteins might act as potential signaling factors to regulate root iron uptake and/or root growth.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
Data Availability Statement
All raw mass spectrometry data and Maxquant files generated have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD061925.