PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Cancer; Cell-migration; Nfkb2; Tp53; Homeostasis; Cox-2

ABSTRACT:
p53 is a pivotal tumor suppressor and a major barrier against cancer. We now report that silencing of the Hippo pathway tumor suppressors LATS1 and LATS2 in non-transformed mammary epithelial cells reduces p53 phosphorylation and increases its  association with the p52 NF-κB subunit. Moreover, it partly shifts p53’s conformation and transcriptional output towards a state resembling cancer-associated p53 mutants,  and endow p53 with the ability to promote cell migration. Notably, LATS1 and   LATS2 are frequently downregulated in breast cancer; we propose that such   downregulation might benefit cancer by converting p53 from a tumor suppressor into   a tumor facilitator.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Downregulation of LATS kinases alters p53 to promote cell migration

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell pellets were lysed using NP-40 lysis buffer. For MS analysis of p53 immunoprecipitant a mixture of PAb1801, DO-1, PAb421 antibodies was used. Lysates were incubated with the bound antibodies for 16 hours at 4oC and washed with NP-40 lysis buffer.For MS analysis the beads were additionally washed with 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH=8.0 and proteins were released from beads using on-beads trypsin digestion as previously described (Hubner et al. 2010). Peptides were then purified on C18 stageTips.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25 (Cox and Mann 2008)). MS/MS spectra were searched against the reference Uniprot human proteome by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 0.01 was used on both the peptide and protein levels and determined by a decoy database. Peptides   and proteins were quantified using a label-free algorithm in MaxQuant. Prior to   bioinformatics analysis, the resulting protein list was filtered to eliminate common   contaminants and decoy database hits.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
MS
For MS analysis of p53, a mixture of PAb1801, DO-1, and PAb421 antibodies was used, and proteins were released from beads using on-beads trypsin digestion. Further details are in the Supplemental Material.
The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the Proteomics Identifications Database (PRIDE) partner repository with the data set identifier PXD003120.
RNA expression analysis
RNA from two independent batches of MCF10A cells was subjected to high-throughput RNA-seq. Library preparation, high-throughput sequencing, and analysis are detailed in the Supplemental Material.
The data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and are available through GEO series accession number GSE74493.
Gene expression matrices
A gene was defined as differentially expressed between two conditions if the fold change exceeded 1.5 in both cell batches. The matrices in Figure 3A contain genes differentially expressed in siLATS1/2 samples compared with the control (738 genes), whose expression in siLATS1/2 samples was higher (for the up-regulated genes) or lower (for the down-regulated genes) by at least 1.2-fold relative to siLATS1/2/p53 samples (320 genes) in both cell batches.

RESULTS:
Results and Discussion
LATS down-regulation reduces p53 phosphorylation
Human breast tumors display significant down-regulation of LATS expression relative to matched normal tissue (The Cancer Genome Atlas [TCGA] breast invasive carcinoma data set) (Supplemental Fig. S1A). Given the positive cross-talk between LATS kinases and p53, we asked whether LATS impacts p53 activity in mammary epithelium. siRNA-mediated knockdown of LATS1 and LATS2 (siLATS1/2) (Supplemental Fig. S1B) did not significantly alter p53 levels in nontransformed MCF10A mammary epithelial cells (Fig. 1A, left panel). p53 is regulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs), including multiple phosphorylations. To assess p53 phosphorylation, we used Phos-tag gels to decrease the mobility of phosphorylated p53. Notably, LATS down-regulation augmented the faster-migrating p53 band (Fig. 1A [right panel], B), confirmed by phosphatase treatment to be hypophosphorylated (Supplemental Fig. S1C). Silencing either LATS1 or LATS2 alone also reduced p53 phosphorylation (Supplemental Fig. S1D). Of note, acute p53 activation by the radiomimetic agent neocarzinostatin (NCS) markedly increased the portion of phosphorylated p53 in both control and LATS-depleted cells, although a mild impact of LATS depletion was retained (Supplemental Fig. S1E). Similar effects were seen also in immortalized human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC3-KT) and human breast adenocarcinoma MCF7 cells (Supplemental Fig. S1F). Thus, LATS down-regulation compromises p53 phosphorylation.
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of MCF10A p53 revealed that LATS knockdown caused a significant decrease in Ser15 and Ser315 phosphorylation (Fig. 1C), confirmed by analysis with phospho-specific antibodies (Fig. 1D). Notably, YAP/TAZ knockdown did not rescue these changes (Supplemental Fig. S1G).
LATS down-regulation affects the p53 interactome
PTMs may dictate interaction partners. Indeed, MS analysis revealed increased binding of several proteins to p53 upon LATS knockdown (Fig. 2A). These included promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein, known to interact and colocalize with p53, as well as products of the NFKB2 gene (Fig. 2A) encoding p52, a member of the NF-κB transcription factor family produced by proteolytic cleavage of its precursor, p100. The increase was specific to p52 (Fig. 2B) and was not observed for the p100-unique portion of the precursor (Supplemental Fig. S2). To test whether this interaction is affected by p53 phosphorylation, we expressed wild-type p53 or p53 mutants S15A and S315A in p53-null H1299 cells followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-p52 antibodies. Notably, although the portion of p53 immunoprecipitated with p52 was relatively small, p53 S315A was selectively, albeit modestly, enriched in the immunoprecipitation (Fig. 2C), suggesting that it bound endogenous p52 more strongly than wild-type p53. Hence, decreased p53 phosphorylation upon LATS down-regulation may increase p53 binding to p52 and to additional partners.
LATS down-regulation favors a mutant p53-like functional state
To test whether LATS down-regulation affects p53's transcriptional activity, we conducted RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis in MCF10A cells transfected with siRNA against LATS1/2 alone, p53 alone, or LATS1/2 and p53 together. Two independent MCF10A batches provided biological replicates. Seven-hundred-thirty-eight genes were differentially expressed between control and siLATS cells (Supplemental Table S1); in 320 of those, the effect of LATS depletion on their differential expression became less pronounced when p53 was simultaneously silenced (Fig. 3A, left panel for siLATS decreased genes, right panel for siLATS increased genes, cf. columns v + vi and vii + viii; see also Supplemental Table S2). Comparing the mean expression of these genes in siLATS cells (Fig. 3A, columns v + vi and vii + viii) and control cells (Fig. 3A, columns i + ii and iii + iv) revealed that LATS depletion rendered them more responsive to p53 (Fig. 3A, top panel). Interestingly, these 320 genes were not significantly enriched for p53-related pathways (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes [KEGG] and BioCarta), whereas genes differentially expressed upon p53 silencing but not affected by siLATS were significantly enriched for p53 and apoptosis pathways (Supplemental Fig. S3A,B; Supplemental Table S3). Thus, while canonical wild-type p53 target genes were unaffected by LATS status, LATS down-regulation expanded the p53 transcriptional repertoire. Remarkably, the genes in Figure 3A overlapped significantly (P-value < 0.05) with mutant p53-regulated genes in breast cancer cells (Fig. 3A, black bars at the right of each matrix; Supplemental Table S2), suggesting that LATS depletion may drive wild-type p53 toward a mutant-like functional state. Furthermore, the 320 genes were enriched for gene ontology (GO) terms associated with adhesion, response to wounding, and cell migration (Fig. 3B). The expression changes of some of those genes and their increased p53 responsiveness upon LATS down-regulation were validated by quantitative RT–PCR (qRT–PCR) analysis (Supplemental Fig. S3C). Notably, the genes rendered responsive to p53 by LATS silencing (Fig. 3A, right matrix) were enriched for NF-κB motifs near their transcriptional start sites (TSSs; P-value < 0.001) (Supplemental Table S2, gray bars at the right side).
Our analysis suggested that LATS down-regulation might promote a noncanonical p53 transcriptional program reminiscent of mutant p53. We therefore employed imaging flow cytometry (ImageStreamX) in conjunction with PAb240, a monoclonal antibody recognizing only conformational p53 mutants, and CM1, a polyclonal antibody recognizing all p53 molecules. Remarkably, siLATS elicited a mild yet significant increase in PAb240 reactivity (Fig. 3C), implying that some wild-type p53 molecules had undergone a conformational shift. Moreover, the percentage of PAb240+ cells was also increased mildly, although not as much as in MCF10A cells stably expressing the p53R175H mutant (Supplemental Fig. S3D).
NFKB2 is a mutant p53 target gene contributing to mutant p53 GOF. Notably, analysis of H1299 cells transiently overexpressing either wild-type p53 or p53R175H revealed preferential p52 binding to mutant p53 (Fig. 3D), further suggesting that LATS silencing renders wild-type p53 more similar to mutant p53.
LATS down-regulation promotes p53-dependent cell migration
As the altered p53 transcriptional program enforced by siLATS is enriched for terms related to cell migration (Fig. 3B), we studied the impact of LATS and p53 depletion on the migration of MCF10A cells, employing a real-time cell analyzer (RTCA). Consistent with earlier studies, siLATS augmented migration (Fig. 4A,B). Remarkably, simultaneous p53 depletion (Supplemental Fig. S4A) reduced migration nearly to control levels (Fig. 4), implying that the promigratory effect of LATS down-regulation is p53 dependent, as confirmed with an additional p53 siRNA (Supplemental Fig. S4B). Moreover, whereas ectopic p53R175H expression increased migration (Supplemental Fig. S4C), depletion of wild-type p53 alone had no significant effect (Fig. 4). Thus, a mutant-like state of p53, elicited by LATS down-regulation, promotes migration.
Similar effects were observed in a “wound healing” assay (Fig. 4C; Supplemental Fig. S4D). Overall p53 staining was similar in control and siLATS cells (Fig. 4D, top). However, while control cells showed robust uniform multilayered pSer315 staining near the gap, LATS-depleted cells displayed overall weaker and more heterogeneous staining (Fig. 4D, bottom). Moreover, while wild-type p53 overexpression in H1299 slightly inhibited gap closure, p53S315A overexpression augmented migration (Fig. 4E). Thus, LATS-dependent p53 Ser315 phosphorylation might restrict cell migration. Together, our findings support a novel role for wild-type p53 in inducing cell migration upon LATS down-regulation.
p53-dependent migration involves noncanonical p53 target genes, including PTGS2
PTGS2 is a key enzyme in prostaglandin biosynthesis, overexpressed and linked to tumor aggressiveness in various solid tumors. Of note, PTGS2 is one of the genes comprising the right panel of Figure 3A, implying that p53 is required for its optimal induction in LATS-deficient cells, as confirmed by qRT–PCR analysis of PTGS2 mRNA and pre-mRNA (Fig. 5A; Supplemental Fig. S5A). Interestingly, although acute activation by NCS induced robust p53 accumulation (Supplemental Fig. S1E) and up-regulation of canonical p53 target genes such as p21 and BTG2 (Supplemental Fig. S5B), it only mildly affected PTGS2 expression in control and LATS-depleted cells (Fig. 5B), indicating that up-regulation of PTGS2 by p53 upon LATS depletion is distinct from p53 activation by genotoxic stress.
PTGS2 has been implicated in cell migration and invasion. Indeed, cells transfected with siLATS together with siPTGS2 (Supplemental Fig. S5C) migrated more slowly than cells transfected with just siLATS (Fig. 5C; Supplemental Fig. S5D), suggesting that the increased migration upon LATS depletion relies partly on PTGS2.
In agreement with our in silico analysis of putative mutant p53 target genes (Fig. 3A; Supplemental Table S2), ectopic expression of p53R175H in MCF10A cells up-regulated PTGS2 mRNA (Fig. 5D). Furthermore, silencing of endogenous mutant p53 in the ductal mammary carcinoma cell line HCC1143 reduced PTGS2 expression (Supplemental Fig. S5E). Interestingly, PTGS2 is also a transcriptional target of NF-κB, suggesting that the increased p53–p52 interaction might contribute to PTGS2 induction in LATS-depleted cells. Indeed, NFKB2 knockdown (Supplemental Fig. S5F) reduced PTGS2 mRNA in siLATS but not siControl cells (Fig. 5E). Thus, upon LATS down-regulation, p52 and wild-type p53 might cooperate to up-regulate mutant p53 target genes such as PTGS2, promoting migration.
p53 mutations drive tumor development. However, many tumors retain wild-type p53. We show that LATS down-regulation, observed in breast cancer and other tumors, propels wild-type p53 into noncanonical activities, which might contribute to cancer. TCGA analysis did not reveal a significant correlation between LATS expression and p53 mutations in breast cancer (data not shown), suggesting that mutant p53 may provide the tumors with benefits extending beyond those offered by “altered” wild-type p53. However, it is noteworthy that cancers with low TP53 mutation rates, including breast cancer as a group, tend to down-regulate LATS (Supplemental Fig. S5G).
Our findings reinforce the idea that wild-type p53, a highly flexible protein, can explore a wide landscape of functional states in a context-dependent manner. We propose that the state of wild-type p53 can be toggled by other tumor suppressor pathways, exemplified by LATS. The “pseudomutant” wild-type p53 emerging in LATS-compromised cells has distinctive features, including reduced phosphorylation on Ser15 and Ser315 and altered protein–protein interactions. Notably, the altered wild-type p53 drives the preferential expression of noncanonical promigratory genes, regulated also by cancer-associated p53 mutants.
Recently, the CCT/TRiC chaperonin complex was shown to be required for maintaining the wild-type p53 conformation; mutants incapable of CCT binding promote cancer cell migration and invasion. Likewise, embryonic stem cells harboring mutant p53 were found to maintain genomic integrity by forcing the mutant p53 to adopt a wild-type conformation.
Although LATS1 and LATS2 are bona fide Ser/Thr protein kinases, we could not detect direct phosphorylation of p53 by them in vitro (data not shown). Furthermore, p53 does not harbor a LATS consensus site. Hence, the effect on p53 phosphorylation is probably indirect. One candidate is Aurora kinase A (AURKA), which phosphorylates LATS2 and physically interacts with both LATS kinases; AURKA phosphorylates p53 on S315, and its binding to p53 has been suggested to play a role in maintaining mutant p53 in a wild-type-like conformation. However, other kinases that target p53 Ser315, including various cyclin-dependent kinases and GSK3β, as well as stress kinases such as ATM and ATR that target Ser15 cannot be excluded. LATS depletion may also alter the activity-pertinent phosphatases.
We propose that, under conditions of tissue integrity, when LATS kinases are constitutively active, this might maintain p53 in its canonical tumor-suppressive state. In contrast, during processes involving cell migration, p53 might transiently assume an altered state that favors such processes. As part of p53's emerging role as mediator of cell and tissue homeostasis, its involvement in processes such as EMT and wound healing has been described. However, whereas some studies suggest that p53 promotes tissue renewal and wound healing, others indicate that it antagonizes these processes. Conceivably, temporary suppression of LATS kinases (e.g., following disruption of tissue architecture) might enable p53 to assume an altered state compatible with tissue regeneration. Such a reversible state might become constitutive in tumors that down-regulate LATS; e.g., through promoter hypermethylation.
The impact of LATS on p53 may represent a more general paradigm in which p53 is tuned to a broad network of incoming signals that toggle its functional state. Notably, p53 cooperates with TGF-β-activated Smads (in a manner involving altered p53 phosphorylation) to promote specific cell fates. Furthermore, wild-type p53 can acquire a mutant-like conformation in cells exposed to growth factors or hypoxia, which reduces many p53 PTMs. The signals that modulate the functional state of p53 may become constitutive as a consequence of pertinent cancer-associated genetic and epigenetic alterations, as suggested by the ability of wild-type p53 to promote migration and invasion of cells from mouse ovarian tumors induced by Pten deletion and mutant Kras. It will be of interest to identify additional p53-modulating mechanisms and study their impact on p53 activity in cancers that retain genetically intact TP53.

INTRODUCTION:
The Hippo pathway, originally found to regulate organ size in Drosophila, inhibits tumorigenesis in mammals by regulating numerous processes. At the core of the pathway are the MST1/2 and LATS1/2 kinases, which inhibit the downstream effectors YAP and TAZ that promote proliferation, oncogenic transformation, and epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT). Some functions of YAP and TAZ are independent of LATS1/2 (jointly referred to here as LATS). Similarly, LATS kinases may exert functions unrelated to YAP/TAZ. LATS kinases engage in a positive cross-talk with the tumor suppressor p53 under stress and in stem cells. Thus, beyond inhibiting YAP/TAZ, LATS possess additional tumor suppressive functions.
p53 is a transcription factor orchestrating numerous processes impinging on cell fate; e.g., growth arrest, senescence, and apoptosis. The network governed by p53 operates primarily through differential regulation of target gene expression. Recently, p53 has emerged as a regulator of homeostasis. Intriguingly, cancer cells may benefit from p53-mediated adaptive prosurvival processes.
Point mutations, ablating wild-type p53 function, are frequent in human cancer. Such mutations may disrupt p53–DNA interactions by altering amino acids in the p53 DNA-binding domain that contact DNA directly or may drive conformational changes in p53. These mutants not only lose tumor suppressor capability but also acquire oncogenic gain of function (GOF), augmenting invasion and tumorigenesis. It is commonly believed that mutant p53 GOF entails new activities not shared with wild-type p53. However, some GOF effects may be due to fixation of pre-existing wild-type p53 activities normally manifested only under particular biological conditions. Genetic and epigenetic aberrations occurring in cancer may affect the delicate regulatory wiring governing p53, shifting it toward a mutant-like state.
We now report that compromised LATS expression, seen in many tumors, alters wild-type p53 to induce migration partly through up-regulation of PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2; also known as COX-2). LATS knockdown reduces p53 phosphorylation and changes p53's protein interactome, increasing its binding to the NF-κB p52 subunit. In addition, it partially alters p53's conformation and favors a p53 transcriptional program reminiscent of cancer-associated p53 mutants. Hence, by reducing LATS expression, tumors that retain wild-type p53 may convert it from a tumor suppressor to a tumor facilitator.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Supplemental material is available for this article.
Article is online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.268185.115.