PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Skin; Stem cell
diseases: Atopic dermatitis
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Stem cells; Atopic dermatitis; Proteomics; Skin; Mass spectrometry; Differentiation; Hair follicle; Ceramide synthase 4; Wnt signaling; Sphingolipids

ABSTRACT:
Bioactive sphingolipids serve as an essential building block of membranes, forming a selective barrier ensuring subcellular compartmentalization and facilitating cell type-specific intercellular communication through regulation of the plasma membrane receptor repertoire. How the cell type-specific lipid compositions are achieved and what is their functional significance in tissue morphogenesis and maintenance has remained unclear. Here, we identify a stem-cell specific role for ceramide synthase 4 (CerS4) in orchestrating fate decisions in the skin epidermis. Deletion of CerS4 in the epidermis prevents the effective establishment of the adult hair follicle bulge stem cell (HFSCs) niche due to altered differentiation trajectories of HFSC precursors towards upper hair follicle and inner bulge fates. Mechanistically, the HFSC differentiation defects arise from a stem cell intrinsic imbalance of key ceramides and sphingolipids, and associated hyperactivity of canonical Wnt signaling. The lack of HFSCs leads to disruption of hair follicle architecture and hair follicle barrier function, ultimately triggering a Th2-dominated immune infiltration closely resembling human atopic dermatitis. This work uncovers a fundamental role for a cell state-specific sphingolipid profile in epidermal stem cell homeostasis and the role of an intact stem cell niche in maintaining an intact skin barrier.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Sphingolipid metabolism orchestrates the establishment of the adult hair follicle stem cell niche to control skin homeostasis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Organoid pellets were lysed and digested using the Preomics iST kit ( order # P.O.00001. Following peptide elution and lyophilization, peptides were then TMT labeled and desalted, followed by phosphopeptide enrichment on Fe-NTA spin columns (Thermo Scientific). Unbound peptides were lyophilized and offline fractionated by high pH reversed phase HPLC (YMC Triart C18 column, 250 x 4.6 mm ID) into 60 fractions for the subsequent measurements of the total proteomes. All fractions were desalted on C18 Stage tips prior to mass spectrometry analysis.   Nanoflow LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out according to Bekker-Jensen et al. (Cell Systems, 4(6),2017, 587-599). Briefly, peptide samples were reversed-phase separated on a fused silica capillary column (length 25 cm; ID 75 μm; Dr. Maisch ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm) using an Easy nLC 1200 nanoflow system that was online coupled via a Nanospray Flex ion source to an Orbitrap HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Bound peptides of each fraction were eluted using short gradients from 7 – 45% B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 30 min, followed by a washout at 90% B, before returning again to starting conditions (total runtime 38min). The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, switching in a data-dependent fashion between survey scans in the orbitrap (mass range m/z = 350-1400; resolution R=60000; target value = 3E6; max IT 100 ms) and MS/MS acquisition (HCD) of the 20 most intense ion peaks detected (resolution R = 15.000; target value = 1E5; max IT = 15msec; NCE = 27). Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw MS data were processed using MaxQuant (v. 2.1.4.0) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the mouse uniprotKB database (UP000000589_10090.fasta; version from 01/2022) concatenated with reversed sequence versions of all entries and also containing common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues was set as fixed modification for the search, while oxidation at methionine, acetylation of protein N-termini and deamidation on aspargine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. Trypsin was defined as the digesting enzyme, allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and requiring a minimum length of 6 amino acids. The maximum allowed mass deviation was 20 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS scans. The match between run function was enabled. Protein groups were regarded as being unequivocally identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for both the peptide and protein identifications.  Data transformation and evaluation were performed using Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0). Proteins identified by a single modified site only, common lab contaminants as well as proteins containing reverse sequences derived from the decoy database search were removed from the dataset prior to any further analysis. For quantification, TMT reporter intensity values were first log2 transformed, demanding valid values in all of the replicates in both experimental groups (no missing values). Reporter intensities were quantile normalized and significant differences between WT controls and KO samples were determined using a Student's t-test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 set as cut-off. Only proteins, which showed an additional > 2-fold difference were considered for further evaluation.