PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: B cell
diseases: Diffuse large b-cell lymphoma
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Prc2 targets; Differentiation-based therapy; Human; Astral; Diffuse large b cell lymphoma; Dot1l; Ezh2; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Differentiation of antigen-activated B cells into pro-proliferative germinal center (GC) B cells depends on the activity of the transcription factors MYC and BCL6, and the epigenetic writers DOT1L and EZH2. GCB-like Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphomas (GCB-DLBCLs) arise from GC B cells and closely resemble their cell of origin. Given the dependency of GC B cells on DOT1L and EZH2, we investigated the role of these epigenetic regulators in GCB-DLBCL cell lines and observed that GCB-DLBCLs synergistically depend on the combined activity of DOT1L and EZH2. Mechanistically, inhibiting both enzymes led to enhanced derepression of PRC2 target genes compared to EZH2 single treatment, along with the derepression of BCL6 target genes and suppression of MYC target genes. The sum of all these alterations results in a ‘cell identity crisis,’ wherein GCB-DLBCLs lose their pro-proliferative GC identity and partially undergo plasma cell differentiation, a state associated with poor survival. In support of this model, combined epi-drugging of DOT1L and EZH2 prohibited the outgrowth of human GCB-DLBCL xenografts in vivo. We conclude that the malignant behavior of GCB-DLBCLs strongly depends on DOT1L and EZH2 and that combined targeting of both epigenetic writers may provide an alternative differentiation-based treatment modality for GCB-DLBCL.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Targeting DOT1L and EZH2 synergizes in breaking the germinal center identity of Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For protein digestion, frozen cell pellets were lysed in 5% SDS lysisbuffer, boiled and sonicated. Aliquots corresponding to 20 µg of protein were digested using S-Trap micro-columns (ProtiFi) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In short, samples were reduced and alkylated using TCEP (5 mM, 15 min, 55 C) and CAA (20 mM, 10 min). The samples were acidified and a methanol TEAB buffer was added, prior to loading on the S-Trap column. Trapped proteins were washed 4 times with the methanol TEAB buffer and then digested for 2 h at 47 C using Trypsin (Sigma). Digested peptides were eluted and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before LC-MS analysis. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were reconstituted in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Vanquish Neo nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific). The Vanquish Neo was operated in the trap-and-elute mode and peptides were loaded onto a Pepmap 100 C18 5µm trap column (300µm x 5mm, Thermo Scientific), before separation on the analytical column (AUR325075C18TS, 1.7µm/75µm x 250mm, Ionopticks). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 400 nl/min in a 42-min gradient, containing a 38-min non-linear increase from 1% to 45% solvent B, followed by a 7-min wash at 99% solvent B. The Orbitrap Astral was run in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were analyzed by DIA-NN (version 1.9.1) without a spectral library and with “Deep learning” option enabled. The Swissprot Human database (20,435 entries, release 2024_26) was added for the library-free search. The Quantification strategy was set to QuantUMS (high precision), MBR option was enabled and Heuristic protein inference was disabled. The other settings were kept at the default values. The protein groups report from DIA-NN was used for downstream analysis in Perseus (version: 2.0.11.0). Values were Log2-transformed, after which proteins were filtered for at least 75% valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based a normal distribution using a width of 0.3 and a minimal downshift of 2.4. Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test (minimal threshold:–log(p-value) ≥ 1.3 and [x-y] ≥ 1.0 | [x-y] ≤ -1.0).