PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Heart
diseases: Cardiovascular system disease
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Hfpef; Heart failure; Protein quality control; Protein degradation; Cardiac aging; Proteostasis; Protein synthesis

ABSTRACT:
Abstract: Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a leading cause of hospitalization and death in the elderly. While aging strongly increases the incidence of HFpEF, the specific influences of aging on HFpEF at molecular and pathophysiological levels remain unclear. Here, we show that aged mice, when subjected to chronic metabolic and hypertensive stress (2-hit stress), develop an aggravated cardiometabolic HFpEF phenotype compared to younger counterparts. Aged HFpEF mice also display unique pathological characteristics reminiscent of those found in HFpEF patients. We demonstrate that age-related dysfunction in protein quality control (PQC) exacerbates proteostatic stress in HFpEF. Specifically, we demonstrate that increased protein synthesis induced by 2-hit stress combines with age-related impairment in protein degradation in aged HFpEF hearts, culminating in the accumulation of protein aggregates. These findings underscore the importance of incorporating aging into preclinical HFpEF models and support the therapeutic potential of targeting PQC mechanisms to ameliorate disease outcomes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Age-related proteostatic imbalance exacerbates heart failure with preserved ejection fraction pathogenesis in old mice

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Frozen heart samples from young (3 mo.) and old (22 mo.) mice after 5 weeks of hit-stress were lysed in urea buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2, 75mM NaCl) by tip sonication for 2x10s on ice. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 21k g for 10 min at 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured for every lysate by BCA assay and adjusted to 1 mg/ml with urea buffer. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 55°C and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by incubation with additional 10 mM DTT for 15 min at room temperature. Lysates were distributed in a 96-well plate (500 μg protein per sample), desalted and digested with trypsin at 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio using the R2-P1 (Rapid-Robotic Proteomics) protocol implemented on a KingFisher™ Flex (Thermo Fisher) magnetic particle processing robot as described before43.  Peptides were dissolved in 4% formic acid (FA), 3% ACN and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy1200 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse-phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 35 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), housed in a column heater set at 50°C, using two buffers: (A) 0.125% FA in water, and (B) 80% ACN, 0.125% FA in water delivered at 400 nl/min flow rate. Peptides were separated by a 90-min effective gradient ranging from 6 to 30% ACN in 0.125% FA. Mass spectrometry data was acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap from 375 to 1500 m/z at 120,000 resolution with fill target of 4e5 ions and maximum injection time of 50 ms. For a cycle time of 3s the most abundant ions on the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using 1.6 m/z precursor isolation window and beam-type collisional-activation dissociation (HCD) with 30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution with fill target of 5e4 ions and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 30 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
DDA raw files were converted to mzML formats using msconvert, and MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse reference target/decoy protein sequence database (canonical mouse proteome, downloaded from www.uniport.org on 01/11/2022) using Comet (v2019.01.02) with recommended settings for high resolution mass analyzers44. Trypsin was selected as the digestive enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, constant carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines (+57.0215 Da), and variable modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0105). Search results were filtered with Percolator (v3.01)45 to 1% false discovery rate at the peptide spectrum match level.  Quantification was performed by MS1 peak area integration using an in-house developed software. Peptide quantifications were pooled aggregated into protein quantifications, where the median peptide for each protein was taken to represent the protein. Protein quantifications were normalized to the total MS1 signal from each run.