PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Hek293t; Proteomic; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Trivalent arsenic [As(III)], the predominant environmental form, poses significant health risks, including cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases, through contaminated food and water ingestion. Studies have explored As(III) toxicity mechanisms, particularly its displacement of Zn(II) in zinc-binding proteins, but identifying direct As(III)-binding proteins remains crucial. Given the nucleic acid binding capacity of many zinc-binding proteins, we hypothesized that nuclear As(III)-binding proteins could reveal key toxicity targets. Using a quantitative proteomics approach, we performed affinity pull-down with a biotin-As(III) probe on nuclear protein lysate. We identified splicing factor 1 (SF1) as a direct As(III)-binding protein and demonstrated that this interaction modulates mRNA splicing in human cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Chemoproteomic Approach for Identifying Nuclear Arsenite-binding Proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Nuclear lysate was prepared from SILAC-labeled HEK293T cells using NE-PER Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Extraction Reagents (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The kit buffer was exchanged for 1x PBS using NAP-5 Sephadex columns (Cytiva), and protein fractions were combined.  For the forward SILAC experiment, 0.3 mg of heavy nuclear protein lysate was incubated with 80 μM PAPAO in 1x PBS at 4°C for 30 min, while an equal amount of light protein lysate was incubated with 1x PBS alone. Subsequently, 20 μM biotin-As probe was added to each mixture, and incubated at 4°C for 2 h with rotation. The mixtures were then loaded onto pre-washed high-capacity streptavidin beads (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) and incubated for 2 h at 4°C with rotation. Beads were washed twice with 1 mL of 1x PBS, 10x PBS, and water, each wash involving 3 min rotation at 4°C followed by centrifugation at 800 x g for 3 min. Heavy and light lysate-incubated beads were combined, boiled in Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad) containing 10% 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma, Millipore) for 10 min, and centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 2 min. The supernatant was loaded onto a 15% SDS-polyacrylamide gel, which was run until the 250 kDa marker band entered the resolving gel. The gel was stained with Coomassie blue and subjected to in-gel digestion. The reverse SILAC experiment was performed similarly, except the light-labeled nuclear lysate was pre-incubated with 80 μM PAPAO. Tryptic peptides were desalted with OMIX C18 pipette tips (Fisher Scientific) and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled with an Easy 1000 nLC (Thermo) and a Flex nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was equipped with high-field asymmetric-waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS). Compensation voltages (CV) were set at -40, -60, and -80 V (1/3 of a 3-sec cycle each), and the carrier gas flow was 4.2 L/min. A gradient of 8-34% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) was used at 0.3 μL/min. The spray voltage was 2 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 320°C. MS was acquired with the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution. Fragmentation was performed with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30 relative collisional energy. MS/MS was acquired in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw files were split based on CV using FAIMS_MzXML_Generator (https://github.com/coongroup/FAIMS-MzXML-Generator) and searched using Maxquant (V 2.1.4.0). Maxquant searching parameters were multiplicity:2, max. labeled AAs:3, “Heavy label”: Arg6, Lys8, Max number of modifications per peptide: 5, max missed cleavages: 2, min peptide length: 7 with match between runs (default setting) against a human proteome (UP000005640_9606, downloaded on Oct 25, 2022).