PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
organism parts: Plant cell; Whole body
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Autophagy; atg8; rab gtpase; autophagosome-vacuole fusion; aim; lds; nutrient recycling; vacuole.

ABSTRACT:
Autophagy, a critical process for the vacuolar degradation of proteins and organelles, is governed by multiple conserved autophagy-related (ATG) proteins. The central component of the ATG machinery is the ubiquitin-like protein ATG8, which is essential for multiple steps of the autophagy process, including phagophore expansion, autophagosome closure, trafficking and fusion with the lysosome/vacuole, and selective cargo recruitment. Currently, our understanding of the roles of ATG8 in plant autophagy and the functional specialization of ATG8 family members is limited due to genetic redundancy. To assess the roles of ATG8 genes in plant autophagy, here we used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to systematically knockout the Arabidopsis ATG8 genes. By analyzing the atg8 mutants, we found that in contrast to mammalian ATG8s, in which the LC3s and GABARAP subfamilies play distinct roles in the autophagic process, Arabidopsis ATG8s perform an overlapping function in controlling autophagic flux. Combinatorial mutations of Clade I and Clade II ATG8s resulted in severely impaired autophagy under nutrient-starved conditions. Furthermore, we found that RABG3 proteins, members of the RAB7/RABG GTPase family, interact with ATG8s through AIM-LDS interfaces, and that such interaction is essential for the association of RABG3 proteins with the autophagosomal membrane and probably for the fusion of autophagosome with the vacuole, but is not required for endosomal trafficking. With the collection of multiple high-order atg8 mutants generated in this study, we now provide a venue to study the roles of ATG8 genes in canonical autophagy and non-canonical autophagy in Arabidopsis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Genetic analysis of arabidopsis autophagy-related 8 family proteins reveals their redundant and regulatory roles in plant autophagy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Plant tissues were homogenized in liquid nitrogen and extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail). Total proteins were precipitated using a 4:1:3 (v/v) methanol/chloroform/water mixture, collected by centrifugation, washed once with the methanol, and then lyophilized to dryness. The precipitates were resuspended in 100 µL of 8 M urea and 100 ug proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 hour at room temperature, then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour, and the reaction was quenched with 20 mM dithiothreitol. The sample was diluted with 900 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration to below 1 M, and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50. The resulting peptides were lyophilized to a volume lower that 50 µL, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid until the pH was below 3.0, and desalted and concentrated using Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were eluted in 50 µL of 75% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid, lyophilized again, and resuspended in 15 µL of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Full MS scans were performed in a mass range of 380–1500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 X 106 nd a maximum injection time of 200 ms. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was applied to fragment the top fifteen most intense peaks using high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 28. An intensity threshold of 4 X 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z were applied. Precursor ions with unassigned charges or charges of +1 to +7 were excluded. MS/MS scans were collected at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 X 105 and a maximum fill time of 300 ms. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeatcount of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 s, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering tandem MS was set to 4 X 103 counts. The resulting MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 proteome database (Araport11_pep_20220914), downloaded from TAIR (http://www.tair.com/). Peptide assignments were performed using SEQUEST HT with the following parameters: trypsin digestion allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of six residues, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys andoxidation of Met were speciﬁed as static and dynamic modiﬁca-tions, respectively. False discovery rates of 0.01 (high conﬁdence)and 0.05 (medium conﬁdence) were used to validate peptide spec-tral matches. Label-free quantiﬁcation based on MS1 precursorion intensity was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a mini-mum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 for unique peptides; the“3 Top N” peptides were used for area calculation. All genotypes and treatments were analyzed in four biological replicates, each with two technical replicates.