PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Peripheral blood
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: Label free
keywords: Protocol; Proteomics; Preanalytics; Liquid biopsy; Plasma; Extracellular vesicles; Translation

ABSTRACT:
We establish here an EV purification and proteomic analysis workflow in a real world clinical setting in which we evaluate different variables, from blood collection through protein preparation for mass spectrometry (MS). We compare blood collection tubes, sample transportation and storage conditions, EV enrichment methods, size exclusion chromatography columns, as well as lysis and protein preparation conditions. For each parameter tested, we assess hemolysis, particle concentration and size, protein quantity, protein markers (EV-related, cell-specific, co-isolates) and, for some, comprehensive proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A translational protocol for the analysis of plasma-derived extracellular vesicle proteomics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
JR0704-1 / 5µg vs. 10µg A protein amount of 5µg or 10µg was digested using the SP3 protocol and resulting peptides were dried and stored frozen pending the LC-MS/MS measurement. REF: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41596-018-0082-x)  JR0888 / immediate processing vs. RT vs. 37°C; JR0900 / RIPA-Lyse vs. RIPA + SF vs. Laemmli A protein amount of 10µg were digested (trypsin) using an AssayMAP Bravo liquid handling system (Agilent technologies) running the autoSP3 protocol according to Müller et al. (Müller T, Kalxdorf M, Longuespée R, Kazdal DN, Stenzinger A, Krijgsveld J. Automated sample preparation with SP3 for low-input clinical proteomics. Mol Syst Biol. 2020 Jan;16(1):e9111. doi: 10.15252/msb.20199111. PMID: 32129943; PMCID: PMC6966100.). Resulting peptides were dried and stored frozen pending the LC-MS/MS measurementMS method Orbitrap Exploris 480 JR0704-1 / 5µg vs. 10µg The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for a total of 60 min. Peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5µm, 300Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using 30 µl/min flow of 0.05% TFA in water. The analytical multistep gradient (300 nl/min) was performed using a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For 42 min the concentration of B was linearly ramped from 4% to 30%, followed by a quick ramp to 78%, after two minutes the concentration of B was lowered to 2% and a 10 min equilibration step appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A MS1 scan at 120k resolution (380-1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT) was followed by 20 DIA scans of variable width covering a mass range of 400-1000 m/z with 0.5 Da overlap between the windows. Scans were recorded at 30k resolution (1000% AGC target, 54 ms maxIT) and a fragmentation energy of 28%. Each sample was followed by a wash run (40 min) to minimize carry-over between samples. Instrument performance throughout the course of the measurement was monitored by regular (approx. one per 48 hours) injections of a standard sample and an in-house shiny application.  JR0888 / immediate processing vs. RT vs. 37°C; JR0900 / RIPA-Lyse vs. RIPA + SF vs. Laemmli The LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Vanquish Neo UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for a total of 60 min. Peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5µm, 300Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min of 0.05% TFA in water for a total loading volume of 60 µl. The analytical multistep gradient (300 nl/min) was performed using a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For 42 min the concentration of B was linearly ramped from 4% to 30%, followed by a quick ramp to 78%, after two minutes the concentration of B was lowered to 2% and an equilibration step of 3x the column volume was appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A MS1 scan at 120k resolution (380-1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT) was followed by 20 DIA scans of variable width covering a mass range of 400-1000 m/z with 0.5 Da overlap between the windows. Scans were recorded at 30k resolution (1000% AGC target, 54 ms maxIT) and a fragmentation energy of 28%. Each sample was followed by a wash run (40 min) to minimize carry-over between samples. Instrument performance throughout the course of the measurement was monitored by regular (approx. one per 48 hours) injections of a standard sample and an in-house shiny application.

DATA PROCESSING:
JR0704-1 / 5µg vs. 10µg Analysis of DIA RAW files was performed with Spectronaut (Biognosys, version 17.1.221229.55965) in directDIA+ (deep) library-free mode. Default settings were applied with the following adaptions. Within the Pulsar Search in Peptides the Max Peptide Length was set to 35, in Result Filters the Peptide Charge was enabled and the Max Charge set to 6 and the Min Charge set to 2. Within DIA Analysis under Identification the Precursor PEP Cutoff was set to 0.01, the Protein Qvalue Cutoff (Run) set to 0.01 and the Protein PEP Cutoff set to 0.05. In Quantification the Proteotypicity Filter was set to Only Protein Group Specific, the Corss-Run Normalization was disabled, the Quantification window was set to Not Synchronized and the Major Group Quantity was set to Sum peptide quantity. The data was searched against the human proteome from Uniprot (human reference database with one protein sequence per gene, containing 20,591 unique entries from first of March 2023) and the contaminants FASTA from MaxQuant (246 unique entries from twenty-second of December 2022). JR0888 / immediate processing vs. RT vs. 37°C; JR0900 / RIPA-Lyse vs. RIPA + SF vs. Laemmli All sample handling (sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis) have been performed in a block randomization (Burger, Bram, Marc Vaudel, and Harald Barsnes. "Importance of block randomization when designing proteomics experiments." Journal of proteome research 20.1 (2020): 122-128.) order. Analysis of DIA RAW files was performed with Spectronaut (Biognosys, version 18.6.231227.55695) in directDIA+ (deep) library-free mode. Default settings were applied with the following adaptions. Within DIA Analysis under Identification the Precursor PEP Cutoff was set to 0.01, the Protein Qvalue Cutoff (Run) set to 0.01 and the Protein PEP Cutoff set to 0.01. In Quantification the Proteotypicity Filter was set to Only Protein Group Specific, the Protein LFQ Method was set to MaxLFQ and the Quantification window was set to Not Synchronized (SN 17). The data was searched against the human proteome from Uniprot (human reference database with one protein sequence per gene, containing 20,597 unique entries from ninth of February 2024) and the contaminants FASTA from MaxQuant (246 unique entries from twenty-second of December 2022).Data management and calculations were performed using GraphPad Prism 10 (Graphpad, Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Comparisons between two groups were performed using the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test and paired t-test. For comparison using fold changes, the binary logarithms were calculated and one sample t-tests performed. Statistical significance for the performance of blood preservation tubes was always tested against EDTA values. p-values of <0.05 were considered statistically significant, with p-values represented as follows: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p < 0.0001. “ns” denotes differences in means that were not significant. All error bars shown represent standard deviation if not stated otherwise. Analyses of mass spectrometry data for the transportation experiment (Figure 3) were performed using R version 4.1.3 and Metascape ((33), http://metascape.org). Heatmap for Figure 7C was elaborated using the pheatmap function in R.

METHODS:
Purification method
The actual isolation method used is commonly the main obstacle for clinical-translational units to encounter EV-derived analyses. This is due to logistical, technical and economic challenges on the one hand, and a lack of detailed and easily applicable protocols accompanied by reliable validation methods on the other hand. Consequently, we compared EV purification using differential ultracentrifugation (dUC) and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) to the isolation method of density gradient centrifugation (DGUC) and SEC, followed either by ultrafiltration or by another ultracentrifugation step to concentrate the sample (Fig. 5a). We observe a dramatic reduction in particles quantified by NTA in the DGUC samples as opposed to dUC (Fig. 5b), either due to particle loss during DGUC or due to false-positive detection of larger protein aggregates or apolipoproteins in the NTA analysis of dUC-treated samples. Furthermore, ultrafiltration recovers markedly more EVs from SEC eluate than another ultracentrifugation step (Fig. 5b). Disease-relevant markers are commonly found in small EVs, we therefore included only the sEV fraction of dUC-processed samples in our analysis. Accordingly, dUC-isolated sEVs show a smaller median size than DGUC-isolated full vesicle populations (Fig. 5c). We then investigated the composition of dUC (+ SEC) vs. DGUC (+ SEC + UF/UC)-derived proteins. Strikingly, there is a massive reduction in co-purified apolipoproteins and platelet-derived vesicles when performing DGUC (Fig. 5d, see Supplementary Fig. S5 online, ApoB and CD41), accompanied by a slight increase in red blood cell-derived vesicles (Fig. 5d, CD235). The amount of CD9+ EVs recovered from ultracentrifugation following DGUC and SEC is comparable to ultrafiltration. However, ALIX+ and GAPDH+ EVs are much reduced with ultracentrifugation (Fig. 5 d, see Supplementary Fig. S5 online), implying that ultracentrifugation can only partially collect and concentrate the purified vesicles. Experimental costs for both methodologies are similar (see Supplementary Table S2 online). 
In summary, we recommend application of overnight DGUC as a first step of EV purification since it significantly reduces lipoprotein contamination of the obtained proteins. Following DGUC and SEC, ultrafiltration should be used to concentrate purified EVs and recover a broad spectrum of EV populations.
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) columns
 In addition to separation by density, separation by size using SEC is inevitable to obtain enriched EV populations and separation from lipoproteins of similar density. However, commercially available SEC columns are expensive and recommended to be used only a few times. Not uncommonly, transition times between different commercial column generations are too short for the completion of experimental series. Additionally, while commercially available SEC columns are usually packed in plastic columns, home-made SEC can be performed in re-usable glass columns, a potentially sustainable alternative. We therefore evaluated performance of commercially available in comparison to two types of home-made SEC columns (Fig. 6a). Notably, particle yield of home-made Sepharose CL-4B columns is significantly higher than from commercial Izon qEV columns (Fig. 6b). Home-made Sephacryl S300 columns do not yield higher EV numbers but elute a higher amount of protein (Fig. 6b and d). There are no conceivable differences in particle size (Fig. 6c). We set out to test elution profiles of the different columns by using dextran blue, a high molecular weight polymer with size characteristics similar to EVs and a mix of two proteins of different sizes, thyroglobulin and BSA. Elution profiles are similar for Izon qEV and Sepharose CL-4B columns (6e, see Supplementary Fig. S6 online), but in Sephacryl S300 columns even smaller proteins elute together with dextran blue (Fig. 6e). This confirms the high co-elution of proteins with home-made Sephacryl S300 columns as observed in the bulk analysis (Fig. 6d). These results are underlined by analyses from plasma-derived EVs (Fig. 6f-g). Again, the separation between EVs and lipoproteins is comparable in Izon qEV and in home-made Sepharose CL-4B columns, while in Sephacryl S300 columns there is a significant overlap between EV- and lipoprotein-containing peak fractions (Fig. 6f). Sepharose CL-4B exhibit a particularly high enrichment index, consisting of a higher peak in a reduced number of fractions (Fig. 6g) and performance remains high after 7 and 11 cycles of usage (see Supplementary Fig. S6 online). At the same time, self-made Sepharose CL-4B columns are an economically and ecologically more sustainable option. Furthermore, our cost-effectiveness analysis (see Supplementary Table S2) shows lower total cost of Sepharose CL-4B in comparison to the commercially available column.
In summary, Sepharose CL-4B columns are a cost-effective and sustainable alternative to commercially available SEC columns and exhibit reliable high performance regarding the separation of EVs from protein aggregates and lipoproteins.
Protein lysis and delivery to the mass spectrometry core facility
Our optimization procedure aims at comprehensive proteomic analysis of patient plasma-derived EVs. Therefore, as a final step of pre-analytics, it is important to consider conditions of EV lysis and delivery to the mass spectrometry core facility (Fig. 7a).
EVs have been described to adhere to plastic surfaces like tubes and filters. We therefore investigate the best way to recover EVs from the ultrafilter when performing lysis and protein precipitation immediately following EV purification. To this end, lysing within the filter yields higher amounts of EV-associated proteins than preceding transfer to a different tube (see Supplementary Fig. S5 online). Also, NTA confirms that particle numbers are reduced after ultrafiltration, compared with an aliquot collected right after the SEC, before concentrating (see Supplementary Fig. S5 online). The protein yield is further increased by using double protease inhibitor concentration (see Supplementary Fig. S7 online).
EVs can be delivered to the core facility in PBS with lysis immediately preceding mass spectrometry analysis. Alternatively, EVs can be lysed immediately following purification, resulting in delivery of the EV-derived protein to the mass spectrometry facility. We found that TCA protein precipitation immediately after lysis does not only lead to the identification of a somewhat higher number of proteins in mass spectrometry (Fig. 7b) but also a better representation of EV-related proteins as described in the Vesiclepedia database (Fig. 7c). EV purification from 9 to 10 mL of blood plasma regularly yields a total protein amount of 30–100 µg (see Supplementary Fig. S7 online). We therefore tested the protein amount required for mass spectrometry: analysis of 5 µg total protein input was equivalent to 10 µg in terms of proteins identified and EV representation of identified proteins (Fig. 7b-c).
Next, we tested different conditions of redissolution of the precipitated protein pellet (Fig. 7d): (1) RIPA: resuspension in RIPA buffer at the core facility, (2) RIPA + SF: resuspension in RIPA buffer immediately following TCA precipitation, snap-freezing, storage at −70 °C and transport to the core facility on dry ice, or (3) Laemmli: resuspension in Laemmli buffer at the core facility. While we see a tendency towards a higher number of identified proteins when precipitated pellets are redissolved at the core facility and do not go through the freeze-thaw process (Fig. 7d-e), according to the posterior error probability (PEP) there are no significant quality differences in the three conditions compared.
Therefore, we recommend lysis of EVs immediately after purification within the ultrafilter using double protease inhibitor concentration, followed by TCA precipitation.
Materials and methods
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Ethics Approval was obtained from the Ethics Comitee of the University of Heidelberg, Medical Faculty Mannheim (Ethics Approval No. 2014-598N-MA). Informed consent was obtained from all participants. All methods were performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Plasma isolation
Peripheral blood was collected from two male and seven female healthy individuals aged 20 to 43 years by standard venipuncture using a Vacuette Safety blood collection set with a 21G needle (Greiner Bio-one, Frickenhausen, Germany). Each blood draw followed by independent processing was considered a biological replicate as outlined in the figure legends. For experiments in Fig. 7d-e isolated EVs from cancer patients aged 35–83 years were used. Informed consent was obtained from all participants. Blood was drawn directly into 10.0 mL Cell-free DNA BCT (Streck, La Vista, NE, USA). For the comparison of blood collection tubes (Fig. 2), we additionally used 9.0 mL EDTA K3E S-Monovette (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany), 10.0 mL Citrate 9NC 0.106 mol/l S-Monovette (Sarsted, Nümbrecht, Germany), 9 mL ACD-A Vacuette (Greiner Bio-one, Frickenhausen, Germany) and 10.0 mL RNA Complete BCT (Streck, La Vista, NE, USA). All tubes were filled completely until the vacuum was exhausted. The tubes were inverted immediately after blood collection according to manufacturer´s recommendations. To produce platelet-poor plasma (PPP), tubes were centrifuged at 2,500 xg for 15 min at room temperature (15–20 °C). Then the plasma was collected from the top with a Pasteur pipette (down to around 0.5–1.0 mL above the buffy coat) and placed in a new 15 mL tube. The collected plasma was centrifuged a second time at 2,500 xg for 15 min at room temperature, and again the plasma was collected from the top down to 0.5 mL above cell pellet and either used immediately for an experiment or placed in a 5 mL cryotube until further processing. Storage temperature was − 20 °C unless otherwise specified (see Supplementary Fig. 4 online). All further procedures were carried out in low-bind tubes (Sarsted, Nümbrecht, Germany), in order to avoid EV adhesion to the tube wall.
Sample transportation
For experiments assessing the impact of temperature during sample transportation (Fig. 3), peripheral blood samples were collected at University Hospital Mannheim and transferred to the research laboratory within the next two hours using a motorized vehicle (about 15 min drive). The tubes transported at 37 °C were entered into a Mini Bio Isotherm Hot container (M.&G. Intl srl, Italy) immediately after blood draw and then transported as described above. For the immediate processing condition, platelet-poor plasma was produced by tandem centrifugation as detailed above immediately after blood draw and before transportation. All tubes from the same experiment were transported together to the research laboratory.
Hemolysis
Hemolysis was quantified from a 2µL PPP aliquot using a NanoDrop One Microvolume UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by measuring sample absorbance at 414 nm. A standard curve was generated starting from a fully lysed red blood cell sample, and serial dilutions were made from 100 to 0.025%. Each sample hemolysis value was calculated according to the linear range of the standard curve.
Differential ultracentrifugation (dUC)
dUC, followed by SEC, for isolation of EVs from PPP was used for the analysis of optimal needle-to-processing time (Fig. 4) and for comparison to density gradient ultracentrifugation (Fig. 5). PPP was poured into an ultracentrifuge tube (Seton, S5031 or Beckmann Coulter C140303) before addition of 0.22 µM-filtered PBS to reach a total volume of 10 mL. Tubes were centrifuged at 10,000 xg for 20 min at 4 °C in a Beckmann Optima XE-90 ultracentrifuge (Beckmann Coulter GmbH, Krefeld, Germany) using a SW 40 Ti swinging bucket rotor. Supernatant was transferred to a new ultracentrifugation tube to be centrifuged at 100,000 xg for 2 h at 4 °C in the ultracentrifuge as specified above. Resulting 100,000 xg pellets were resuspended in 100 µL of 0.22 µM-filtered PBS, stored at 4 °C overnight and entered into a SEC column the next day.
Density gradient ultracentrifugation (DGUC)
EVs were purified from PPP by DGUC, size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and ultrafiltration (UF) unless otherwise specified. For DGUC, a discontinuous density gradient was prepared using a 60% iodixanol solution (Optiprep, Abcam, United States) according to Dhondt et al. 2020. Briefly, 2 mL of iodixanol solution 40% (w/v) were layered on the bottom of an ultracentrifugation tube (Seton S5031 or Beckmann Coulter C140303), followed by 2 mL of 20% (w/v), 2 mL of 10% (w/v) and 1.5–2 mL of 5% (w/v). 3–4 mL of PPP were layered on the top of the gradient. When stored, PPP was thawed in a water bath at 37 °C before entering the gradient. DGUC was performed at 100,000 xg for 16 h at 4 °C in a Beckmann Optima XE-90 ultracentrifuge (Beckmann Coulter GmbH, Krefeld, Germany) using a SW 40 Ti swinging bucket rotor. A visible band between 40% and 20% gradients (high-density band) was collected and the resulting EV-enriched volume of about 1 mL was transferred to a 1.5 mL tube.
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) and ultrafiltration (UF)
For SEC following dUC, we used single qEV 35 nm legacy columns (Izon, SO6, Christchurch, New Zealand) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, columns were allowed to reach room temperature for at least 30 min and then washed with at least one column volume of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS. 100–150 µL of resuspended pellet volume resulting from the 100,000 xg ultracentrifugation step were allowed to enter the column before addition of 600 µL of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS and collection of the void volume (800 µL). Subsequently, seven 200 µL fractions were collected separately. A 10 µL aliquot from each fraction was used for NTA (nanoparticle tracking analysis) measurement. All fractions with valid particle measurements in NTA were lysed (see EV lysis) and pooled for subsequent protein precipitation.
For SEC following DGUC we used qEV2 35 nm legacy columns (Izon, SP8, Christchurch, New Zealand) according to manufacturer´s instructions. Briefly, columns were allowed to reach room temperature for at least 30 min and then washed with at least one column volume of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS. The EV-enriched sample resulting from DGUC was loaded onto the column, its tube was washed with 1 mL of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS and this volume was also loaded onto the column immediately. Additional 14 mL of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS were added to the column and subsequently collected as void volume. Then, 5 mL of filtered PBS were entered into the column and collected in an Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal filter 10 kDa (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) (EV-enriched fraction). The Amicon tube was centrifuged at 3,683 xg at 4 °C for 20 min. 10 µL of this concentrated volume were aliquoted for NTA and 40 µL for transmission electron microcopy (TEM). The remaining volume of the EV-enriched fraction was lysed immediately by addition of lysis buffer to the Amicon filter.
For comparison of different types of SEC columns (Fig. 6), self-made Sepharose CL-4B and Sephacryl S300 columns were prepared as follows:
Before use, Sepharose CL-4B (CL4B200, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and Sephacryl S300 (S300HR, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) were swollen with 0.22 μm-filtered PBS rolling for one hour at 4 °C. Afterwards, bottles were left standing for at least three hours to allow gravity sedimentation of the resins. When completely settled, part of the buffer was removed to have a 70% (v/v) resin slurry. The slurry was resuspended carefully until homogeneous and 28 mL of slurry were layered carefully into a glass chromatography Econo-Column 1.5 × 20 cm (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Feldkirchen, Germany), aiming at 20 mL of stacked resin. The columns were left to settle overnight at 4 °C and additional volume was added the next day if necessary. Before entering a sample, the columns were washed with two column volumes of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS.
Elution profiles of Sepharose CL-4B and Sephacryl S300 columns (Fig. 6e, see Supplementary Fig. S6 online) were assessed using 400 µL of dextran blue 2 g/L (gel filtration calibration kit HMW, Cytiva, USA), and in a separate run, using a protein mix of 350 µL thyroglobulin 2 g/L (Gel filtration calibration kit HMW, Cytiva, USA) and 50µL of bovine serum albumin 4 g/L (Carl Roth, Germany). For qEV2 35 nm legacy columns (Izon, New Zealand) 900 µL dextran blue and a protein mix of 800 µL thyroglobulin 2 g/L and 100 µL bovine serum albumin 4 g/L were used.
After entering the corresponding standard, 1 mL fractions were collected until completing at least one column volume. Dextran blue elution profile was assessed by measuring the absorbance of each fraction at 595 nm in a microplate using a Tecan Infinite F200 (Tecan Trading AG, Switzerland). For the protein mix elution profile, 150 µL of each fraction were mixed with 150 µL of Bradford reagent 5x (SERVA, Heidelberg, Germany) diluted to 1x with ddH2O in a microplate, and absorbance was measured at 595 nm using a Tecan Infinite F200 (Tecan Trading AG, Switzerland). After collecting the sample fractions, columns were washed with two column volumes of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS, 1 mL of NaOH 0.5 M, and two column volumes of PBS containing 0.05% NaN3, and stored at 4 °C until further use.
For peripheral blood samples (Figs. 6b-d, f-g, see Supplementary Fig. S6 online), plasma preparation and DGUC were performed as described above. EV-enriched samples collected from DGUC were entered into a Sepharose CL-4B/Sephacryl S300 column (prepared as above). Then 6 mL of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS were loaded and 6 mL collected for void volume, followed by 5 mL for EV-enriched fractions, followed by 4 mL for non-EV-enriched control fractions. For Fig. 6b-d EV-enriched eluates were subjected to bulk analysis and further processed as described above for the qEV2 35 nm legacy columns. For analysis of elution profiles, EV-enriched or non-enriched fractions were collected per mL and analyzed using Western Blot (Fig. 6f-g). The SEC fractions with EV marker protein signals were then pooled before TCA precipitation and subsequent Western Blot (see Supplementary Fig. S6 online).
Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA)
Particle concentration and size distribution from EV-enriched fractions were measured using a ZetaView PMX-230 Twin (Particle Metrix GmbH, Inning am Amersee, Germany) and ZetaView version 8.05.16 SP7 software. A sample aliquot was diluted 1:100 to 1:100,000 in DPBS (Sigma Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany). The following instrument settings were used: laser wavelength 488 nm, filter wavelength scatter, sensitivity 80 and shutter 100. For each sample, 21 s video was recorded with at least 8 frames used for analysis.
EV Lysis and protein precipitation
Isolated EVs were lysed using RIPA buffer (Tris-Hcl pH 7.6 25 mM, NaCl 150 mM, sodium deoxycholate 0.1%, SDS 0.1%, Triton X-100 0.1%, sodium orthovanadate 2 mM, NaF 50 mM, protease inhibitor tablets (Pierce protease inhibitor Mini tablets, Thermo Scientific, USA) 5%, phosphatase inhibitor tablets (PhosSTOP EASYpack, Roche, Germany) 2%). One volume of 5x buffer was added to four volumes of sample, vortexed for 30 s and incubated on ice for 30 min. Lysate was cleared at 20,817 xg (Centrifuge 5430R, Eppendorf, Germany) for 10 min at 4 °C and pellets were discarded. 35 µL of cleared lysate were aliquoted for BCA protein measurement. Lysate volume was split according to each experiment and 1 volume of trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was added to 9 volumes of lysate and left to precipitate overnight at 4 °C. The next day, tubes with protein precipitate were centrifuged at 20,817 xg and 4 °C for 5 min and supernatant was removed and discarded without disturbing the protein. The pellet was washed with 1000 µL of cold acetone, centrifuged again at 20,817 xg and 4 °C for 5 min and supernatant was discarded. In total, three acetone washes were performed. After the third acetone wash, the pellet was dried in a Vacuum Concentrator (5301, Eppendorf, Germany) at 30 °C for 20–25 min. After visual verification of a completely dry protein pellet without any acetone traces, pellets were sealed and stored at 4 °C until western blot or mass spectrometry analysis.
In Supplementary Fig. S7 online, 400–550 µL of purified EVs in 0.22 μm filtered PBS were split evenly into the different conditions. Inhibitor concentrations were modified as specified in the figure legend with 2x phosphatase inhibitor corresponding to a phosphatase inhibitor concentration of 4%, 2x protease inhibitor corresponding to a protease inhibitor concentration of 10%, and 50% volume increase corresponding to the supplementation of the sample with half its volume of buffer (0.22 μm-filtered PBS).
In Fig. 7b-c, EV lysate volumes corresponding to 5–10 µg of protein, respectively, were either TCA-precipitated in a 1.5 mL tube as described above or diluted in 8 mL of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS and pelleted in a Beckmann Optima XE-90 ultracentrifuge (Beckmann Coulter GmbH, Krefeld, Germany) at 100,000 xg for 2 h at 4 °C. Supernatant was decanted by gentle inversion of the tube and the remaining drops in the tube opening where removed. The pellet was resuspended in the volume remaining in the tube, and sealed. Tubes were stored at 4 °C no more than 5 days and then transferred to the mass spectrometry core facility. Corresponding UC tubes and TCA precipitates were transported on ice.
For Fig. 7d-e, EV-derived protein lysates were divided into three equal volumes and then TCA-precipitated. One of the protein pellets was resuspended immediately with RIPA 1x buffer (described above) and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage at −70 °C. Later, this sample was transferred to the mass spectrometry core facility on dry ice. The other two protein precipitates were stored at 4 °C and transferred to the mass spectrometry core facility on ice. Upon arrival at the core facility, they were resuspended in Laemmli 1x (see Western Blotting, below) or in RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific, 89900). In all three conditions, protein pellets for this experiment were resuspended to a final concentration of 0.19–0.25 µg/µL. The concentration was identical in the different conditions of one replicate.
Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) for protein quantification
Micro BCA Protein assay (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Rockford, Illinois, USA) was performed for protein quantification according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard curve of 0.5 µg/mL – 200 µg/mL was prepared from a 2 mg/mL stock. The assay was performed in a microtiter plate. For each sample well 135 µL of 0.22 μm-filtered PBS and 15 µL of sample were mixed thoroughly. For the standard curve, 150 µL of the respective standard solution were used. Subsequently, 150 µL of BCA working reagent were added per well and mixed thoroughly. The plate was sealed with an adhesive foil and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Hence, absorbance at 562 nm was measured using a Tecan Infinite F200 (Tecan Trading AG, Switzerland), and the protein concentration of each sample was calculated according to the standard curve.
Western blotting
1x Laemmli (Tris-HCl pH 6.8 62.5 mM, SDS 2%, Glycerol 5%, Beta-Mercaptoethanol 2%, Bromophenol blue 0.1%) was used to redissolve protein pellets for immunoblotting. Redissolved protein samples were either loaded to an SDS gel immediately or stored at −20 °C until further use.
Samples redissolved in Laemmli were boiled at 95 °C for 4 min. Equal sample volumes were run on home-made SDS-PAGE gels and transferred to a PVDF membrane with 0.45 μm pore size (Immobilon-P, Merck Millipore, Germany). After Ponceau staining, membranes were rinsed with PBST (PBS with 1% Tween-20), incubated first in 5% skim milk PBST for 60 min and then in primary antibody solution in 5% skim milk PBST overnight at 4 °C while rotating. Membranes were washed three times, 15 min each, in PBST, incubated in secondary antibody solution (1:10,000 in 5% skim milk PBST) for one hour at room temperature, then washed again three times for 5–15 min. For Hsc70 detection TBST (Tris 20 mM, NaCl 150 mM, pH 7.6, Tween-20 1%) was used instead of PBST. Chemiluminescence was detected using SuperSignal West pico & femto ECL reagents (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Life Technologies, USA) and a ChemiDoc imaging System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Feldkirchen, Germany) with an exposure time of 1–300 s. Image analysis and quantification were performed using Image Lab Software version 6.1.0 (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Feldkirchen, Germany).
Antibodies
The following primary antibodies were used for immunoblotting: CD9 (Cell Signalling Technology, #13403, 1:1,000), GAPDH (Proteintech, #60004-1, 1:1,000), ALIX (abcam, ab275377, 1:1,000), ApoA1 (R&D Systems, MAB36641, 1:2,500), ApoB (R&D Systems, MAB41242, 1:1,000), CD235a (Invitrogen, JC159, 1:500), CD41 (Integrin α−IIb, abcam, ab83961, 1:1,000), Hsc70 (abcam, ab51052, 1:2,500). The following secondary antibodies were used: Peroxidase conjugated AffiniPure goat anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, 115-035-003, 1:10,000) and Peroxidase conjugated AffiniPure goat anti-rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, 111-035-003, 1:10,000).
Transmission electron microscopy
Concentrated EV isolates were adsorbed onto glow discharged carbon coated grids, washed in aqua bidest and negatively stained with 2% aqueous uranyl acetate. Micrographs were taken with a Zeiss EM 910 or EM 912 at 100 kV (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using a slow scan CCD camera (TRS, Moorenweis, Germany).
Mass spectrometry
For experiments in Fig. 7b-c a protein amount of 5–10 µg was digested using the SP3 protocol and resulting peptides were dried and stored frozen pending the LC-MS/MS measurement. For experiments in Figs. 3 and 7d-e a protein amount of 10 µg was digested (trypsin) using an AssayMAP Bravo liquid handling system (Agilent technologies) running the autoSP3 protocol according to Müller et al.. Resulting peptides were dried and stored frozen pending the LC-MS/MS measurement.
For experiments in Fig. 7b-c LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for a total of 60 min. Peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 μm, 300Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using 30 µl/min flow of 0.05% TFA in water. The analytical multistep gradient (300 nl/min) was performed using a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For 42 min the concentration of B was linearly ramped from 4 to 30%, followed by a quick ramp to 78%, after two minutes the concentration of B was lowered to 2% and a 10 min equilibration step appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A MS1 scan at 120 k resolution (380–1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT) was followed by 20 DIA scans of variable width covering a mass range of 400–1000 m/z with 0.5 Da overlap between the windows. Scans were recorded at 30 k resolution (1,000% AGC target, 54 ms maxIT) and a fragmentation energy of 28%. Each sample was followed by a wash run (40 min) to minimize carry-over between samples. Instrument performance throughout the course of the measurement was monitored by regular (approx. one per 48 h) injections of a standard sample and an in-house shiny application.
For experiments in Figs. 3 and 7c-d the LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Vanquish Neo UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for a total of 60 min. Peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5 μm, 300Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 30 µl/min of 0.05% TFA in water for a total loading volume of 60 µl. The analytical multistep gradient (300 nl/min) was performed using a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For 42 min the concentration of B was linearly ramped from 4 to 30%, followed by a quick ramp to 78%, after two minutes the concentration of B was lowered to 2% and an equilibration step of 3x the column volume was appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A MS1 scan at 120 k resolution (380–1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT) was followed by 20 DIA scans of variable width covering a mass range of 400–1000 m/z with 0.5 Da overlap between the windows. Scans were recorded at 30 k resolution (1,000% AGC target, 54 ms maxIT) and a fragmentation energy of 28%. Each sample was followed by a wash run (40 min) to minimize carry-over between samples. Instrument performance throughout the course of the measurement was monitored by regular (approx. one per 48 h) injections of a standard sample and an in-house shiny application.
Data analysis
Analysis workflows for mass spectrometry data were carried out in two slightly differing protocols, that are detailed separately below.
For experiments displayed in Fig. 7b-c analysis of DIA RAW files was performed with Spectronaut (Biognosys, version 17.1.221229.55965) in directDIA+ (deep) library-free mode. Default settings were applied with the following adaptions. Within the Pulsar Search in Peptides the Max Peptide Length was set to 35, in Result Filters the Peptide Charge was enabled and the Max Charge set to 6 and the Min Charge set to 2. Within DIA Analysis under Identification the Precursor PEP Cutoff was set to 0.01, the Protein Qvalue Cutoff (Run) set to 0.01 and the Protein PEP Cutoff set to 0.05. In Quantification the Proteotypicity Filter was set to Only Protein Group Specific, the Corss-Run Normalization was disabled, the Quantification window was set to Not Synchronized and the Major Group Quantity was set to Sum peptide quantity. The data was searched against the human proteome from Uniprot (human reference database with one protein sequence per gene, containing 20,591 unique entries from first of March 2023) and the contaminants FASTA from MaxQuant (246 unique entries from twenty-second of December 2022).
For experiments displayed in Figs. 3 and 7d-e sample handling (sample preparation and LC-MS/MS analysis) have been performed in a block randomization order.
Analysis of DIA RAW files was performed with Spectronaut (Biognosys, version 18.6.231227.55695) in directDIA+ (deep) library-free mode. Default settings were applied with the following adaptions. Within DIA Analysis under Identification the Precursor PEP Cutoff was set to 0.01, the Protein Qvalue Cutoff (Run) set to 0.01 and the Protein PEP Cutoff set to 0.01. In Quantification the Proteotypicity Filter was set to Only Protein Group Specific, the Protein LFQ Method was set to MaxLFQ and the Quantification window was set to Not Synchronized (SN 17). The data was searched against the human proteome from Uniprot (human reference database with one protein sequence per gene, containing 20,597 unique entries from ninth of February 2024) and the contaminants FASTA from MaxQuant (246 unique entries from twenty-second of December 2022).
Analyses of mass spectrometry data for the transportation experiment (Fig. 3) were performed using R version 4.1.3 and Metascape (http://metascape.org). Heatmap for Fig. 7c was elaborated using the pheatmap function in R.
In general, data management and calculations were performed using GraphPad Prism 10 (Graphpad, Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Comparisons between two groups were performed using the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test and paired or unpaired t-test (as indicated). For comparison using fold changes, the binary logarithms were calculated and one sample t-tests performed. Statistical significance for the performance of blood preservation tubes was always tested against EDTA values and subsequently the p-value was adjusted for multiplicity using the Bonferroni-Holm method. p-values of < 0.05 were considered statistically significant, with p-values represented as follows: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, and **** p < 0.0001. “ns” denotes differences in means that were not significant. All error bars shown represent standard deviation if not stated otherwise.

RESULTS:
Results
In order to enhance applicability of proteomic extracellular vesicle (EV) analysis in a clinical and translational setting we set out to comprehensively test and optimize several preanalytical and procedural factors (Fig. 1).
Blood collection tubes
 In a first step, we compared different blood collection tubes (BCTs) currently used for liquid biopsy and for conventional routine blood tests in the clinic (Fig. 2a), namely EDTA, Citrate, ACD, Streck DNA and Streck RNA. Supplementary Table S1 online contains an overview of the cost of each of these preservation tubes. According to Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA), particle numbers isolated from ACD, Citrate, Streck RNA and Streck DNA tubes tend to be smaller compared to the conventional EDTA tubes (Fig. 2b). These results correspond to the amount of EV-derived protein from the different BCTs (see Supplementary Fig. S1 online). Only in Streck RNA tubes the protein yield is clearly reduced (see Supplementary Fig. S1 online). Vesicle size, on the other hand, is unaffected by different preservation anticoagulants (see Supplementary Fig. S1 online). EVs can derive from physiological sources or from blood cells ex vivo. Eventually, both of these fractions contribute to the total number of EVs isolated and quantified. Therefore, we further characterized EVs purified from the different BCTs. In contrast to the NTA quantification, EV-derived protein from Citrate and Streck RNA tubes contains more EV-associated markers than from EDTA (Fig. 2c, d, see Supplementary Fig. S1 online). At the same time, the red blood cell marker CD235a is clearly decreased in all non-EDTA tubes, suggesting fewer extra-physiological activation or fragmentation of red blood cells. ACD tubes show the lowest signal for CD41, potentially indicative of less platelet-derived EV release (Fig. 2c, e). Finally, an important quality control is the measurement of hemolysis. We tested hemolysis using absorption at 414 nm in platelet-poor plasma from all tested BCTs. Application of ACD or Citrate instead of EDTA tubes substantially reduces hemolysis while other BCTs do not meaningfully improve this aspect (Fig. 2f).
In summary, based on enrichment of EV-associated protein markers and on reduction of hemolysis, for studies of EV-derived proteomics we recommend blood draw into Citrate tubes. Alternatively, despite showing lower EV marker signals, ACD-derived EVs are accompanied by reduced CD235a, CD41 and a trend towards lower hemolysis than EDTA. Therefore, considering the great concern about platelet/red blood cell (RBC)-derived EVs, ACD tubes might be further considered for blood-derived proteomic EV studies.
Transportation temperature
We tested the impact of different transportation temperatures and modalities on EV characteristics (Fig. 3). In the standard condition, full blood was centrifuged to produce platelet-poor plasma (PPP, see Methods section for detailed protocol) immediately after blood draw, and then transferred to the processing laboratory facility (Fig. 3a). In a second condition, full blood was transported to the laboratory at ambient temperature, with outside temperatures between 5 °C and 15 °C (see Supplementary Fig. S2 online). All further processing took place in the laboratory facility. The third experimental condition was identical to the second, with the exception that the full blood was strictly kept at 37 °C in a specialized transportation box. As far as particle numbers and EV-derived protein amounts are concerned, transport at 37 °C induces an increase in variability (Fig. 3b, see Supplementary Fig. S2 online). Variability in hemolysis is greater at both transportation conditions (see Supplementary Fig. S2 online). At the same time, size of EVs increases when transporting the full blood at 37 °C (Fig. 3c-d). Heat-induced extraphysiological changes of EV number and composition are confirmed by NTA (Fig. 3b, c) and by transmission electron microscopy (Fig. 3d). Next, we tested the exact protein composition of the purified vesicles in the three conditions. Interestingly, we were able to identify a drastic increase in vesicle-derived markers in conditions of full blood transport (Fig. 3e, f), Western Blot analysis and hemolysis measurement confirms ex vivo EV secretion of platelet or red blood cell origin in conditions of full blood transport (Fig. 3e-g, see Supplementary Fig. S2 online). Of note, CD235a exhibits a more pronounced increase in the condition at 37 °C while CD41 signal shows a trend to be higher at ambient temperature, suggesting that cell types might be differentially affected by each.
condition. In biomarker studies, translational researchers are interested in physiological rather than artificial EV content. Therefore, we characterized in more detail the ex vivo-added protein content by mass spectrometry (Fig. 3h-i). Here, we show that 527 proteins in the ambient temperature condition, and 289 proteins in the 37 °C condition are exclusively identified in transported samples and therefore can be considered contaminants of the analysis (Fig. 3i). Transport at 37 °C leads to increased particle numbers, while the range of proteins identified from samples transported at ambient temperature more clearly exceeds the control condition. According to the functional enrichment analysis performed with Metascape (see Supplementary Fig. S2 online), platelet activation is, at least partially, responsible for this increase in identified peptides. However, despite the differences in protein numbers, principal component analysis shows clustering of biological replicates and only limited influence of transportation condition on total sample composition (see Supplementary Fig. S2 online).
In summary, peripheral blood samples for EV-derived proteomic analysis should be either processed immediately to produce platelet-poor plasma in close proximity to the site of patient care or transported at room temperature. Transportation conditions are key to fine-tuning results of proteomic EV analysis.
Needle-to-processing time
 In real world clinical routine there are different set-ups for the processing of blood samples. Samples are either processed immediately (around the clock on-site laboratory service), within the first 24 h (e.g., 8 am to 5 pm on-site laboratory service), processed within 72 h (weekday on-site laboratory service, arrival on Friday night) or within one week (off-site laboratory service). We therefore decided to systematically test the influence of needle-to-processing time. We drew blood from healthy volunteers and processed it either immediately or kept it at room temperature for 24 h, 72 h or one week (Fig. 4a). We observed a dramatic increase in the amount of EVs and EV-derived protein when not processing full blood immediately and this increase is proportional to the needle-to-processing time (Fig. 4b, see Supplementary Fig. S3 online). Concurrently, we detect an increasing trend in hemolysis corresponding to the length of pre-processing time (see Supplementary Fig. S3 online). Interestingly, median vesicle size clearly increases as soon as samples are not processed immediately, likely reflecting a shift in the purified vesicle populations or vesicle fusion (Fig. 4c). Western Blot analysis confirms that additional vesicles and vesicle-derived proteins are predominantly from red blood cells (CD235), platelets (CD41) and leukocytes (CD45), thereby diluting physiological EV- and non-EV-derived proteins (Fig. 4d-g).
Based on these results, we strongly recommend to minimize needle-to-processing time for proteomic EV analysis.
Storage temperature
The purification of EV-derived proteins requires a sophisticated multistep protocol. Even when processing patient samples with as little delay as possible (Fig. 4), the full purification process cannot be completed on the same day. Therefore, it must be the aim of a clinically actionable protocol to remove cellular content, the source of potentially contaminating EVs, as quickly as possible and then store platelet-poor plasma while maintaining EV quantity and quality. We proceeded to test the effect of different temperatures of PPP two weeks’ storage on the subsequently isolated extracellular vesicles (see Supplementary Fig. S4 online). While there seemed to be a tendency towards higher maintenance of vesicle numbers in −20 °C and − 70 °C as opposed to storage at 4 °C, neither vesicular Western Blot markers nor total protein cargo or particle size varied significantly between different storage temperatures (see Supplementary Fig. S4 online).
We conclude that, within a two weeks’ timeframe, storage temperature of PPP does not affect the quantity or quality of purified EV-derived proteins. However, storage at −20 °C or −70 °C might be preferred to 4 °C because of slightly better maintenance of EV quantity.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
 Liquid biopsy is increasingly used in personalized medicine to tailor cancer treatments by analyzing cell-free DNA (cfDNA), circulating tumor DNA, and microRNA. While these biomarkers have entered routine clinical use their predictive power is limited, and proteomic analysis is needed for functional tumor insights. Proteomic data, however, is more challenging to obtain due to the instability of proteins and the inability to amplify them like nucleic acids, making it one of the main hurdles in liquid biopsy applications.
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), small cell-derived particles carrying proteins, lipids, metabolites, and nucleic acids, have emerged as a promising source of tumor-specific biomarkers. These vesicles, found in all body fluids can provide valuable insights into tumor biology and serve as drug delivery vehicles due to their low immunogenicity and ability to target cells. Over the last two decades, EVs have shown great potential for clinical applications, but translating EV research into practical use has faced challenges, particularly regarding standardization, reproducibility and sample handling.
The quality of biofluids, especially blood, is critical for EV analysis. Pre-analytical factors such as collection, transportation, storage, and processing affect EV quality and diagnostic outcomes. Transportation of blood samples to the laboratory introduces mechanical stress that can compromise EV integrity. Furthermore, red blood cells undergo ex vivo hemolysis when kept at 40 °C or above while refrigeration during transportation may preserve EVs, but is energy-intensive and not always effective. Therefore, understanding the impact of transportation conditions, including temperature, on EV quality is essential for reliable results.
After blood collection and transport, EVs must be isolated from plasma. Techniques like differential or density gradient ultracentrifugation and size exclusion chromatography are commonly used but preserving EVs free from plasma protein contamination remains a challenge. Studies have shown that pre-analytical and analytical variables can significantly affect the outcomes of EV proteomic analysis, limiting its diagnostic power. Given that many clinical settings face logistical challenges, such as patient care sites being distant from research laboratories optimizing transport and processing methods is key for successful clinical translation.
Storage of isolated EVs is another critical step. While recent evidence suggests that storing EVs in proteinaceous buffers may preserve their properties protocols for long-term storage and transportation are still being refined. In this study, we test different storage conditions and isolation methods for EVs in a clinical research setting, aiming to optimize the entire workflow from blood collection to mass spectrometry analysis. Our goal is to make these protocols scalable and applicable in broader clinical contexts, enhancing the utility of EVs in translational research and personalized cancer treatment.
This work investigates real-world challenges in EV proteomic analysis, exploring how to implement laboratory-optimized protocols in a clinical research environment. By improving methods for handling and analyzing EVs, we hope to advance their clinical application, ultimately benefiting patient care and personalized treatment strategies.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Data availability
Mass spectrometry data that supports the findings of this study has been uploaded to the PRIDE server and is available under the following accession code: PXD058373 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD058373).
Declarations