PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Cancer; Amyloids; Aggregation

ABSTRACT:
Despite the current diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to bladder cancer being widely accepted, there have been few significant advancements in this field over the past decades. This underscores the necessity for a paradigm shift in the approach to bladder cancer. The role of amyloids in cancer remains unclear despite their identification in several other pathologies. In this study, we present evidence of amyloids in bladder cancer, both in vitro and in vivo. In a murine model of bladder cancer, a positive correlation was observed between amyloids and tumor stage, indicating an association between amyloids and bladder cancer progression. Subsequently, the amyloid proteome of the RT4 non-invasive and HT1197 invasive bladder cancer cell lines was identified and included oncogenes, tumor suppressors, and highly expressed cancer-related proteins. It is proposed that amyloids function as structures that sequester key proteins. Therefore, amyloids should be considered in the study and diagnosis of bladder cancer.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Amyloids as protein traps in bladder cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells were lysed in 500 µL of 0.25% Igepal CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich) in Tris-buffered saline (TBS). Homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 9000 xg for 15 minutes at 4 °C and the supernatant was collected. Protein quantification was performed using Bradford reagent (114391, Sigma-Aldrich). RNA was digested by treatment with RNase A (0.1 mg/mL final concentration) at 37 °C for 20 minutes. Protein homogenates (RNase treated) obtained from RT4 and HT1197 cells were digested with Proteinase K (100 µg/mL, supplemented with 1 mM CaCl2) for 20 min at 37 °C. For amyloid purification, protein homogenates were seeded on 30% sucrose cushion and centrifuged in an Optima XL-100 Beckman Coulter centrifuge using an SW60 rotor for 1 hour at 4 °C at 50 000 rpm. The pellets were resuspended in either H2O mQ (water, hereafter) or 100% formic acid, incubated for 1 hour at 37 °C, and lyophilized. Dried samples were resuspended in sample buffer suitable for tricine SDS-PAGE94. Three independent biological replicates were prepared. Samples were loaded onto 12% gels, allowing proteins to migrate 1 cm into the resolving gel. After Coomassie staining, gel slices were excised and sent to the proteomics facility CEQUIBIEM (QB-FCEN-UBA/IQUIBICEN-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina) for further processing and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Gel slices were destained with ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile (ACN), reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 45 min at 56 °C, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark, and trypsinized overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were then extracted by sonication in 50% ACN and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid solution, further concentrated by speed-vacuum drying, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and desalted on Zip-Tip C18. Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in a Q-Exactive instrument (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used for peptide separation and analysis. The chromatographic separation was performed in a nano-HPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (ThermoFisher Scientific), with a C18 reverse-phase column (EASY-Spray Accucore, P/N ES902) operated with a flow rate of 200 nL/min at 35 °C. The mobile phase was a two-solution system of 0.1% formic acid in water (solution A) and 0.1% formic acid in ACN (solution B). Peptides (4 µL) were injected in 100% solution A and eluted for 120 min with increasing concentrations of solution B: first 5 min in 5% B, then a 100 min gradient of 35%-95% B, followed by a 5 min gradient until 95% B, and finally 10 min of isocratic elution with 95% B. The eluting peptides entering the Q-Exactive instrument were first ionized in an EASY-SPRAY electrospray (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 2.50 kV. Only positive ions were selected in the Orbitrap analyzer, which was operated in the Full-MS and MS/MS modes. The scanned mass range was 400–2000 m/z, with a Full-MS resolution of 70,000 and a MS/MS resolution of 17,500, both at 400 m/z. The 12 most intense precursor ions in each cycle were sequentially isolated (data dependent mode), fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD), and measured in the Orbitrap analyzer. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with an unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS/MS.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw MS data were processed using the MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.12.0). Proteins and peptides were identified using a target-decoy approach with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using the human proteome database with all known substitutions from RT4 and HT1197 cell lines. The analysis was performed with almost all the default settings as follows: trypsin/P specificity for digestion with up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification; N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications; and inclusion of the contaminant database. ‘Match between runs’ was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 15 min. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the MaxFLQ algorithm with a minimum ratio count of one.  MaxQuant-processed data were further analyzed using the Perseus software (v. 1.6.15.0). Student’s t-test was performed for log2 transformed LFQ intensities to identify proteins with significant changes in abundance between the conditions compared. Those proteins with a fold-change >2 were defined as differentially present between formic acid and water samples.