PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Escherichia coli; Trace metals; Orbitrap exploris 240; Cofactors

ABSTRACT:
This dataset compares the relative protein abundances of E. coli DH5α grown in anaerobic conditions on minimal M9 medium in the presence or absence of Trace Metals. Proteins were quantified at 6, 12 and 24 h to investigate the switch between alternative metabolic pathways

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome of E. coli K12 DH5α grown in anaerobic conditions in the presence or absence of Trace Metals

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells grown anaerobically in TM-depleted and TM-rich conditions were collected at different time points (6, 12, and 24 h). Three biological replicates per time point were used, for a total of 18 different proteomes. The cells were resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer (50 mM Tris HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 6 M urea, 2% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT) with added protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and disrupted by three freeze-thaw cycles followed by sonication on ice. Crude extracts were  centrifuged to remove the insoluble debris. Protein concentrations were measured using a Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein samples were first mixed with SDS (5%) and DTT (20 mM), boiled, cooled to room  temperature, and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (40 mM) in the dark for 30 min. The samples were  acidified with phosphoric acid  to a final concentration of 1.2% and mixed with six volumes of S-trap binding buffer (100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol). After gentle mixing, the protein solutions were loaded onto S-Trap filters (Protifi), spun at 2000 rpm, and the flow-through were collected and reloaded on the filters. This step was repeated three times, and then each filter was washed 3 times with binding buffer. Finally, digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) containing trypsin (1/10 wt/wt) was added on the filters and the samples were incubated o/n at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted according to the manufacturer instructions and the peptides-containing fractions were pooled, lyophilized and resuspended in 0.2% Formic Acid. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Vanquish-Neo UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 240 (ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA). After loading, the samples were first concentrated and desalted on the pre-column (PepMap™ Neo Trap cartridge) and then fractionated on a C18 reverse phase capillary column (Double nanoViper™ PepMap™ Neo 2 µm C18, 75 µm X 150 mm) using a gradient from 5% to 95% of solvent B (0.2% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) in A (0.2% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in ultrapure water) over 77 min, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The MS/MS acquisition was performed in data dependent mode (DDA) mode by fragmenting the 10 most intense ions in the collision-induced dissociation (CID) modality with a full scan in the 300 to 1800 m/z range. Three technical replicates were acquired for each sample.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files were converted to mzML format with the msConvert tool of ProteoWizard and then subjected to an optimized label-free quantification pipeline. DDA data were analyzed with MSFragger (v4.1) in FragPipe (v22.0) with the default LFQ-MBR workflow, using as reference database for protein identification the genome of E. coli DH5α (NCBI bioproject PRJNA1129478). The quantification matrix was produced from the ion level identifications of FragPipe with directLFQ.