PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Neutrophil; Cell culture
diseases: Brain glioblastoma multiforme; Brain cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Metaproteomics
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Lc-msms

ABSTRACT:
Proteomic analysis on the underlying mechanisms of PoTX-induced nerve injury

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic analysis on the underlying mechanisms of PoTX-induced nerve injury

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to DMSO (Control group) or PoTX at concentrations of 1 μM (Low group), 10 μM (High group) for a duration of 24 hours. Each group consisted of three biologically independent samples. Following treatment, the samples were suspended in lysis buffer containing 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 8 M urea, and a protease inhibitor cocktail, and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. During this incubation period, the samples underwent ultrasonication for 2 minutes and vortexing for 10 seconds every five minutes. Upon centrifugation at 4°C, 16,000 g for 30 minutes, the protein concentration within the supernatant was measured by BCA protein assay kit. A total of 100 μg protein of protein were re-suspended in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) at a final concentration of 100 mM, followed by reduction with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37°C for 60 min. Thereafter, proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM) at a concentration of 40 mM in darkness at room temperature for an additional duration of 40 minutes. The mixture was then centrifuged at 10,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The resulting pellet was collected and subsequently re-suspended in 100 μL of TEAB of a final concentration of 100 mM. Trypsin was introduced to the solution at a 1:50 mass ratio of trypsin to protein and incubated overnight at 37°C. Then, the samples were concentrated using a vacuum concentrator and re-solubilized in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Following desalting with HLB, the digested protein products were dried and quantified utilizing the NANO DROP ONE (Thermo Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Digested protein products were separated by the Thermo Scientific Vanquish Neo UHPLC system which was directly interfaced with the Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer. The analytical column was uPAC High Throughptu column (75 μm×5.5 cm, Thermo, USA). The mobile phase consisted of a mixture of phase A and B, in which phase A was composed of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water, and phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. The Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer was operated in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with the scanning range of 100-1700 m/z.  The MS/MS spectra were searched against the selected database using the software Spectronaut software (Version 19). 6 peptides per protein and 3 daughter ions per peptide were selected for quantitative analysis. The parameters are as follows up : Protein FDR ≤ 0.01，Peptide FDR ≤ 0.01，Peptide Confidence ≥ 99%，XIC width ≤ 75ppm. Shared and modified peptides were excluded from the analysis, and peak areas were calculated and aggregated to produce the quantitative results. Only proteins associated with at least one unique peptide were considered for protein identification. The proteomic data was analyzed using the Majorbio Cloud platform (https://cloud.majorbio.com)38. The R package “t-test” was employed to calculate P-values and fold change (FC) for the proteins between two groups. FC ≥ 1.2 or ≤ 0.83 and p-value < 0.05 were regarded as the criteria for screening differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Functional annotation of interest DEPs was performed using the GO (http://geneontology.org/) and KEGG pathway (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/).

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Reagent and materials
Poneratoxin (product number: HY-P10234), ouabain (HY-B0542), veratridine (HY-N6691) were purchased from MedChemExpress (USA). Tetrodotoxin was purchased from Taizhou Kangte Bioengineering Co., Ltd. (China). SH-SY5Y cells were purchased from the Pricella (China). DMSO (D8371) and penicillin-streptomycin liquid (100×, P1400 ) were purchased from Solarbio (China). Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium/Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F12, 11320033), fetal bovine serum (FBS, 10099141 C), TRIzol™ reagent (15596018CN), SuperScript™ double-strand cDNA synthesis kit (11917020), RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (K1622) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (USA). Cell counting kit-8 (FB29236) was purchased from FreeMoreBio (China). Fluo-4 calcium assay kit (S1061S), cell cycle and apoptosis analysis kit (C1052), RIPA lysis buffer (P0013B), phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride (100 mM, ST506), protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (P1045), BCA protein assay kit (P0012), SDS-PAGE sample loading buffer (P0015), primary antibody dilution buffer (P0023A) were purchased from Beyotime (China). Monoclonal anti-p-tau S396 (ab109390, 1:10000), anti-GSK-3 α/β (ab185141, 1:5000) and anti-p53 (ab32389, 1:10000) antibodies were purchased from Abcam (UK). Monoclonal anti-tau (43894, 1:1000), anti-pan Akt (4691, 1:1000), anti-p-Akt Ser473 (4060, 1:2000), anti-p-GSK-3 α Ser21 (9316, 1:1000), anti-p-GSK-3 β Ser9 (5558, 1:1000), anti-ULK1 (8054, 1:1000), anti-p-ULK1 Ser757 (6888, 1:1000) and anti-CDK5 (14145, 1:1000) antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (USA). Monoclonal anti-β-actin (B1029, 1:5000) and anti-GAPDH (B3029, 1:5000) antibodies, peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse secondary antibody (BF03001, 1:6000), peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (BF03008, 1:6000) and enhanced/super ECL kit (BF06053) were purchased from Biodragon (Beijing, China). SDT lysis buffer (SL1029) was purchased from Coolaber (China). Multicolor prestained protein ladder (10–250 kDa, WJ103) was purchased from Shanghai Epizyme (China). TruSeq™ RNA Library Prep Kit v2 was purchased from Illumina (USA). NEBNext® Magnesium RNA Fragmentation Module was purchased from New England Biolabs (USA).
Cell culture
HEK293 cells stably expressing the human hNaV1.2 or hNaV1.3 were cultured on DMEM supplemented with 10% heatinactivated FBS, 50 µg/mL Hygromycin B in an incubator at 37 ℃ with 5% CO2. The SH-SY5Y cells were cultured at 37 ℃ in a complete DMEM/F12 culture medium consisting of 15% FBS, supplemented with 100 units/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin at 37 °C under a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. The ND7/23 cells were cultured at 37 ℃ in a complete RPMI-1640 culture medium consisting of 10% FBS, supplemented with 100 units/ml penicillin and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin at 37 °C under a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. The cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination using the Myco-Lumi™ Luminescent Mycoplasma Detection Kit (Beyotime, C0298S), following the protocol outlined in the instructions. Cells that had undergone approximately 3 to 10 passages were utilized in this study.
Whole-cell voltage-clamp electrophysiology
Whole-cell patch-clamp experiments were performed using a AXON 700B electrophysiology platform (AXON, USA). The extracellular solution (ECS) contained 4 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 10 mM HEPES, and 10 mM glucose (pH 7.4). The intracellular solution (ICS) contained 130 mM CsF, 10 mM NaCl, 10 mM EGTA and 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.2). Compounds were diluted in ECS with 0.1% DMSO. Voltage clamping and data acquisition were performed using pClamp software with a sampling rate of 10 kHz. Following the establishment of whole-cell recording, cells were held at − 100 mV, and a depolarizing pulse of 50 ms to -10 mV was applied to elicit sodium currents, followed by repolarization to -120 mV. This voltage protocol was repeated every 10 s (5 s for SH-SY5Y cells). Once the sodium current stabilized, drug application commenced. Compounds were administered in ascending order of concentration, starting from the lowest test concentration.
Assessment of cytotoxicity
Cell viability was measured though the CCK-8 assay. Briefly, cells were seeded in 96-well plates with a density of 2500 cells per well and cultured in 100 µL of complete medium for 24 h. Following this incubation period, the cells were treated with DMSO or specified compounds for indicated times. Subsequently, 10 µL of CCK-8 solution was added to each well, and the incubation continued for an additional 2 h.
Te absorbance at 450 nm was measured using TECAN Infinite E Plex multimode microplate reader at 25 °C. The cell viability percentage was calculated by.
 where the ODtest refers to the average absorbance value of wells treated with indicated compounds, ODblank denotes the average absorbance value of wells devoid of cells, and ODnegative represents the average absorbance value of wells treated with DMSO control based on three biological replicate.
Evaluation of intracellular calcium concentration
SH-SY5Y cells were seeded onto black 96-well cell culture plate at a density of 2000 cells per well. Following cell adhesion to the plate, the culture medium was removed, and 90 µL of Fluo-4 staining solution was added to each well. The plates were then incubated in the dark at 37 °C for 30 min. Prior to measuring intracellular calcium concentration, 10 µL of tenfold concentrated PoTX or an equivalent concentration of DMSO was introduced into each well. Fluorescence intensity was subsequently measured using a TECAN Infinite E Plex multimode microplate reader at 25 °C (Ex/Em = 490/525 nm).
Apoptosis analysis by flow cytometry
SH-SY5Y cells were seeded in 6-well plates and were treated with DMSO controls or indicated compounds for a duration of 24 h. Following the treatment, both non-adherent and adherent cells were harvested, and a cell cycle assay was conducted using the Cell Cycle and Apoptosis Analysis Kit in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. The distribution of the cell phases was analyzed utilizing a CytoFlex Flow Cytometer (Beckman Coulter).
RNA extraction and library preparation
SH-SY5Y cells were seeded in 6-well plates and cultured until they reached approximately 70% confluency. Subsequently, the cells were treated with either 1 µM PoTX (designated as the Low group), 10 µM PoTX (designated as the High group), or DMSO (designated as the Control group) for a duration of 24 h. Three replicate wells were established for each treatment group. After treatment, the cells were harvested, and total RNA was extracted using TRIzol™ reagent. The quality of the RNA was assessed with Agilent Bioanalyzer 5300 and quantified using NanoDrop ND-2000 spectrophotometer. In the TTX blocking experiment, cells were initially incubated with 100 µM TTX for 5 min, followed by the addition of either DMSO or a indicated concentrations of PoTX to sustain the treatment of 24 h.
For each sample, 1 µg of total RNA (OD260/280 = 1.8–2.2; OD260/230 ≥ 2.0; RQN ≥ 6.5; 28 S:18 S ratio ≥ 1.0) was utilized to prepare the RNA-seq transcriptome library employing the TruSeq™ RNA Library Prep Kit v2. mRNA was separated by polyA selection using Oligo (dT) beads and fragmented into small pieces using NEBNext® Magnesium RNA Fragmentation Module. Then, double-stranded cDNA was constructed using SuperScript™ double-strand cDNA synthesis kit. The resulting cDNA was subsequently subjected to end-repair, phosphorylation, and adapter addition in accordance with the library construction protocol. Libraries were size-selected for cDNA target fragments of 300 bp and amplified through 15 cycles of PCR. Following quantification with Qubit 4.0.
Transcriptome analysis
The sequencing library was prepared on the Illumina NovaSeq X Plus platform (PE150) utilizing the NovaSeq Reagent Kit. The raw paired-end reads of sequencing were subjected to trimming and quality control using fastp with default parameters. The clean reads for each sample were aligned to the reference genome (Homo_sapiens, GRCh38) in orientation mode utilizing HISAT2 software. The mapped reads from each sample were then assembled through a reference-based approach employing StringTie. The expression level of each transcript was determined using the transcripts per million reads (TPM) method, and the RSEM software was employed to quantify gene abundances. The differential expression genes (DEGs) were identified using the DESeq2 software, applying the screening criteria of an adjusted P-value (P-adjust) < 0.05 and a Fold Change (FC) ≥ 2. The fastcluster software package was utilized for the clustering analysis of target genes. The Goatools tool was employed for Gene Ontology (GO) annotation and enrichment analysis, while KOBAS was used for the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis.
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis
SH-SY5Y or ND7/23 cells were cultured in 6-well plates and treated with either 1 µM or 10 µM PoTX, or a DMSO control, for 24 h. Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol™ reagent, and complementary DNA was synthesized from the extracted total RNA samples utilizing the RevertAid First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit. Quantitative PCR analysis was conducted on the ABI StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR System. GAPDH served as the reference gene and relative fold changes of target genes in the expression levels were calculated using the 2−∆∆CT method. Three replicates were analyzed in each group.
Total protein extraction and digestion
SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to DMSO (Control group) or PoTX at concentrations of 1 µM (Low group), 10 µM (High group) for a duration of 24 h. Each group consisted of three biologically independent samples. Following treatment, the samples were suspended in lysis buffer containing 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 8 M urea, and a protease inhibitor cocktail, and incubated on ice for 30 min. During this incubation period, the samples underwent ultrasonication for 2 min and vortexing for 10 s every five minutes. Upon centrifugation at 4 °C, 16,000g for 30 min, the protein concentration within the supernatant was measured by BCA protein assay kit. A total of 100 µg protein of protein were re-suspended in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) at a final concentration of 100 mM, followed by reduction with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37 °C for 60 min. Thereafter, proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM) at a concentration of 40 mM in darkness at room temperature for an additional duration of 40 min. The mixture was then centrifuged at 10,000g for 20 min at 4 °C. The resulting pellet was collected and subsequently re-suspended in 100 µL of TEAB of a final concentration of 100 mM. Trypsin was introduced to the solution at a 1:50 mass ratio of trypsin to protein and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Then, the samples were concentrated using a vacuum concentrator and re-solubilized in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Following desalting with HLB, the digested protein products were dried and quantified utilizing the NANO DROP ONE (Thermo Scientific).
4D-DIA proteomic analysis
Digested protein products were separated by the Thermo Scientific Vanquish Neo UHPLC system which was directly interfaced with the Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer. The analytical column was uPAC High Throughptu column (75 μm×5.5 cm, Thermo, USA). The mobile phase consisted of a mixture of phase A and B, in which phase A was composed of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water, and phase B was composed of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water. The Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer was operated in the data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode with the scanning range of 100–1700 m/z.
The MS/MS spectra were searched against the selected database using the software Spectronaut software (Version 19). 6 peptides per protein and 3 daughter ions per peptide were selected for quantitative analysis. The parameters are as follows up : Protein FDR ≤ 0.01, Peptide FDR ≤ 0.01, Peptide Confidence ≥ 99%, XIC width ≤ 75ppm. Shared and modified peptides were excluded from the analysis, and peak areas were calculated and aggregated to produce the quantitative results. Only proteins associated with at least one unique peptide were considered for protein identification. The proteomic data was analyzed using the Majorbio Cloud platform (https://cloud.majorbio.com). The R package “t-test” was employed to calculate P-values and fold change (FC) for the proteins between two groups. FC ≥ 1.2 or ≤ 0.83 and p-value < 0.05 were regarded as the criteria for screening differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). Functional annotation of interest DEPs was performed using the GO (http://geneontology.org/) and KEGG pathway (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/).
Immunoblotting
SH-SY5Y or ND7/23 cells were harvested and inoculated into 6-well plates prior to treatment with PoTX for a duration of 24 h. Subsequently, the cells were lysed using RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride, along with a protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. The protein concentrations were quantified utilizing a BCA protein assay kit. Loading buffer was added to the lysates, which were then boiled at 95 °C before being resolved on SDS-PAGE and subsequently transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes. The blots were blocked for 2 h in blocking buffer (5% BSA in TBST) and incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies. Following three washes with TBST buffer, the blots were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with corresponding secondary antibodies in TBST containing 5% BSA. Chemiluminescence detection was performed using the Cytiva ImageQuant 800 system.

RESULTS:
Results
In vitro assessment of excitotoxicity of PoTX
To begin with, a systematic evaluation was conducted on the excitotoxicity of PoTX based on SH-SY5Y cells, as they are considered a widely utilized human cell mode for neuroscience investigation, including neurotoxicity of agents, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, inflammation, and ischemia. Electrophysiological studies revealed that, in addition to the previously validated NaV1.6 and NaV1.7 subtypes, PoTX exhibited substantial agonistic activity toward two additional endogenously expressed subtypes, NaV1.2 and NaV1.3, in SH-SY5Y cells, with EC50 values of 0.41 ± 0.033 µM and 1.04 ± 0.015 µM, respectively (Fig. 1A). Meanwhile, treatment with PoTX significantly modified the voltage-dependent sodium channel current patterns in SH-SY5Y cells (Fig. 1B). It slowed the inactivation kinetics of sodium channels (Fig. 1C), reduced the peak current amplitude (Fig. 1D), and induced a rapid and sustained increase in intracellular Ca2+ levels (Fig. 1E). Notably, even following the removal of PoTX, a 24-h exposure of SH-SY5Y cells to PoTX at concentrations of 1 µM and 10 µM led to persistent changes in membrane excitability, as demonstrated by a significant reduction in voltage-activated peak current (Fig. 1F). Collectively, these results suggested that PoTX treatment exerted a profound influence on the excitability of SH-SY5Y cells.
Furthermore, we evaluated the excitotoxicity of PoTX by by CCK-8 assay. The results indicated that PoTX treatment alone did not significantly reduce cell viability, even at a concentration of 40 µM for 24 h (Fig. 1G). Similar results were observed in ND7/23 cells (Fig. 1H), a fusion cell-line of mouse N18Tg2 neuroblastoma and embryonic rat DRG that abundantly expressed NaV1.6 and NaV1.7 channels. This indicated that although PoTX exhibited more pronounced agonistic activity on NaV1.6 channels, its solitary action did not precipitate a substantial decline in the viability of cells with high NaV1.6 expression. This resilience may be attributed to the counteracting effect of Na+/K+-ATPase on the rising intracellular Na+ level. Accordingly, we developed a SH-SY5Y cell-based model through ouabain (OB) intervention to enhance the sensitivity of the model to Na+ influx toxicity. OB is a specific inhibitor of Na+/K+-ATPase that is responsible for blocking the efflux of Na+/K+-ATPase to overloaded Na+ intracellularlly. When cells exposed to OB and NaV channel activator, excessive opening of NaV channels would lead to cell swelling and death. Veratridine (VTD), a well-established NaV channel agonist serves as a positive control for model construction and method validation.
Firstly, we conducted an investigation into the influence of treating SH-SY5Y cells with diverse concentrations of OB independently for time periods of 3, 6, 9, 12–24 h (Fig. S1A–E) on cell viability. The experimental outcomes revealed that upon extending the treatment period to 24 h, the impact of OB on cell viability reached a relatively stable state and manifested an obvious dose-dependent pattern (Fig. S1E). Consequently, a treatment duration of 24 h was chosen for further exploration of the optimal concentration of OB intervention. Concurrently, in order to attenuate the toxic effects of OB, four concentrations of OB treatment, under which cell viability was maintained above 50% (0.2, 0.1, 0.05, and 0.025 µM, as presented in Fig. S1E), were selected for the subsequent combined administration analysis in conjunction with VTD. Eventually, considering that VTD treatment induced a more significant reduction in cell viability under such circumstances, the combination of 0.1 µM OB and NaV channel activator exposure for 24 h (Fig. 1I) was determined as the treatment condition for the evaluation model of excitatory cytotoxicity. According to the aforementioned model, VTD demonstrated a moderate degree of excitatory cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells, with an IC50 value around 66 µM (Fig. 1J). This is in accordance with its reported NaV channel agonist activity. Notably, PoTx exhibited remarkable excitatory toxicity, with an IC50 value reaching as low as 0.042 µM (Fig. 1K), which is three orders of magnitude greater than that of VTD.
Meanwhile, cytological experiments demonstrated that subsequent to the combined treatment of PoTX and OB, a notable swelling and rounding of the morphological features of SH-SY5Y cells were observed (Fig. 2A). And there was a substantial increase in the proportion of apoptotic cells, particularly those in the early apoptotic stage (Fig. 2B,C). The results as presented above suggested that PoTX can efficiently activate the NaV channels and trigger the accumulation of intracellular Ca2+ in SH-SY5Y cells, thereby leading to significant excitotoxicity when the cellular compensatory mechanisms are compromised.
Transcriptomic analysis on the underlying mechanisms of PoTX-induced nerve injury
Global analysis
To further investigate the potential pharmacological impacts of PoTX on the nervous system, the transcriptomic alterations within SH-SY5Y cells were meticulously analyzed after 24 h of treatment with either a high concentration (10 µM, High group) or a lower concentration (1 µM, Low group) of PoTX. All sequencing data underwent strict quality control and standardization before analysis. As shown in Table 1, an average of 45 million raw reads were obtained from control and two test groups. After the quality control and contamination removal, over 98% of the high-quality clean reads were available for assembly and further analysis. The clean reads were mapped to the human reference genome, and the mapping ratios of each group were higher than 95%, indicating the adequate data quality for each groups that could be used for subsequent analyses.
Principal component analysis (PCA) showed that the samples in each group had sound clustering, and the distance between the samples in the control group and the two test groups was significantly higher than that between the two test groups with different concentrations (Fig. 3A). The adjusted P-value (P-adjust) < 0.05 and Fold Change (FC) ≥ 2 were adapted as the screening criterion. As indicated by the results of the volcano plot depicted in Fig. 3B, a total of 335 genes were identified as differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the Low group when compared with the Control group. Among these DEGs, there are 119 up-regulated genes and 216 down-regulated genes. In the High group, totally 319 DEGs were detected, of which 110 DEGs were up-regulated and 209 DEGs were down-regulated compared with the Control group (Fig. 3C). No DEGs can be found between the Low group and High group (Fig. S2). Based on gene expression matrix, the Venn diagram was employed to analyze the co-located and specifically located DEGs among the Low and High groups. As shown in Fig. 3D, approximately 70% of the DEGs (230) were shared between the two test groups, and exhibited the same trend of change (Fig. 3E). For the DEGs specifically expressed in a single test group, despite no significant, generally the same trend of change can also be observed in another group (Fig. S3A,B). Collectively, the aforementioned results demonstrated the sufficient reliability and representativeness of transcriptome differential analysis, which can be utilized for further functional and pharmacological investigations.
Functional annotation and enrichment analysis
The results of GO (Gene Ontology) enrichment analysis on the acquired DEGs demonstrated that, irrespective of whether it was treated with a low ((Fig. 4A) or high (Fig. S4A) concentration, PoTX conspicuously influenced the gene expressions related to the cell cycle, DNA replication, and damage repair within SH-SY5Y cells. Similarly, the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) enrichment analysis identified multiple pathways associated with cell proliferation suppression, such as cell cycle, DNA replication, homologous recombination, cellular senescence and p53 patway (Fig. 4B, Fig. S4B). Further KEGG functional annotation analysis of the co-localized DEGs in the Low and High groups revealed that PoTX significantly inhibited the cell cycle, DNA replication, and the p53 signaling pathway (Fig. 4C,E) and induced the activation of the cell senescence pathway (Fig. 4F). In addition, it seemed that the activity of the PI3K-Akt pathway was significantly suppressed in both treatment groups, as evidenced by the down-regulation of MYB, BRCA1, CCNE, alongside an up-regulation of CDKN1A (Fig. 4G). To validate the findings from RNA-seq analysis, 5 DEGs within the aforementioned pathways were selected for qRT-PCR analysis to further elucidate their expression profiles. The results of 5 genes in expression measured by qRT-PCR showed similar alterations to those identified by RNA-Seq analysis, including an up-regulated gene (CDKN1A) and 4 down-regulated genes (MCM4, E2F1, FEN1 and RRM2, Fig. 4H), confirming the reliability of the RNA-seq analysis results. Moreover, the pronounced up-regulation of Ca2+-dependent phospholipase A2 (PLA2G4C, Fig. 4H), a rate-limiting enzyme involved in the synthesis of bioactive lipid mediator arachidonic acidand cytochrome c oxidase subunit 6B2 (COX6B2, Fig. 4H), a critical component of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IVgenes expression suggested that intracellular calcium overload induced by PoTX have contributed to mitochondrial dysfunction and lipid metabolism dysregulation. These factors represented significant risk determinants for long-term depression, cognitive disorder and neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Then, we conducted a partial validation of the transcriptional regulatory effects of PoTX using the ND7/23 cell line. As illustrated in Fig. 5A and C, PoTX induced comparable alterations in gene expression within ND7/23 cells, characterized by the up-regulation of CDKN1A and down-regulation of MCM4 and E2F1 expression levels. Additionally, we utilized tetrodotoxin (TTX), a potent inhibitor of NaV1.2, 1.3, 1.6, and 1.7 channels, to block the activation of NaV channels. Electrophysiological analysis revealed that treatment with 100 µM TTX completely abolished PoTX-induced membrane potential activation in SH-SY5Y cells (Fig. 5D). Under this condition, the transcriptomic alterations within SH-SY5Y cells induced by PoTX were re-evaluated. The results revealed that, following the blockade of NaV channels by TTX, compared to the control group without any pharmacological intervention, treatment with 1 µM PoTX did not induce significant transcriptomic changes in SH-SY5Y cells. Even at a high concentration of 10 µM, only 39 DEGs were identified, comprising 10 up-regulated and 29 down-regulated genes (Fig. 5E), using P-adjust < 0.05 and |log2FC| ≥ 1 as the screening criteria. The GO functional annotation analysis revealed that 9 of the DEGs were associated with membrane proteins or membrane protein complexes (Fig. 5F). The aforementioned results demonstrated that NaV channel activation mediates the transcriptomic regulation induced by PoTX, as its inhibitor effectively counteracted these changes. In addition to directly evoking nociceptive responses and disrupting neuroelectrophysiological functions, PoTX, acting as a potent NaV agonist, can also accelerate nerve cell senescence, induce cognitive impairment and contribute to the onset and progression of neurodegenerative diseases.
Proteomic analysis on the underlying mechanisms of PoTX-induced nerve injury
Furthermore, with the aim of delving deeper into the influence of PoTX on nerve cells and validating as well as complementing the results obtained from the transcriptome analysis, the 4D-DIA quantitative proteomics analysis were conducted to assess the protein expression changes in SH-SY5Y cells following PoTX treatment. A total of 8,735 proteins were successfully identified and quantified. The Venn analysis indicated that the mRNAs expression of all these proteins were detected in the RNA-seq analysis (Fig. 6A). The thresholds for screening differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were established as a fold change (FC) ≥ 1.2 for up-regulated DEPs and ≤ 0.83 for down-regulated DEPs, with a p-value of < 0.05. In comparison to the Control group, a total of 556 proteins were identified as DEPs in the Low group treated with 1 µM PoTX, of which 218 DEPs were up-regulated and 338 DEPs were down-regulated (Fig. 6B). In the High group treated with 10 µM PoTX, the number of DEPs reached 623, comprising 270 up-regulated DEPs and 353 down-regulated DEPs (Fig. 6B). The KEGG annotation of identified DEPs revealed that, in addition to proteins associated with cell growth, death and motility, PoTX treatment also led to changes in a variety of proteins related to neurodegenerative diseases (Fig. 6C,D), including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson disease (PD), spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) and Huntington disease (HD). In particular, a total of 26 neurodegenerative disease-related DEPs were identified in the High group (Fig. 6E). And in the Low group, there were 10 DEPs annotated as being associated with neurodegenerative diseases (Fig. S5), among which 8 DEPs were concurrently present in the High group (Fig. 6E).
It is notable that a variety of channel proteins implicated in neuronal excitability were down-regulated in SH-SY5Y cells following a 24-h treatment with PoTX at a concentration of 10 µM (Fig. 6E), including glutamate receptor 4 (GRIA4), voltage-dependent N-type calcium channel subunit alpha (CACNA1B) and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 3 (ITPR3). Among them, several proteins, such as GRIA4, a subunit of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptor, have been shown to play a critical role in the neuroplasticity. And the decline of GRIA4 has been regarded as an important biomarker for the diagnosis of psychiatric disorders, like major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. For CACNA1B, the pore-forming subunit of the pre-synaptic neuronal voltage-gated calcium channel Cav2.2/N-type, its decrease of expression or the loss of function has also been documented to be correlated with HD, schizophrenia, behavioural and cognitive deficits. Additionally, the elevated levels of apolipoprotein E (APOE) and low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) observed in High group were regarded as the high risk factors for multiple late-onset neurodegenerative diseases like PD, AD and HD.
What’s more, the outcomes of proteomic analysis disclosed that the level of soluble microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) declined in both the Low and High groups (Fig. 6E, Fig. S5). Immunoblotting analysis indicated that apart from the reduction of soluble tau protein, the levels of phosphorylated tau protein at the Ser396 site and its polymers exhibited a significant increase (Fig. 7A), which is regarded as the principal marker and critical pathogenic factor for microtubule instability, neurofibrillary tangles, and tau protein-related neurodegenerative disorders such as AD. Hence, we further probed into the biological mechanism of the elevated phosphorylation level of tau protein at the Ser396 site.
Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) and cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (CDK5) are two pivotal proteins that phosphorylate tau protein at Ser396. The joint analysis of transcriptome and proteome demonstrated that in the category of Environmental Information Processing (EIP) within the KEGG annotation, irrespective of the Low or High groups (Fig. 7B,C), the PI3K-Akt pathway is the signaling pathway with the largest number of DEPs annotated. As a critical downstream element of the PI3K-Akt pathway, the activity of GSK-3 can be inhibited by Akt-mediated phosphorylation at Ser21 of GSK-3α and Ser9 of GSK-3. Consequently, the phosphorylation levels of Akt and GSK-3 were analyzed via immunoblotting. As depicted in Fig. 7D,E, the treatment with PoTX did not give rise to conspicuous alterations in the total protein levels of Akt and GSK-3α/β. However, PoTX significantly inhibited the phosphorylation of Akt at Ser473 within SH-SY5Y cells (Fig. 7D). This, in turn, led to a reduction in Akt kinase activity and consequently induced the suppression of the phosphorylation of downstream GSK-3α at Ser21 and GSK-3β at Ser9 (Fig. 7E), finally activating the kinase activity of GSK-3α/β. Meanwhile, consistent with the results of the aforementioned transcriptome analysis (Fig. 4G), the proteome analysis also revealed that the activity of the PI3K-Akt pathway underwent a significant downregulation subsequent to the PoTX treatment. This was embodied by the elevation of senescence-promoting related proteins, including cellular tumor antigen p53 (p53), cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1 A (p21), and cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1B (p27), along with the decline in the protein level of cyclin dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) (Fig. 7F,G). Additionally, although the increase was not statistically significant in the proteome analysis (Fig. 7G), immunoblotting analysis indicated that PoTX could likewise induce the accumulation of CDK5 within SH-SY5Y cells (Fig. 7H), which would further enhance the phosphorylation level of tau protein at the Ser396.
Besides the elevated phosphorylation level of Tau protein, PoTX also notably influenced the expression of UNC-51-like kinase 1 (ULK1), which functions as a crucial convergence point for multiple signals that regulate autophagy. Both proteomic and immunoblotting analyses results demonstrated that ULK1 experienced a significant reduction following PoTX treatment (Fig. 7G,I). Simultaneously, the phosphorylation level of Ser757 associated with the inhibition of its activity was remarkably increased (Fig. 7I). This implied that PoTX may accelerate the aging process of nerve cells and increase the risks of neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and PD through inhibiting autophagy.
The identical effects were also observed in ND7/23 cell line. As illustrated in Fig. 8A, following 24 h of PoTX treatment, the phosphorylation levels at Ser21 of GSK-3α and Ser9 of GSK-3β in ND7/23 cells were significantly reduced, indicative of enhanced kinase activity. Correspondingly, the phosphorylation level of tau protein, a crucial downstream substrate, exhibited a marked increase (Fig. 8B), which suggests an elevated risk of neurofibrillary tangle formation. In addition, in ND7/23 cells, PoTX treatment resulted in a marked decrease in the expression level of ULK1 kinase and a significant increase in the level of inhibitory phosphorylation (Fig. 8C). Despite the differences in the expression profiles of NaV channel protein subtypes, the marker alterations observed in both ND7/23 and SH-SY5Y cells exhibited remarkable consistency. This consistency suggested that the PoTX-induced acceleration of neuronal aging may be linked to its long-term effects on membrane excitability. However, it remained unclear whether this effect is mediated by specific NaV channel subtypes or directly results from changes in membrane potential.
In conclusion, proteomic analysis combined with immunoblotting experiments has shown that PoTX can significantly reduce neuronal plasticity and simultaneously induce the accumulation of neurotoxic substances and accelerate cellular senescence through the following mechanisms: (1) inducing tau protein phosphorylation and polymerization via PI3K-Akt pathway-mediated GSK-3 activation and up-regulation of CDK5 protein; (2) down-regulating the expression and activity of ULK1 protein to affect cellular autophagy; (3) down-regulating the expression of channel proteins related to neuronal excitability. Considering the substantial activation of NaV channel and the subsequent multi-pathway effects, along with its minimal direct cytotoxicity, PoTX represented a highly promising tool for investigating the interplay between chronic pain, neuronal hypersensitivity with depression and various neurodegenerative diseases.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The family of voltage-gated sodium channels (VGSCs), as the primary mediators in action potential generation, is considered to play a crucial role in the establishment and stabilization of cellular electrophysiological functions. They are constituted by the pore-forming α-subunit (of ~ 260 kDa), which is essential and sufficient for channel functions, along with accessory β-subunits of smaller size (30–40 kDa) that modulate gating, kinetics, and channel surface density. The α-subunits of VGSCs consist of nine isoforms (NaV1.1-NaV1.9), which are encoded in humans by a family of nine highly conserved genes (SCNA1-5, SCNA7-10). Among them, NaV1.1, NaV1.2, NaV1.3, and NaV1.6, encoded respectively by SCN1A, SCN2A, SCN3A, and SCN8A, represent the principal NaV channels expressed in the central nervous system and play essential roles in the initiation and propagation of action potentials as well as neural network activity.
A diverse range of neurological disorders, including epilepsy, migraine, neurodegenerative diseases and neuropathic pain, is characterized by abnormal neuronal excitability. Although the specific pathological mechanisms necessitate further in-depth investigation, an increasing body of evidence suggests that VGSCs, as key determinants of intrinsic neuronal excitability, exhibit abnormal expression and function that are closely associated with the progression of these conditions. For instance, the recent study utilizing primary hippocampal neurons has identified the overexpression of NaV1.6 induced by Aβ1-42 oligomers as a key factor contributing to neuronal hyperexcitability in Alzheimer’s diseasea mouse model. Therefore, investigating the relationship between functional abnormalities of VGSCs and neurological disorders is of great significance for understanding the underlying pathological mechanisms, identifying suitable therapeutic targets, and facilitating drug development efforts.
Specific modulators are considered powerful tools for elucidating the pharmacological functions and structure of target proteins. The stings of bullet ant, Paraponera clavata (subfamily Paraponerinae) found in the tropical regions of Central and South America, can induce uncontrollable tremors and intimidate severe localized pain that may persist for several hours. With respect to study of the toxic components, Piek and his colleagues isolated and identified a 25-residue disulphide-free peptide, poneratoxin (PoTX) from the venom of bullet ants, which has been shown to stimulate skeletal muscle fibers in frogs and rats through a previously undescribed mechanism. More recently, Robinson et al. revealed that PoTX can directly modulate the activity of VGSCs, reduce the voltage threshold for activation of subtypes NaV1.6 and 1.7 and inhibit their inactivation, with the EC50 values of 0.097 ± 0.010 and 2.3 ± 0.4 µM, respectively, in whole-cell voltage-clamp electrophysiology assay. However, further comprehensive investigation is needed to clarify the binding site of PoTX on NaV channels, understand the mechanisms underlying continuous channel activation, and explore its pharmacological effects on neuronal cells.
In this study, we verified that apart from its agonistic activity on NaV1.6 and 1.7, PoTX served as a potent agonist for NaV1.2 and 1.3 subtypes. Building upon this finding, we systematically evaluated the membrane potential activation and neurotoxic effects of PoTX in SH-SY5Y cells. The results indicated that PoTX could directly modulate the membrane excitability, remarkably enhance sodium influx, thereby resulting in the accumulation of intracellular Ca2+. However, treatment with PoTX alone did not significantly impact cell viability. Furthermore, a comprehensive analysis combining transcriptomics and proteomics revealed that PoTX significantly induced the activation of cell cycle arrest and senescence pathways in SH-SY5Y cells. Concurrently, it regulated the expression, abundance, or modification of a series of proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases. Notably, these effects could be abrogated by the NaV channel blocker tetrodotoxin (TTX). Identical pharmacological effects were also witnessed in ND7/23 cells. Collectively, these findings confirmed that the pharmacological effects elicited by PoTX are predominantly mediated by the activation of NaV channels. As a potent and persistent agonist of NaV channels that does not substantially affect cell viability, PoTX holed great promise as a powerful tool molecule. It can be employed to delve deeper into the compensatory mechanisms of nerve cells in response to continuous NaV channels activation and calcium toxicity, as well as to explore the intricate relationship between abnormal sodium channel function and various neurological disorders.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD060121. Reviewers can access the dataset by logging in to the PRIDE website with the username “reviewer_pxd060121@ebi.ac.uk” and password “S3aAkWqopH88”. Sequence data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information with the primary accession code PRJNA1215545. The data is accessible to reviewers upon request from the corresponding author. Moreover, it will be made publicly available online once the manuscript is published. Supporting Figs. S1–S5) and full western blots (S6–S14) were available in the Supporting Information.
Declarations