PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deaminated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Topoisomerase 2; Srbd1; Condensin; Evosep; Catenanes; Anaphase; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Untangling of DNA is crucial for the individualization of sister chromatids to prevent errors in chromosome segregation in mitosis. Topoisomerase IIα (TOP2A) plays a pivotal role in this process, serving as the primary enzyme responsible for decatenating sister chromatids. The loop-extrusion activity of condensins at the onset of mitosis produces tension on catenanes, directing TOP2A activity towards decatenation. Consequently, condensins and topoisomerase collaborate in the individualization of sister chromatids. Through a haplo-genetic screen in human cells, we identified a highly conserved protein, S1 RNA-binding domain-containing protein (SRBD1), to be absolutely essential for sister chromatid segregation in WT cells but not in Condensin II-deficient cells. The anaphase defects observed upon loss of SRBD1 strikingly resemble the mitotic defects observed when decatenation is perturbed by inhibition or depletion of TOP2A. Moreover, SRBD1 localizes at the central axis of mitotic chromatids, akin to condensins and TOP2A. We show that the activity of SRBD1 is most critical during prophase, corresponding to the peak of Condensin II and TOP2A activity. We found that SRBD1 exhibits direct DNA binding activity with a preference for single-stranded DNA, implying its action at specific genomic structures. Indeed, we found that SRBD1 is strongly enriched at genomic loci associated to transcription and DNA repair. Altogether, we propose that SRBD1 acts at such locations to promote directionality of TOP2A and to prevent the formation of difficult-to-resolve DNA structures, thereby averting severe chromosome missegregations, a function that seems anciently conserved.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
SRBD1, a highly conserved factor required for chromosome individualiza-tion in prophase

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
RIME was performed as described in (Mohammed et al., 2016). In brief, a total of 45*10^6 HAP1 OsTIR1 parental or HAP1 SRBD1-HA-mAID cells were plated in 6 15 cm dishes. After 48 hours, cells were fixed and crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde (15714, Electron Microscopy Sciences) for exactly 10 min after which the reaction was quenched with glycine (0.185 M final concentration). For every sample 4 replicates were performed. Cells were washed three times with ice cold PBS. Cells were collected by scraping in 1xPBS supplemented with 1× complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (PI tablets, 5056489001, Roche) on ice. Cells were collected by centrifugation and snap frozen. Subsequently, cells were lysed according to the protocol in (Mohammed et al., 2016) after which the lysates were sonicated for 6 cycles (30 seconds on/30 seconds off) using the Bioruptor Pico (B01060001, Diagenode). 1% Triton X was added and lysates were centrifuged at maximum speed in a cooled tabletop centifuge. Anti-HA- magnetic beads (88836, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were blocked in 0.5% BSA/PBS and after blocking beads were added to each sample and incubated overnight at 4 degrees on a rotator. Beads were washed 10x with RIPA buffer (50 mM Hepes, 500 mM LiCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP40,  0.7% Na-DOC) and beads were eluted with freshly prepared ice cold 100 mM AMBIC (ammonium hydrogen carbonate).  For mass spectrometry, peptide mixtures were prepared and measured as previously described in (Stelloo et al, 2008), with the following exceptions. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and loaded on the Evotip Pure™ (Evosep). Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer equipped with an Evosep One LC system. Peptides were separated using the pre-programmed gradient (Extended method, 88 min gradient) on an EV1137 (Evosep) column with an EV1086 (Evosep) emitter.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 2.1.4.0) using standard settings for label-free quantitation (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the Swissprot Human database (20,398 entries, release 2022_08;) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation and deamidation were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (version 2.0.7.0), after which proteins were filtered for at least 3 out of 4 valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on a normal distribution (width: 0.3 and downshift: 1.8). Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test (threshold: FDR: 5% and S0: 1).