PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iTRAQ8plex-116 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; phosphorylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Serum proteomics; Lc-ms; Vitamin d; Itraq; Insulin

ABSTRACT:
The aim of this cross-sectional study was to identify novel serological markers linking vitamin D status to insulin physiology

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Sexual dimorphic correlation of IGFBP-2 and -3 with vitamin D status

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
3D-LC MS serum proteomics using size exclusion chromatography

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data files were submitted to PD 1.4 for target vdecoy search using Sequest

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Discovery phase: serum proteomics in cross-sectional samples
The study received ethics approval by the King Saud University Ethics Committee. Reporting of the cross-sectional study conforms to the STROBE statement and the broader EQUATOR guidelines. For the cross-sectional serum proteomics study, participants were randomly selected from an existing cohort, the Riyadh cohort 2. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Adults with overweight/obesity (BMI between 25 and 35 kg/m2) and with normal fasting plasma glucose levels (3.9 to 5.5 mmol/L) and serum 25(OH)D < 50nmol/L or >50 nmol/L were included in the study. Subjects pregnant or breastfeeding, with morbid obesity (BMI > 35 kg/m2), diagnosed with type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus, or with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease were excluded from the study. An abdominal ultrasound was performed to exclude non-alcoholic fatty liver disease among the study participants. Anthropometry and morning blood withdrawal was performed after overnight fasting. Blood collection for all participants took place during the winter months (December to February). The discovery cohort comprised 16 participants (four males with serum 25(OH)D < 50nmol/L; four males with serum 25(OH)D > 80 nmol/L; four females with serum 25(OH)D < 50nmol/L; four females with serum 25(OH)D > 80 nmol/L). Participants were asked about their sun exposure habits using a questionnaire as reported before. Total energy and micronutrient (vitamin D, calcium and EPA/DHA) intake was estimated using food frequency questionnaires as reported before. Physical activity levels of the participants were assessed using the WHO Global Physical Activity Questionnaire, as reported previously.
Serum procurement and proteomic analysis
The procurement and handling of sera was in accordance with the recommendations of the Standard Operating Procedure Integration Working Group (SOPIWG) as adopted by the author’s method. Two eight-plex serum proteomics experiments were performed for male and female subjects separately, as we have shown previously that vitamin D has sex-specific non-skeletal cardiovascular effects. The serum specimens were freshly thawed and vortexed for 2 min. For each participant, 100 µL of unprocessed serum were immediately mixed with 400 µL 6 M Guanidine Hydrochloride and subjected to global quantitative serum proteomic analysis using our previously published method. In summary, high-performance Size Exclusion Chromatography using three serially connected Waters KW-804 columns at 0.75 ml/min flow rate and 30 °C was used to separate the proteins based on their molecular weight differences. The separated low-molecular weight protein segments (molecular weight cutoff 3 kDa) were dialysis purified and lyophilised to dryness at 4 °C. One-hundred μg of protein from each sample was subjected to trypsin proteolysis and the peptides were chemically labelled using the eight-plex isobaric Tag for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) reagents, pooled, and offline fractionated with C4 reverse phase chromatography at pH 8.0 (2.1 mm X 150 mm, 3 μm particle, 120 Å pore, Kromasil, Germany). As a multiplex proteomics workflow, samples were analysed under the same exact experimental conditions. Each fraction was analysed using ultra-high performance C18 nano-liquid chromatography at pH 3.5 (75μm ID x 50 cm, 2 μm particle, 100 Å pore, Hypersil, USA) hyphenated with high-resolution tandem mass spectrometry using the FT-Orbitrap Elite platform.
Unprocessed raw files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for target decoy search against the UniProtKB Homo Sapiens database (release date 10-Jan-2015) using SequestHT. Only reporter ion ratios from unique peptides were considered for the quantitation of the respective protein. Median normalisation and log2 transformation was performed for the reporter ion quantification ratios. A protein was considered differentially expressed between the high vs. low vitamin D status when its one-sample, two-tailed, T-test p-value was ≤0.05 and the mean iTRAQ log2ratio of high vs. low vitamin D status was higher than ±0.3. All mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD009606.
Principal component analysis and bioinformatics with biostatistics informed selection of candidate verification markers
Principal component analysis using the reporter ion ratios of the all analysed proteins in the male and female cohorts, respectively was performed using ClustVis (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/clustvis/). DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) software tools were used to identify canonical pathways and protein networks significantly over-represented in the differentially expressed proteins between high and low vitamin D status groups of the male and female cohorts. Significance was set at p-value ≤0.05. Surrogate markers to the identified enriched pathways were further evaluated as candidate verification markers with bibliographic research. As an additional qualifier, retrospective statistical power analysis using the function pwr.2p.test() available within R (https://www.R-project.org/) was applied to the suitable candidate marker as reported. The minimum statistical power threshold was set at 0.8, which factored in the p-value, variation, differential expression ratio, and the number of replicate biological observations for the chosen protein analysed from the discovery experiment.
Verification phase: ELISA measurements in an independent cross-sectional cohort
ELISA measurements of selected proteins identified at the discovery phase were validated in a larger cross-sectional cohort of adults with obesity randomly selected from the Riyadh cohort 2, using the same inclusion and exclusion criteria as described above for the discovery phase. In total, 179 adults were included, of which 84 males [n = 40 with 25(OH) < 50 nmol/L; n = 44 with 25(OH) > 50 nmol/L] and 95 females [n = 47 with 25(OH) < 50 nmol/L; n = 48 with 25(OH) > 50 nmol/L]. The size of the verification cohort was based on the logistic regression models requiring a minimum of 10 events per predictor variable, which in our study included sex and 25(OH)D levels. All other clinical parameters listed in Table 2 were not considered, as they remained constant between the cohorts examined.
Insulin-like growth factor binding protein IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-3 ELISA measurements
IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-3 were targeted for measurement using the commercially available Luminex ELISA kit (Catalog number: HIGFBMAG-53K; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The captured bead complexes were measured with the FLEXMAP 3D system (Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX). The raw data (mean fluorescence intensity) were collected and further processed for calculating protein concentration. The intra-assay and inter-assay coefficient of variation (CV) was <10 and <15%, respectively.
Biochemical analyses
Fasting glucose levels were measured using an enzymatic assay (hexokinase coupled with glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase) with a chemical analyser (Konelab, Espoo, Finland). The inter-assay CV was 2.2%. Serum 25(OH)D levels were measured by a specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (IDS, Tyne and Wear, UK). The inter- and intra-assay variability of this assay was 5.1 and 4.6%, respectively.
Clinical data analysis
Clinical data were analysed using SPSS (Version 25). An unpaired, two-tailed Student T-test was applied to compare the clinical and lifestyle characteristics of the low vs. high vitamin D status groups of males and females in the discovery and validation cohorts. A Mann–Whitney U Test was used to compare IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-3 levels in low vs. high vitamin D status groups of males and females in the validation cohort. Parameters are presented as mean ± standard deviation or median (25th to 75th percentile). A p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant.

RESULTS:
Results
The anthropometric, lifestyle and clinical characteristics of the participants in the discovery phase are presented in Table 1. The low and high vitamin D status groups of the male and female participants were similar with regards to age, BMI, fasting glucose, sun exposure, physical activity and total energy, DHA/EPA and calcium intake. The two groups had significantly different serum 25(OH)D levels (p < 0.0001) as per the inclusion criteria and vitamin D intake (p < 0.0001).
In the male and female cohorts of the cross-sectional study, 1297 and 1114 protein groups were profiled, respectively (peptide level FDR p < 0.05). Principal component analysis using the iTRAQ log2ratio of all analysed proteins in high vs. low vitamin D status groups for male and female subjects of the cross-sectional study is presented in Fig. 2. Of the quantitatively analysed serum proteins, 423 and 549 proteins were differentially expressed in the high vs. low vitamin D status conditions of the male and female cohorts, respectively (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). IPA analysis showed that protein networks related to small molecule biochemistry were enriched in both male and female cohorts (score = 17 and 19 for males and females, respectively) (Fig. 3a, b). KEGG canonical pathway analysis showed that glycolysis|gluconeogenesis was significantly enriched in the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) of the male and female cohorts (Fisher exact p = 0.002 and 0.028, respectively for males and females) (Fig. 3c). The secreted IGFBP2 and IGFBP3 proteins, as surrogate markers of glucose and fatty acid homeostasis through their engagement with the IGF/Insulin complex, were found to be differentially expressed between low and high Vitamin D status of both male and female cohorts. 
In particular,  the discovery serum proteomics analysis showed that IGFBP-2 was over-expressed in men with high compared to low vitamin D status [Males: IGFBP-2 mean iTRAQ log2ratio in high vs. low vitamin D status (SD) = 0.6 (0.8), p = 0.02] whereas IGFBP-3 was expressed at higher levels in women with high compared to low vitamin D status [Females: IGFBP-3 mean iTRAQ log2ratio in high vs. low vitamin D status (SD) = 0.5 (0.5), p = 0.001] (Fig. 4a). This sex-specific correlation of vitamin D status with IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-3 was further examined using Luminex ELISA analysis against an independent cross-sectional cohort.
The clinical characteristics of the validation cohort are presented in Table 2. As for the discovery cohort, the low and high vitamin D status groups of the male and female participants were similar with regards to age, BMI, fasting glucose, sun exposure, physical activity and total energy, DHA/EPA and calcium intake. The two groups had significantly different vitamin D intake (p < 0.0001) and vitamin D status (p < 0.0001). ELISA measurements confirmed the sexually dimorphic correlation of IGFBP-2 and IGFBP-3 with vitamin D status among adults with obesity [Males: IGFBP-2 Low vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 5.1 (2.9–11.1), High vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 10.0 (5.6–22.1), p = 0.002; IGFBP-3 Low vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 5.4 (3.4–5.6), High vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 5.5 (3.9–5.8), p = 0.66] [Females: IGFBP-2 Low vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 11.4 (6.6–23.4), High vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 13.4 (5.7–25.8), p = 0.99; IGFBP-3 Low vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 2.4 (1.6–2.8), High vitamin D status median (25th to 75th percentile) = 2.8 (2.7–4.5), p = 0.03] (Fig. 4b).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Vitamin D is an ancient hormone, originally produced by archaebacteria, phytoplankton and zooplankton dating back to over 500 million years. Almost all mammalian cell types express the vitamin D receptor, suggesting that vitamin D may exhibit a pleiotropic effect in addition to its well-established role in calcium and phosphorus homoeostasis. A clinically relevant marker used to measure vitamin D status is circulating levels of 25(OH)D. Although there is significant controversy in this field, vitamin D insufficiency is defined by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) as serum 25(OH)D levels lower than 50 nmol/L. Notably, the Endocrine Society suggested that circulating 25(OH)D should be maintained at higher concentrations (75 to 80 nmol/L) for extra-skeletal health benefits with no known toxicity at this level. Across countries in all continents, the mean serum concentration of 25(OH)D is around 50 nmol/L, suggesting that approximately 50% of these populations have vitamin D insufficiency.
Emerging evidence suggests  the extra-skeletal, pluripotent effects of vitamin D in reducing the risk of adverse cardiometabolic outcomes. A meta-analysis, including 65,000 prospectively monitored participants, showed that the group with the lowest compared to the highest serum 25(OH)D levels had a relative risk of 1.5 (1.3 to 1.8) for total incidents of cardiovascular disease and 1.6 (1.3 to 2.1) for stroke. Another meta-analysis of approximately 500,000 participants found an inverse association with all-cause mortality for circulating 25(OH)D levels up to 75 nmol/L. An additional dose-response meta-analysis from 34 studies involving 180,667 participants demonstrated that serum 25(OH)D levels were inversely correlated with total number of CVD events and CVD mortality. Decreased 25(OH)D levels may affect cardiovascular risk either directly, for example by increasing blood pressure through the renin-angiotensin system, or indirectly, by influencing inflammation, myocardial function, vascular calcification and parathyroid hormone levels.
An additional potential extra-skeletal effect of vitamin D is its chemopreventive effects against type II diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The meta-analysis of well-powered clinical studies have shown that subjects with low 25(OH)D levels have an increased risk of developing T2DM compared to those with a normal vitamin D status. Results from a population study in Victoria, Australia showed an inverse association between vitamin D status and risk factors of T2DM, including fasting plasma glucose and HbA1c levels. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis that included almost 30,000 subjects, found that lower 25(OH)D levels were significantly associated with an increased risk of developing diabetes among older adults. Low vitamin D status may lead to insulin resistance by impairing insulin secretion and compromising pancreatic beta-cell function, all hallmark features of T2DM. Recent findings suggest that supplementation with vitamin D could positively affect insulin secretion and glucose homoeostasis. An additional recently published Mendelian randomisation study in European and Chinese adults provided first ever evidence for a causal effect of higher 25(OH)D serum levels for the prevention of T2DM. As a corollary to these observations, the chemoprevention of T2D prior to its clinical diagnosis in individuals with obesity by means of Vitamin D status correction may also reduce the risk of cardiometabolic disease. However, surrogate protein markers that can easily be measured in serum to gauge such a risk reduction due to Vitamin D status improvement are currently lacking. 
The aim of the present study was to perform quantitative serum proteomics in a cross-sectional cohort of non-diabetic adults with obesity and low vs. high vitamin D status in order to identify novel serological markers linking vitamin D status to cardiometabolic disease risk. The relevant differentially expressed proteins chosen as candidate markers were further verified against a larger cross-sectional cohort with the same inclusion/exclusion criteria as for the discovery phase. An overview of the study design is presented in Fig. 1.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
These authors are contributed equally: Nasser M. Al-Daghri, Antigoni Manousopoulou
Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at (10.1038/s41387-018-0063-8).