PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Proteomics; Ipsc; Axon; Dopaminergic neurons; Protein turnover

ABSTRACT:
Dopaminergic neurons participate in fundamental physiological processes and are the cell type primarily affected in Parkinson’s disease (PD). Their analysis is challenging due to the intricate nature of their function, their involvement in diverse neurological processes, their heterogeneity and localization in deep brain regions. Consequently, most of the research on the protein dynamics of dopaminergic neurons has been performed in animal cells ex vivo. Here we use iPSC-derived, human mid-brain specific dopaminergic neurons to study general features of their proteome biology. We use dynamic SILAC to measure the half-life of more than 4,300 proteins. We report uniform turnover rates of conserved protein complexes and identify several outliers in the mitochondrial outer membrane and mitophagy pathway. Our study provides a workflow and resource for future applications of quantitative proteomics in iPSC-derived human neurons.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome dynamics in iPSC-derived human dopaminergic neurons – part 2: protein turnover dynamics using SILAC

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
iPSCs were used to generate hDaNs via Neural Progenitor Cell (NPC) intermediates using chemical induction as described in Schwarz, et. al., 2022 and based on a protocol described by Reinhardt, et. al., 2013 with slight modification.  Experiments were performed at day 18 (mature hDaNs) and the cells were harvested at day 23 for proteomic analysis.  DMEM-SILAC (Sigma-Aldrich) lacking arginine and lysine supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin (100 U/ml, PAN) and stable isotope-encoded arginine and lysine was added to the cells. The ‘light’ SILAC media was supplemented with L-[12C6,14N2] lysine (Lys0) and L-[12C6,14N4] arginine (Arg0) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), whereas L-[2H4] lysine (Lys4) and L-[13C6] arginine (Arg6) were added to the ‘medium-heavy’ SILAC media and L-[13C6,15N2] lysine (Lys8) and L hDaNs (on day 18) were cultured in DMEM-SILAC heavy/medium media for 0, 6, 12, 48, 72 and 120 hours and were all harvested on day 23. For the 120 hour timepoint, hDaNs were cultured in SILAC medium on day 18, while for the 72 hour timepoint, hDaNs were cultured in SILAC media on day 20, and similar for the other timepoints. This was done so that the cells were harvested on day 23, all at the same time and to avoid differences that could arise due to the cell’s maturation state.  Proteins were reduced with 10 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for one hour, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for one hour and digested with Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase, Wako Chemicals) for three hours at RT. Afterwards, four volumes of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega Corporation) overnight. To stop the digestion, 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added.  Samples were fractionated with the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Kit #84868). First, the samples were purified by solid phase extraction on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). 100 ug of peptides were loaded in the conditioned spin columns and separated into nine fractions according to the hydrophobicity. Elution was done with a steep gradient of ACN and ammonia (5%-50% ACN in 10 mM NH4OH). Finally, fractions were acidified to pH to <2.7 with TFA, dried by vacuum centrifugation and purified on C18 StageTips prior LC-MS/MS measurements. Peptide samples were measured on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online-coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were separated using a 20-cm-long, 75–μm–inner diameter analytical HPLC column (ID PicoTip fused silica emitter; New Objective, Berks, UK) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm silica beads (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany).  samples were measured using 90 min gradient optimized for each HpH fraction. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to “standard” and the mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode. Full MS scans were acquired in a range of 300-1750 m/z at resolution of 60,000. Twenty most intense multiply-charged ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion period of 30 seconds and tandem MS (MS/MS) spectra were acquired at resolution of 30.000. The column temperature was maintained at 40°C using an integrated Sonation column oven. Peptides were ionized using nanospray ionization; the source temperature was set to 275°C.

DATA PROCESSING:
The LC-MS/MS acquired raw data was processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 2.2.0.0.). Spectra were searched against Uniprot Homo sapiens database (103,830 entries, downloaded 2022/12/16) and 286 commonly observed laboratory contaminants. The SILAC labels were defined as: Lys0 and Arg0 as the “light”, Lys4 and Arg6 as the “medium-heavy” and Lys8 and Arg10 as the “heavy” channel. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. For MS and MS/MS, the peptide mass tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Only two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. False discovery rate was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. Intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) was enabled.  The “requantification” option was enabled