PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Blood cell
diseases: Meniere's disease
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Mitochondria; Oxphos; Intermembrane space; Mitochondrial disease; Respiratory chain

ABSTRACT:
Mitochondrial disorders (MDs) are among the most common inborn errors of metabolism and primarily arise from defects in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Their complex mode of inheritance and diverse clinical presentations render the diagnosis of MDs challenging and, to date, most lack a cure. Here, we build on previous efforts to discover genes necessary for OXPHOS and report a highly complementary galactose-sensitized CRISPR-Cas9 “growth” screen, presenting an updated inventory now with 481 OXPHOS genes, including 157 linked to MDs. We further focus on FAM136A, a gene associated with Ménière’s disease and show that it supports inter-membrane space protein homeostasis and OXPHOS in cell lines, mice, and patients. Our study identifies a mitochondrial basis in a familial form of Ménière’s disease (fMD), provides a comprehensive resource of OXPHOS-related genes, and sheds light on the pathways involved in mitochondrial disorders, with the potential to guide future diagnostics and treatments for MDs.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
An updated inventory of genes essential for oxidative phosphorylation identifies a mitochondrial origin in familial Ménière’s disease - FAM136A IP-MS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were digested following the SP3 method (Huges, et al., 2019) using magnetic Sera-Mag Speedbeads (Cytiva 45152105050250, 50 mg/ml). Proteins in SDS-PAGE sample buffer were alkylated with 32mM (final) iodoacetamide for 45 min at RT in the dark. Beads were added at a ratio 10:1 (w:w) to samples, and proteins were precipitated on beads with ethanol (final concentration: 60 %). After 3 washes with 80% ethanol, beads were digested in 50ul of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 1.0 ug of trypsin (Promega #V5073). After 1h of incubation at 37°C, the same amount of trypsin was added to the samples for an additional 1h of incubation. Supernatant were then recovered, transferred to new tubes, acidified with formic acid (0.5% final concentration), and dried by centrifugal evaporation. In order to remove traces of SDS, two sample volumes of isopropanol containing 1% TFA were added to the digests, and the samples were desalted on a strong cation exchange (SCX) plate (Oasis MCX; Waters Corp., Milford, MA) by centrifugation. After washing with isopropanol/1%TFA and 2% acetonitrile/0.1% FA, peptides were eluted in 200ul of 80% MeCN, 19% water, 1% (v/v) ammonia, and dried by centrifugal evaporation.  Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Vanquish Neo nanoHPLC system interfaced via a nanospray Flex source to a high resolution Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn PepMap100 C18 (5 mm x 1.0 mm ID, 5 μm, Thermo Fisher) before separation on a C18 custom packed column (75 μm ID × 45 cm, 1.8 μm particles, Reprosil Pur, Dr. Maisch), using a gradient from 2 to 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 130 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 2 s. Peptides were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized energy of 30 % at 15’000 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.6 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data files were analysed with MaxQuant 2.5.1.0 (Cox et al., 2008) incorporating the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The sequence databases used for searching were the human  reference proteome based on the UniProt database (RefProt_Homo_sapiens_20240214  , www.uniprot.org, version of February 2024, containing 82’499 sequences), and a “contaminant” database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc). Mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm on precursors (after recalibration) and 20 ppm on MS/MS fragments. Both peptide and protein identifications were filtered at 1% FDR relative to hits against a decoy database built by reversing protein sequences.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Mitochondrial disorders (MDs) are among the most common inborn errors of metabolism, and dysfunction in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is a hallmark. Their complex mode of inheritance and diverse clinical presentations render the diagnosis of MDs challenging, and, to date, most lack a cure. Here, we build on previous efforts to identify genes necessary for OXPHOS and report a highly complementary galactose-sensitized CRISPR-Cas9 "growth" screen, presenting an updated inventory of 481 OXPHOS genes, including 157 linked to MDs. We further focus on FAM136A, a gene associated with Ménière's disease, and demonstrate that it supports intermembrane space protein homeostasis and OXPHOS in cell lines, mice, and patients. Our study identifies a mitochondrial basis in familial Ménière's disease, provides a comprehensive resource of OXPHOS-related genes, and sheds light on the pathways involved in MDs, with the potential to guide future diagnostics and treatments for MDs.