PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Colorectal cancer; tmod2; proteomics; lfq; protein-protein interactions; Cancer metastasis

ABSTRACT:
Tropomodulin-2 (TMOD2) was previously identified as upregulated in the nuclear compartment of highly metastatic KM12SM colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Here, we aimed to investigate its role using multiple CRC cell lines and patient-derived samples through functional proteomics, bioinformatics, and in vitro and in vivo analyses. TMOD2 expression was significantly elevated in highly metastatic CRC cells at both mRNA and protein levels, correlating TMOD2 high protein expression in CRC patients’ samples with advanced disease stages and poorer patient survival. To analyze TMOD2 role in CRC progression and metastasis, stable overexpression and transient depletion of TMOD2 was investigated in CRC isogenic cells with different metastatic properties. TMOD2 stable overexpression enhanced tumorigenic properties, including adhesion, anchorage-independent growth, and migration in CRC cells, whereas transient silencing of TMOD2 resulted in decreased adhesion and invasion capabilities, highlighting a role of TMOD2 in promoting metastasis. In vivo experiments confirmed the role of TMOD2 in enhancing tumor growth and liver metastasis, with TMOD2-overexpressing cells forming larger subcutaneous tumors and inducing poorly metastatic KM12C CRC cells to colonize the liver efficiently. DIA-LFQ proteomics and IP-LC-MS/MS analyses revealed significant dysregulation of proteins involved in cytoskeletal dynamics, secretion, and focal adhesion upon TMOD2 overexpression. Validation studies confirmed the specific involvement of key proteins, including STAG1 and MARCKS, in TMOD2-modulated pathways. Collectively, the result presented here suggest that TMOD2 plays a pivotal role in CRC progression by modulating cytoskeletal dynamics, enhancing cell adhesion, and promoting metastatic behavior, establishing TMOD2 as a potential therapeutic target in CRC.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Deciphering the central role of TMOD2 in colorectal cancer progression and metastasis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells at 90% confluence were harvested with PBS 1x containing 4 mM EDTA, and centrifuged at 260 g and RT for 5 min. Then, cell pellets were lysed with 500 µL of RIPA buffer supplemented with 1x protease and phosphatase inhibitors. For the LFQ, KM12C, KM12SM, SW480, and SW620 CRC cells stably overexpressing TMOD2 were analyzed in comparison to their corresponding Mock-stably transfected cells. Cells were incubated in DMEM free FBS for 48 hours prior to cell collection and protein extraction. Label free quantification (LFQ) mass spectrometry experiment was performed with the four CRC cells stably overexpressing TMOD2 and mock control cells. CRC cells were incubated in DMEM free FBS for 48 hours prior to protein extraction. For protein digestion, 20 μg of each protein extract in 100 μl of RIPA were reduced with 10 μl 100 mM TCEP for 45 min at 37°C and 600 rpm and alkylated with 11 μL of 0.4 M chloroacetamide for 30 min at RT, 600 rpm, and in darkness. After reduction and alkylation, samples were incubated with 100 µL of SeraMag magnetic beads (MBs) mix (50% hydrophilic beads - 50% hydrophobic beads, GE Healthcare) and 200 μL of acetonitrile (ACN) 100% for 35 min at RT and 600 rpm for protein binding to the beads. Then, supernatants were discarded, and MBs were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with ACN. Finally, supernatants were discarded, proteins were O/N digested at 37°C and 600 rpm with 0.5 μg of porcine trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 100 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8.0. Next, samples were sonicated twice, supernatants collected, and dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  For LC-MS/MS, peptides were analyzed in an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer coupled to a Vanquish Neo UHPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each sample was analyzed in triplicate. Peptide samples were loaded into the precolumn PepMap Trap Catridge 5 µm, 300 µm x 5 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in an Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 3 µm, 75 µm x 15 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated at 50°C. The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min and 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2Omq and 0.1% FA in 80% ACN were used as elution buffers A and B, respectively. The 15 min elution gradient was: 4%-10% buffer B for 2 min, 10%-40% buffer B for 11 min, 40%-99% buffer B for 0.5 min, and 99% buffer B for 1.5 min. Prior to injection, samples were re-suspended in 20 µL of buffer A, and 0.5 µL of each sample were injected, and analyzed in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. For ionization, 1900 V of liquid junction voltage and 280°C capillary temperature was used. The full scan method employed a m/z 380-980 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 240000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 500%, and maximum injection time (IT) 5 ms. The DIA method was performed with the Astral mass analyzer, using an AGC of 500%, an IT of 3.5 ms, A normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25 was used for fragmentation of precursors. The scan range was set from 380 to 980 m/z, with an isolation window of 2 m/z, and window placement optimization was enabled. Thus, a total of 299 scan events were obtained in each cycle. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

DATA PROCESSING:
The LFQ raw data were analyzed with the DIA-NN software (version 1.8.1) using standardized protocols. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against Uniprot UP000005640_9606.fasta Homo sapiens (human) 2024 database (20418 protein entries, acceded in March 2024). This fasta file was used for library-free search and library generation. In addition, Deep learning-based spectra, retention times (RTs), and ion mobility (Ims) prediction was enabled. Trypsin/P was selected as the protease used for digestion, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed. In addition, N-terminal Met excision, carbamidomethylation of cysteines, and Met oxidation were enabled. The peptide range selected was from 7 to 30 amino acids, with a maximum of 6 charges per precursor ion. An FDR of 1% was selected for precursor identification, and match between runs (MBR) was selected. Any LC (high accuracy) was selected as quantification strategy and a cross-run normalization dependent on RT was used.  LFQ data were analyzed with the R Studio program (version 4.1.1) according to established protocols (https://github.com/pwilmart), using “tidyverse”, “psych”, “gridExtra”, “scales” and “ggplot2” packages. In addition, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to determine sample clustering using the “stats” R package prior to statistical analysis. Statistical and differential expression analysis for the identification of dysregulated proteins associated to TMOD2 overexpression was performed with R Studio (version 4.1.1) using the packages "dplyr", "tidyverse”, "limma”, “edgeR”, “ggplot2” and “rstatix”. A Moderated t-statistics analysis was performed after data filtering (proteins identified in at least 70% of samples were considered for the analysis) and missing values imputation by random draws from a gaussian, using the “imputeLCMD” R package. Proteins identified with an expression ratio ≥1.5 or ≤0.67 and adjusted p-value (FDR) ≤ 0.05 were selected as statistically significant dysregulated proteins.