PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive Plus; Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT; Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Label-free drug target identification; Human; Intracellular target engagement; Qe-plus

ABSTRACT:
Biophysical proteomics assays allow for proteome-wide, label-free monitoring of ligand-induced changes in protein structure and stability, offering insights into protein-ligand interactions and modulation of biophysical properties of cellular proteins. They exploit the principle that compound-induced alterations in structure or stability of proteins can be detected through changes in their susceptibility to denaturation. Here we introduce SPICE (Solvent Proteome Profiling In Cells), which employs solvent-based denaturation of proteins under otherwise physiological conditions in intact cells. We characterized solvent-induced denaturation of proteins inside cells as distinct from that in cell extracts and validated SPICE by detecting known drug-target interactions for multiple compound classes. We showed that SPICE can be flexibly used in different formats, to resolve denaturation or concentration-response curves upon treatment of live cells. Our results indicate that SPICE, unlike experiments in cell extracts, also detects secondary compound-induced effects such as target profiles of drug metabolites, modulation of protein-protein interactions, and downstream signalling events.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Solvent-based Shift Assay in Living Cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For SIPP experiments, Proteins were extracted from frozen cell pellets by addition of lysis buffer (DPBS, 0.4% IGEPAL-630, 1X Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) and three freeze-thaw cycles, using liquid nitrogen. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation for 30 min at 4 °C and 19,000 x g. The protein concentration of the soluble fraction was determined by a BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and diluted to 4 µg/µL using lysis buffer. For treatments, DMSO or compounds in DMSO were added 1:100 to a final concentration of 1% DMSO and incubated on a head-over-end shaker for 20 min at room temperature. Each sample was divided into ten aliquots and exposed to increasing concentrations of AEA (acetone:ethanol:acetic acid, 50:50:0.1) to reach a final concentration of 2 µg/µL protein and final AEA concentrations from 0 to 27% (v/v) (0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27%). All samples were then incubated at 37 °C and under vigorous shaking for 20 min. Precipitated proteins were separated by centrifugation at 4 °C and 4000 x g for 45 min. Equal amounts of the soluble fraction were removed and used for LC-MS/MS sample preparation. For SPICE experiments, Cells were cultured in the respective growth medium until a maximum density of 80%, harvested, and washed twice with DPBS. For treatment, the cells were resuspended in pre-warmed medium containing a compound or DMSO in the desired final concentration, followed by incubation for one hour at 37 °C and gentle shaking to avoid settling of the cells. Both suspension and adherent cells were kept in suspension during treatment. Treated cells were pelleted, washed with DPBS (Pan-Biotech) and resuspended in resuspension buffer (DPBS, 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Cell suspensions were divided into ten aliquots of one million cells per aliquot and exposed to increasing concentrations of AEA from 0 to 20% (v/v) (0, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 20%). All samples were then incubated at 37 °C and vigorous shaking for 20 min. For complete lysis, IGEPAL-630 was added to a final concentration of 0.4% and cells were lysed by three freeze-thaw cycles using liquid nitrogen. Precipitated proteins and cell debris were separated by centrifugation at 4 °C and 4000 x g for 45 min. Equal amounts of the soluble fraction were removed and used for LC-MS/MS sample preparation. For SPICE or SIPP in a compressed format, equal amounts of the soluble fractions were pooled into a single sample per denaturation curve before LC-MS/MS sample preparation. For parallel analysis of abundance changes, an aliquot of treated cells was processed the same way as SPICE samples, except for denaturation. For LC-MS/MS sample preparation, soluble protein fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in Resuspension Buffer (50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS, pH 8.5) before sample preparation based on protein aggregation capture (PAC)33. Peptides were eluted from the beads using 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 containing trypsin (Promega, V5517) at a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin:protein). Samples were digested overnight at 37 °C under vigorous shaking. Eluted peptides were collected, and beads were washed with water to retrieve the remaining peptides. Both fractions were pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were resuspended in water and TMT-labelling with TMT 10plex or TMTpro 16/18plex reagents was performed as previously described34. After confirmation of successful labelling (labeling efficiency > 98%), excess TMT reagents were quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4% and incubation at room temperature for 15 min. Equal amounts of labelled peptides were pooled in 0.5% FA and desalted using a Sep-Pak Vac 50 mg tC18 cartridge (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The peptides were eluted in 60% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA and dried using a vacuum concentrator. Desalted peptides were chromatographically separated via basic reversed phase chromatography as previously described35 into 24 fractions, dried down, and stored at -20 °C until further analysis. For samples that were measured in DIA mode (experiments with MZ1, JQ1, and AHPC), the digestion buffer was 100 mM ammonium-bicarbonate and peptides were desalted using C18-cartridges on an Agilent Bravo Liquid Handling Platform before drying and storage at -20 °C until further analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
For TMT data, MaxQuant Software (v2.0.3.1) and the Andromeda Search Engine were used for identification and quantification of peptides and proteins36. Database search was agains a human protein database from SwissProt (SP000005640, canonical+isoform, download 2022, 42,404 entries). Isotope impurities of the TMT lot were specified to allow MaxQuant the automated correction of TMT intensities. Methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Isotope impurities of the TMT lot were specified to allow for correction of TMT intensities. Trypsin/P was set as the proteolytic enzyme and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Results were adjusted to 1% FDR for peptide spectrum,protein, and site match, employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Furthermore, default settings for the matching tolerances were used, which are 4.5 ppm for precursors, 20 ppm for MS/MS (FTMS), and 0.5 Da for MS/MS (ITMS). For DIA data, DIA-NN (v1.8) was used for identification and quantification of peptides and proteins37. Database search was against a human protein database from SwissProt (SP000005640, canonical+isoform, download 2023, 42,454 entries). Deep learning-based features were switched on. Methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-termini and N-terminal methionine excision were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. Trypsin/P was set as the proteolytic enzyme and the maximum numbers of missed cleavages and variable modifications were set to 2. The default parameter 0.0 was used for mass and RT correction, leading to DIA-NN performing automatic mass and RT correction. MBR and Heuristic protein interference was allowed, and Precursor FDR was set to 1%. For quantitative analysis of complete denaturation curves, MaxQuant output ProteinGroups.txt was filtered for contaminants, reversed peptides, proteins only identified by site and proteins, and proteins that were identified by less than two peptides. Relative intensities were calculated by dividing each intensity by the average of the respective 0 % AEA samples over all replicates. Relative intensities were normalized towards a reference denaturation curve based on median relative intensities per % AEA. Curves were filtered for R2 > 0.8 and a bottom plateau < 0.3. Quantitative analysis for experiments in a compressed format was conducted using R39 and RStudio40. MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt was filtered for contaminants, reversed peptides, proteins only identified by site and proteins, ad proteins that were identified by less than two peptides. DIA-NN output tables were filtered for contaminants. Intensities were normalized by median centering between TMT channels. Significant changes between treatments were determined using the limma package41 including Benjamini-Hochberg-correction of p-values42. For experiments comparing abundance and stability changes, the respective fold-changes from both experiments were divided by each other, before plotting the resulting values on a log2-scale. Hierarchical clustering of denaturation curves was performed using the stats R package for Euclidean clustering. All enrichment and functional clustering analyses were performed with DAVID43, using all proteins quantified in the respective dataset as background. P-values were adjusted by Benjamini-Hochberg correction. Analysis, clustering and creation of figures for networks of proteins significantly changed in abundance or stability were performed using the apps stringApp (v2.1.1)44 and clusterMaker2 (v2.3.4)45 in Cytoscape (v3.10.1)46 at the default score cut-off of 0.4.