PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Splicing modulation; Spliceosome; Sf3b complex; Phosphoproteomics; Pladienolide b

ABSTRACT:
Pladienolide B (Pla-B) is a potent splicing modulator that has shown promise in cancer treatment, but its cellular effects remain incompletely understood. We investigated the dose-dependent effect of Pla-B on human cell lines using isobaric tag-based quantitative proteomics and phosphoproteomics techniques. We quantified over 10,000 proteins and 19,000 phosphorylation events in SH-SY5Y cells, revealing concentration-dependent changes in protein abundance and phosphorylation status. Low Pla-B concentrations induced significant alterations in nuclear proteins, specifically those involved in transcription and cell division. Higher concentrations led to more extensive proteome remodeling, affecting chromatin-associated proteins and transcription. Phosphoproteome analysis uncovered alterations in the phosphorylation states of proteins including SF3B, suggesting complex regulation of signaling pathways. Our findings reveal the detailed proteomic landscape of Pla-B's effects, offering insights into its role in the global proteome, which may guide future therapeutic applications and rational drug design.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Decoding Spliceosome Inhibition: A TMT-Based Proteomic Profile of Pladienolide B Treated Human Cell Lines

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Three hundred microliters of native lysis buffer (8M urea, EPPS pH8.0, with Pierce protease and phosphatase inhibitors) were added directly to each pellet for lysis. Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (room temperature, 15 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 20 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion 12. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 14 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37 °C. TMTpro reagents (0.8 mg) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (40 μL), of which 6 μL was added to the peptides (25 µg) with 7 μL of acetonitrile to achieve a final concentration of approximately 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). TMTpro-labeled samples were pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all 18 samples. For each experiment, ~300 µg of the pooled sample was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and subjected to a C18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) column with a capacity of 100 mg (Sep-Pak, Waters).

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectra were processed using a Comet-based in-house software pipeline. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt database, which were concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were selected to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using LDA and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account and adjust for unequal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R.