PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast; Stem cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free; SILAC
keywords: Oct4; Intrinsically disordered regions; Embryonic stem (es) cells; Transcription factors; Slipers

ABSTRACT:
The cell-type-specific function of transcription factors (TFs) is crucial for determining several cellular identities. It is unclear how a single TF can function specifically in different cell types. Here, we define the molecular features that enable OCT4 to reprogram somatic cells into pluripotent or trophoblast stem cells, maintain the self-renewal of embryonic stem (ES) cells, and drive lineage commitment during early embryonic development. Embedded within the intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) of OCT4, we uncover short linear peptides that are essential for reprogramming (SLiPERs) but dispensable for ES self-renewal. SLiPERs adopt a quasi-ordered state and, during reprogramming, recruit a unique set of proteins to closed chromatin that are unnecessary for ES self-renewal. Interestingly, SLiPERs are not required during early gastrulation but are essential for embryos to develop beyond late gastrulation. Removing SLiPERs leads to aberrant OCT4 binding, derailing the regular transition of ES cells out of pluripotency. Our findings identify modules within IDRs that contribute to the functional versatility and specificity of TFs.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cell-type-specific functionality encoded within the intrinsically disordered regions of OCT4.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The same sample preparation protocol was followed either for SILAC or for ChIP-SICAP samples. In both cases samples were subjected to in-gel digestion protocol. Briefly, proteins were separated and concentrated on gel (NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies), in NuPAGE buffer (MES) and visualised using InstantBlueTM stain (Sigma-Aldrich). The stained gel bands were excised into cubes ca. 1mm and de-stained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and 100% (v/v) acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were digested with trypsin, as described in Shevchenko et al. Briefly, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min at RT protected from light. Proteins were digested for 16 h at 37°C with 12.5 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce) in digestion buffer (1030 μL of dH2O, 300 μL of 50mM ABC and 150 μL of ACN) making sure to cover all the gel pieces. The next day, the digestion was stopped by acidifying the sample to pH < 2.5 with 10% Trifluoroacetic acid(TFA) and digested samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA. Supernatant liquid was recovered from the gel pieces and digested peptides were cleaned using StageTips. All samples digested either by FASP (ChIP-SICAP) or in gel-digestion (SILAC) were  cleaned using StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al. Briefly, peptides samples were passed and concentrated into manually cut Empore Disk C18 Octadecyl (C18)-bonded silica inserted into a pipette tip. Tips were left at -20°C for further analysis by LC-MS. Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf). LC-MS/MS was performed by diluting samples into 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid and on a Q Exactive mass spectrometers (both from ThermoScientific) both coupled on-line, to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex,ThermoScientific). For both approaches, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (ThermoScientific) assembled on an EASY-Spray source (ThermoScientific) and operated at a constant temperature of 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were 1838 loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 150 min, then to 95% in 11 min. For Orbitrap Lumos, survey scans were performed at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5. MS2 was performed in the Ion trap at rapid scan mode with ion target of 2.0e4 and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was set at 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2. For Q Exactive, MS1 spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution and the top 10 most abundant peaks with charge ≥ 2 and isolation window of 2.0 Thomson were selected and also fragmented by HCD fragmentation of 27. The maximum ion injection time for the MS and MS2 scans was set to 20 and 60 ms respectively and the AGC target was set to 1 E6 for the MS scan and to 5 E4 for the MS2 scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60s

DATA PROCESSING:
. Raw data files and peptide search was performed in The MaxQuant software platform 11 version 1.6.1.0 (released in April 2018). Search was conducted against the complete/reference proteome of Homo sapiens (released in November, 2017), using the Andromeda search engine. The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantitation analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm as described by Cox et al. SILAC quantification analysis was performed by employing the MaxQuant as described by Cox et al. For peptide and protein identifications, FDR was set to 1%.