PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
diseases: Brain glioblastoma multiforme
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Label free
keywords: Glioblastoma; temozolomide resistance; subcellular proteomics

ABSTRACT:
TMZ resistance is one of the main reasons why treatment of glioblastoma (GBM) fails. In order to investigate the underlying mechanism associated with TMZ resistance, we conducted a cytoplasmic proteome research of U87 cells treated with TMZ for 1 week. A total of 162 DEPs including 66 up-regulated proteins and 96 down-regulated proteins were identified.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cytoplasmic Proteomics for Temozolomide Resistance in Glioblastoma

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The human glioblastoma cell line U87 cells was purchased from the American type culture collection (ATCC, America) and cultivated in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Gibco, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with 10% FBS, and cultured at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. TMZ was purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), and diluted in Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Solarbio inc, Beijing, China) to a stock solution of 200 mM TMZ. Immediately before use in cell culture, the stock was diluted in media to a concentration of 200μM. The same concentration of DMSO was added into the control group. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were generated according to the protocol as follows: Collected 2 × 107 cells, and suspended in 300-500 μl RLN lysis buffer (Qiagen, Germany) with 1% PMSF, keep on ice for 20 min; Centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 × g,  4 °C, the clear upernatant was the cytoplasmic extractions; Washed the nucleus precipitate with RLN lysis buffer for 3 timesand the supernatant discarded; Suspended the nucleus precipitate in 100 μl RIPA lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, America) with 1% PMSF, sonication on ice for 1 min; The suspension was centrifuged at 12000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, the clear supernatant was the nuclear extractions. The validation of purity of the extractions was indicated for Western blots probed with antibodies against two fractionation controls (Histone H3 for nucleus extraction, Beyotime, China, dilution 1:1000; GAPDH for cytoplasma extraction, JetwayBiotechCo.,Ltd, China; dilution 1:2000 ). Digestion of protein (250 μg for each sample) was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewski, Zougman et al. The resultant peptides of trypsin digestion were desalted by solid phase extraction using C18 Empore disc cartridges (Supelco/Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany), then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 5 μg peptide was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 120 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS experiments were performed triply for three Biologic repetitions.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw MS/MS spectra search were processed using a freely available software suit, MaxQuant (version. 1.3.0.5). MS data were searched against the UniProtKB database. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of Trypsin and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The MaxLFQ label-free quantification method a retention time alignment and identification transfer protocol (“match-between-runs” feature in MaxQuant) described in, was applied and a novel algorithm was used to extract the maximum possible quantification information. Protein aboundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity).

METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Cell Culture and Protein Extraction
The human glioblastoma U87 cell line was purchased from the American type culture collection (ATCC, USA) and cultivated in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; Gibco, Grand Island, NY) supplemented with 10% FBS and cultured at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. TMZ was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) and diluted in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Solarbio Inc., Beijing, China) to a stock solution of 200 mM TMZ. Immediately before use in cell culture, the stock was diluted in media to a concentration of 200 μM. The same concentration of DMSO was added to the control group.
The method of trypan blue staining was described in our previous study. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were generated according to the protocol as follows: 2 × 107 cells were collected and suspended in 300–500 μl RLN lysis buffer (Qiagen, Germany) with 1% PMSF, kept on ice for 20 min, and centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 ×g, 4°C; the clear supernatant was the cytoplasmic extractions; the nucleus precipitate was washed with RLN lysis buffer 3 times and the supernatant was discarded; the nucleus precipitate was suspended in 100 μl RIPA lysis buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, USA) with 1% PMSF, with sonication on ice for 1 min; the suspension was centrifuged at 12000 ×g for 20 min at 4°C; the clear supernatant was the nuclear extractions. The validation of purity of the extractions was indicated for western blots probed with antibodies against two fractionation controls (Histone H3 for nucleus extraction, Beyotime, China; dilution 1 : 1000; GAPDH for cytoplasma extraction, Jetway Biotech Co., Ltd., China; dilution 1 : 2000).
2.2. Protein Digestion and Liquid Chromatography–Electrospray Ionization–Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC–ESI–MS/MS)
Digestion of protein (250 μg for each sample) was performed according to the FASP procedure described by Wisniewski. The resultant peptides of trypsin digestion were desalted by solid phase extraction using C18 Empore disc cartridges (Supelco/Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) and then concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 5 μg peptide was loaded onto a the C18-reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific, Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, and 3 μm resin) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 120 min. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top-10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Determination of the target value is based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Dynamic exclusion duration was 25 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled. MS experiments were performed triply for three biologic repetitions.
2.3. Protein Identification
The raw MS/MS spectra search was carried out using a freely available software suite, MaxQuant (version. 1.3.0.5). MS data were searched through the UniProtKB database. An initial search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm. The search followed an enzymatic cleavage rule of trypsin and allowed maximal two missed cleavage sites and a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was defined as fixed modification, while protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications for database searching. The cutoff of global false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The MaxLFQ label-free quantification method, a retention time alignment and identification transfer protocol (“match-between-runs” feature in MaxQuant) described in, was applied and a novel algorithm was used to extract the maximum possible quantification information. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD007759.
2.4. Identification of Significantly Differently Expressed Proteins (DEPs), Gene Ontology, and Pathway Enrichment Analysis
The raw data of cytoplasmic proteome expression was analyzed. Differently expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified with classic Student's t-test, and the log2 fold change (log2FC) was also calculated. |log2⁡FC| ≥ 1 and P value < 0.05 were considered as the cutoff values for DEPs screening. We did not apply adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing for DEPs screening. Candidate DEPs functions and pathways enrichment were analyzed using online databases. The Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) was a comprehensive set of functional annotation tools. We performed GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses using the DAVID online tool (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and KEGG pathway tool (http://www.genome.jp/kegg). P value < 0.05 was set as the cutoff criterion.
2.5. Protein–Protein Interaction (PPI) Network Construction, Modular Analysis, and Significant Candidate Proteins and Pathway Identification
Online database Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING, https://string-db.org) was applied to analyze the protein–protein interaction (PPI) network. Cytoscape software was utilized to construct protein interaction relationship network and analyze the interaction relationship of the candidate DEPs. Each node represented a protein and the edges represented the interactions between proteins. The Network Analyzer plug-in was used to calculate node degree, which means the numbers of interconnections, and to filter the key candidate proteins of PPI with degree ≥12. These proteins might be the core proteins and may have important physiological regulatory functions.
For validation of the significant candidate DEPs, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Glioblastoma dataset was analyzed using R2: Genomics Analysis and Visualization Platform (http://hgserver1.amc.nl/cgi-bin/r2/main.cgi). The TCGA Glioblastoma dataset included 540 samples.

RESULTS:
3. Results
3.1. Global Profiling of Cytoplasmic Proteins in U87 Cells by Label-Free Quantitative Proteomics
We treated U87 cells with 200 μM TMZ for 1 week; only 20% of the cells survived and showed great phenotypic changes (Figure 1(a)). Then we extracted the cytoplasmic lysates as the proteome samples; the flowchart was shown in Figure 1(b). The purity and efficiency of nucleus and cytoplasma extraction were verified through western blot (Figure 1(c)). Protein identification and label-free quantification were carried out by analyzing MS raw data using the MaxQuant-Andromeda software suite. Finally, it revealed a total of 1999 nonredundant proteins based on the identification of one or more unique peptides. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD007759.
3.2. Identification of Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs)
A total of 161 proteins displayed more than 2-fold quantitative alterations with P value < 0.05 in the proteome comparison between TMZ-treated group and DMSO-treated group, including 65 upregulated proteins (1 protein identified as Bos taurus species was excluded) and 96 downregulated proteins (Figures 1(d) and 1(e) and Table 1).
3.3. Gene Ontology Analysis and Signaling Pathway Enrichment Analysis
Proteins were subjected to signaling pathway enrichment analyses; the pathways enriched by downregulated DEPs were mainly related to ribosome and RNA transport (Figure 2(b) and Table 2). The pathways enriched by upregulated DEPs were mainly related to regulation in actin cytoskeleton, pathways in cancer, focal adhesion, and phagosome and PI3K-AKT signaling pathway (Figure 2(a) and Table 2).
3.4. Key Candidate Proteins Identification with Protein–Protein Interaction (PPI) Network and Subnetwork Analysis
Using the STRING online database (https://string-db.org) (Figure 3) and Cytoscape software, the PPI network was constructed (Figure 4(a)). A total of 161 DEPs (65 upregulated and 96 downregulated proteins) were included in the PPI network; there existed 2 subgroups: proteins with strong connections with others (the pink region shown in Figure 3) and separated proteins. So we conducted subnetwork analysis among these proteins which have strong interactions with each other. As shown in Figure 4(a), the subnetwork contained 114 nodes (44 upregulated and 70 downregulated proteins) and 822 edges. In order to identify key candidate proteins related to TMZ therapy, we selected 28 hub proteins with the filtering of degree ≥12 criteria (i.e., each node had more than 12 connections/interactions) (Figures 4(a) and 4(b)); all these 28 proteins were downregulated proteins and mainly associated with ribosome pathway and spliceosome pathway.
3.5. Validation of the Key Candidate Proteins in TCGA Database
To validate the reliability of the 28 key candidate proteins, we used R2 Platform to confirm the predictive capability for overall survival or progress-free survival probability in TCGA 540 GBM dataset. We found that all the 28 key candidate proteins (Figure 4(b)) were significantly related to the prognosis of GBM patients (either OS or PFS), suggesting our results of the identified candidate proteins were reliable (data not shown). Among the 28 key candidate proteins, we also found 9 special proteins (DHX9, HNRNPR, RPL3, HNRNPA3, SF1, DDX5, EIF5B, BTF3, and RPL8) (Figure 4(c)), which were downregulated after TMZ treatment, and lower expression indicated worse prognosis of GBM patients (both OS and PFS) (Figure 5). Among them, RPL3, RPL8, BTF3, and EIF5B were associated with ribosome signaling pathway and the other 5 proteins were related to spliceosome signaling pathway.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Glioblastoma (GBM) remains one of the most lethal cancers for human beings and the prognosis of GBM is still pessimistic. The treatment of GBM includes gross total resection of tumor tissues, followed by adjuvant chemo- and radiotherapy. Temozolomide (TMZ) is the first-line chemotherapy agent and has improved the prognosis of GBM patients significantly. However, development of TMZ resistance during therapy period is so common among clinical GBM patients, which is also one of the main causes why treatment fails. The most popular mechanism of TMZ resistance is the expression of O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) which protects the cellular genome from the damage of alkylating agents. However, for the acquired TMZ resistance of GBM cells, the mechanism still remains unclear.
Over the past years, extensive genomics and proteomics studies have been conducted and also greatly advanced our understanding of the molecular mechanism which underlies the pathogenesis of GBM. However, most of these studies mainly focus on the whole proteome and genome. Subcellular distribution of proteins under different conditions is a major challenge in cell biology indeed; thus subcellular proteome has been developed to address this issue reliably. Simultaneously, using bioinformatic analysis such as gene ontology (GO), pathway enrichment information, and network-based approaches can also help us to identify the exact molecular mechanism.
Our previous researches indicated that TMZ treatment for 1 week could induce the reconstruction of cytoskeleton and activate epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and autophagy process of GBM cells. And phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) signaling pathway also contributed to the acquired TMZ resistance of GBM cells. In order to explore key candidate proteins and pathways which may play important roles in acquired TMZ resistance, and in consideration of all the biological processes identified in our previous studies occurring in cytoplasma, then we conducted a cytoplasmic proteome research of U87 GBM cells treated with TMZ for 1 week. Further we performed KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, protein–protein interaction (PPI) network and subnetwork analysis, and validation of key candidate proteins in TCGA-GBM dataset. Finally 9 important proteins were identified as the key candidate proteins, which may serve as reliable biomarkers for the prediction or prevention of acquired TMZ resistance of GBM in the future.