PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Brain
diseases: Brain cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480; Q Exactive
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Tmt; Glioblastoma; Phospho; Low-input

ABSTRACT:
Understanding cellular diversity and disease mechanisms requires global analysis of proteins and their modifications. Ultrasensitive mass spectrometry-based proteomics enables unbiased protein-level analysis of low cell numbers, down to single cells. However, phosphoproteomics remains limited to high-input samples due to sample losses and poor reaction efficiencies associated with processing low cell numbers. In this study, we have used isobaric stable isotope labelling as a promising approach for reproducible and accurate quantification of low abundant phosphopeptides. Here, we introduce SPARCE (Streamlined Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Rare CElls) for multiplexed phosphoproteomic analysis of low cell numbers. SPARCE outperforms traditional methods by enhancing labelling efficiency and phosphoproteome coverage. To demonstrate the utility of SPARCE, we analysed four patient-derived glioblastoma stem cell lines, reliably quantifying phosphosite changes from 1,000 FACS-sorted cells. This workflow expands the possibilities for signalling analysis of rare cell populations.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Multiplexed phosphoproteomics of low cell numbers using SPARCE

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells were lysed with either 20 μL water or 8 M urea (including protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Water-lysed samples were subjected to freeze-thaw cycles, followed by sonication. Urea-lysed samples did not undergo freeze-thaw cycles. Proteins were reduced using 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM TEAB at 37°C for 20 minutes, and alkylated using 5 mM CAM in TEAB at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes. For urea-based lysis, TEAB was added to reduce urea concentration to <1.5 M before digestion. Proteins were digested using Trypsin. The amount was ample amount dependent. Samples were acidified and desalted using ZipTip C18 columns, lyophilised, and resuspended in 10 μL water.   For In-solution TMTpro labelling, peptides were labelled with 3–24 μg of TMTpro zero reagent (resuspended in acetonitrile) for 1 hour at room temperature. Excess TMT reagent was quenched with 0.04% hydroxylamine. A second desalting step was performed. For On-tip TMTpro labelling, the TMT labelling was carried out during the ZipTip desalting. Peptides were washed with 50 mM potassium phosphate (pH 6.5). TMTpro was resuspended in the phosphate buffer. 10 μL TMTpro reagent was loaded onto the tip and centrifuged at 110 g. During the one-hour labelling reaction, the tip was kept wet in phosphate buffer by reloading the flowthrough and ensuring the liquid was visible at both sides of the C18 bed. Samples were acidified using 0.1% TFA and washed with 5% ACN/ 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted using 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and lyophilised.  Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using Zr-IMAC HP beads (MagReSyn), according to the manufacturer's instructions, with the only exception that TFA was used instead of FA to acidify the sample after elution. Post-enrichment desalting was carried out using BioPureSPN Mini, PROTO 300 C18 spin columns (Nest Group).  All label-free experiments evaluating lysis and digestion conditions were performed on a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to Easy-nLC 1200. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid over 30 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Precursor ions were measured in data-dependent mode at a resolution of 70,000 and AGC target value of 3 × 106 ions using a top10 method.  All experiments with TMTpro zero/TMTpro were analysed in DDA mode on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 interfaced coupled to Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated over 60 min at a flow rate of 150 nL/min.  The MS1 scan was acquired at 120,000 resolution targeting ions in the scan range 375-1200 m/z. The Normalised AGC target was set to 300% (3e6 ions) (max. MS1 injection time set to “Auto”). The precursor ions were isolated with 0.7 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) of 32. The MS2 scans were acquired at 45,000 (TMTpro zero) or 60,000 (TMTpro) resolution with the First mass set to 110 m/z (TMTpro zero) or 126.5 m/z (TMTpro). The Normalised AGC target set to 50% with “Auto” max. MS2 injection time (TMTpro zero) or 90% with 150 ms max. MS2 injection time (TMTpro). For TMTpro zero samples, the duty cycle time was set to 2 sec. Top 12 method was used for TMTpro samples.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis: Label free and TMTpro zero data were searched using MaxQuant (v 2.3.1) against the human proteome sequence database retrieved from SwissProt on November 6, 2020. For LFQ data, Oxidation (M), Carbamidomethyl (C) and Acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. For TMT-pro zero data without phosphopeptide enrichment, TMTpro zero (K), TMTpro zero (peptide N-term), TMTpro zero (H, S, T), Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. For TMT-pro zero data with phosphopeptide enrichment, TMTpro zero (K), TMTpro zero (peptide N-term), TMTpro zero (H), Phosphorylation (S, T, Y), Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximally 2 missed cleavages allowed. Minimum peptide length was set to 7, and the maximum peptide mass was set to 4600 Da. To determine higher missed cleavage rates, a search using a missed cleavage rate of 5 was used for the trypsin amount optimisation experiment (Figure 2B). To ensure high confidence identifications, peptide-spectral matches, peptides, and proteins were filtered at a less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The ‘match between runs’ feature was off. Default settings were applied to the remaining parameters. The partial-labelling rate was calculated as the ratio between the number of PSMs which had been labelled but had one or more unlabelled sites, and the total number of fully labelled PSMs. The overlabelling rate was calculated as the ratio between the number of PSMs, which had one or more labelled serine/threonine/histidine residues, and the total number of fully labelled PSMs.  DDA-TMTpro data were searched using Fragpipe (v 20.0) using a modified “TMT18-Phospho” workflow. Raw data was searched against the human proteome sequence database retrieved from SwissProt on November 6, 2020, decoy sequences and contamination sequences were automatically added by Fragpipe. The following modifications were made; TMTpro (H), Phosphorylation (S, T, Y), Oxidation (M) and Acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications, and TMTpro (K), TMTpro (peptide N-term) were set as fixed modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximally 2 missed cleavages allowed. Minimum peptide length was set to 7, and the maximum peptide mass was set to 5000 Da. MSBooster rescoring, Percolator for PSM validation, PTMProphet for modification localisation and TMT-Integrator with Philosopher for reporter ion quantification were enabled and MSstats files were generated.  Bioinformatic Analysis: Phosphosite quantification and differential expression analysis were performed using MSstatsPTM. Kinase activity enrichment was performed using PTM-SEA, with the iKiP database and the ranking metric -log10(Adj.P -value)*Sign(log2FC) calculated with the pairwise comparison results from MSstatsPTM. The output from the PTM-SEA analysis was filtered to select kinases with a significant (adjusted p-value < 0.05) normalised enrichment score (NES) in at least one comparison for the low-plex analysis.