PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast
diseases: Seminoma; Embryonal carcinoma; Germ cell cancer; Teratoma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: Label free; Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Germ cell tumor; Seminoma; Embryonal carcinoma; Cancer-associated fibroblast; Tumor microenvironment; Teratoma

ABSTRACT:
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) as one abundant cell type of the tumor microenvironment are known to have tumor supporting abilities by promoting tumor proliferation and modulating the immunal landscape. In this study, germ cell tumor-derived CAF were molecular and epigenetically characterized to identify CAF secreted signal molecules which play a pivotal role in the GCT-CAF interaction.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Characterization of cancer-associated fibroblasts from ex vivo germ cell tumors

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Secretome data of CAF populations isolated from seminoma (SE), embryonal carcinoma (EC) and teratoma (TE). 6 SE-CAF, 3 EC-CAF, 3 TE-CAF as well as 5 non-malignant fibroblasts cultures were seeded, cultivated for 24 h, washed with PBS and incubated in DMEM (without supplements). After 24 h the supernatants were collected, and secreted proteins were analyzed via liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry. Sample preparation was carried out as described in PMID: 33950499.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectra were acquired in data-independent acquisition mode and raw files processed for protein identification and quantification with DiaNN 1.8.1 with standard parameters unless stated otherwise. Search were carried out on a spectral library predicted from protein entries from the MaxQuant2.1.0.0 contamination list and 81837 homo sapiens entries downloaded from the UniProt KB proteome section on 12th January 2023. Methionine oxidation was included as variable modification in the search. Only Proteins were considered showing a q-value on PSM und protein group level of < 0.01 and only proteins which were identified with at least two different peptides.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Germ cell tumors (GCT) are the most common solid tumors in young men of age 15 - 40. In previous studies, we profiled the interaction of GCT cells with cells of the tumor microenvironment (TM), which showed that especially the 3D interaction of fibroblasts (FB) or macrophages with GCT cells influenced the growth behavior and cisplatin response as well as the transcriptome and secretome of the tumor cells, suggesting that the crosstalk of these cells with GCT cells is crucial for tumor progression and therapy outcome. In this study, we shed light on the mechanisms of activation of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) in the GCT setting and their effects on GCT cells lines and the monocyte cell line THP-1. Ex vivo cultures of GCT-derived CAF were established and characterized molecularly and epigenetically by performing DNA methylation arrays, RNA sequencing, and mass spectrometry-based secretome analysis. We demonstrated that the activation state of CAF is influenced by their former prevailing tumor environment in which they have resided. Hereby, we postulate that seminoma (SE) and embryonal carcinoma (EC) activate CAF, while teratoma (TER) play only a minor role in CAF formation. In turn, CAF influence proliferation and the expression of cisplatin sensitivity-related factors in GCT cells lines as well as polarization of in vitro-induced macrophages by the identified effector molecules IGFBP1, LGALS3BP, LYVE1, and PTX3. Our data suggests that the vital interaction of CAF with GCT cells and with macrophages has a huge influence on shaping the extracellular matrix as well as on recruitment of immune cells to the TM. In conclusion, therapeutically interfering with CAF and / or macrophages in addition to the standard therapy might slow-down progression of GCT and re-shaping of the TM to a tumor-promoting environment. Significance: The interaction of CAF with GCT and macrophages considerably influences the microenvironment. Thus, therapeutically interfering with CAF might slow-down progression of GCT and re-shaping of the microenvironment to a tumor-promoting environment.