PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: iTRAQ
keywords: Hek293t cells; P62; Mass spectrometry analysis

ABSTRACT:
HEK293T cells were ectopically expressing Flag tagged p62 (p62 group) or empty vectors (Control group) for 48h, cell lysates were incubated with anti-Flag affinity gels, and co-immunoprecipitates were subjected to trypsin digestion followed by mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were separated by the EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher) and analyzed by the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Protein analysis were performed with Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher) and searched against Uniprot Human database. Three samples per group.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification of p62-interacting proteins by mass spectrometry analysis in HEK293T cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For digestion, the protein solution was transferred into a new Eppendorf tube and the final volume was adjusted to 100 µL with 90 µL of 8 M urea and 10 µL of riethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. The sample was reduced with 2 µL of 0.5 M Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 37 °C for 60min and alkylated with 4 µL 1M iodoacetamide (IAM) at room temperature for 40min in darkness. Five folds volumes of cold acetone were added to precipitate protein at -20℃ overnight. After centrifugation at 12000 g at 4°C for 20 min, the pellet was washed twice by 1 mL of pre-chilled 90% acetone aqueous solution. Then the pellet was re-suspended with 100 µL of 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio and incubated at 37℃ overnight. The peptide mixture was desalted by Pierce C18 Spin Tips, and then dried in a speed vacuum concentrator

DATA PROCESSING:
Tandem mass spectra were processed by PEAKS Studio version 10.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada). The database was uniprot -homo_sapiens (version 2024, 20608 entries). Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme and semi-Specific was specified as the digest type. PEAKS DB were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm.The max missed cleavages was 2. Carbamidomethyl on Cysteine was specified as the fixed modification. Oxidation on methionine, Deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, Acetylation on Protein N-term were specified as the variable modifications. The peptides with 1%FDR and the proteins with 1%FDR and containing at least 1 unique peptide were filtered.

INTRODUCTION:
Autophagy is a conserved catabolic process in which organelles, macromolecules and pathogens are degraded via lysosomes [ , ]. Sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1), also known as p62, the first autophagy receptor identified, binds to ubiquitin on targets and LC3 on phagophores, mediating the selective autophagy of ubiquitinated substrates [ , ]. To identify the potential interacting partners for p62, Flag-tagged p62 was transfected into HEK293T cells and used as bait to Co-immunoprecipitate (Co-IP) with proteins that form a complex with p62. More materials and methods are provided in the . The proteins were then identified via mass spectrometry analysis. Two E3 ubiquitin ligases, TRIM25 and ITCH, were identified as the highest confidence hits in a list of identified proteins ( Figure 1A and ). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed that p62-interacting proteins were enriched in the ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation, protein folding, oxidative phosphorylation, autophagy, etc., signalling pathways ( Figure 1B).  
Validation assays were then performed to test the E3 ubiquitin ligases for p62 identified in this study. Both endogenously and ectopically expressed p62 formed a complex with the E3 ubiquitin ligases TRIM25 and ITCH ( Figure 1C,D and A). GST pull-down assays revealed that recombinant TRIM25 and ITCH directly interact with p62 ( Figure 1E and B). As detected by fluorescence microscopy analysis, mCherry-tagged TRIM25 and GFP-tagged p62 were colocalized mainly in the cytoplasm of HeLa cells ( Figure 1F). Ubiquitination assays were performed to determine whether TRIM25 and ITCH are merely interacting partners or true E3 ubiquitin ligases for p62. One potential explanation for this phenomenon is that ITCH requires assistance from a specific protein or undergoes a particular modification to activate its ability to ubiquitinate p62. Alternatively, it is conceivable that p62 needs to be modified to be ubiquitinated by ITCH. Exogenously expressed p62 was efficiently ubiquitinated by TRIM25 but not by ITCH ( Figure 1G and C). These results suggest that TRIM25 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for p62, whereas ITCH is only an interacting partner. 
A reconstituted E. coli ubiquitination system, which has been used in several of our studies, was included in this study [ – ]. The p62 proteins recovered from the E. coli ubiquitination system ( Figure 1H) were subjected to mass spectrometry analysis, and fifteen Lys (K) residues of p62 were identified ( Figure 1I). As shown in D, K7 and K189 were validated as the two major sites for the TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination of p62 in mammalian cells. The mutant bearing simultaneous K-to-R substitutions (K7/189R) at the two Lys residues almost completely abolished the TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination of p62 ( Figure 1J). Four shRNAs targeting TRIM25 were designed and tested in HeLa and Caski cells ( E), and shTRIM25-1 and shTRIM25-2 were selected for further study. TRIM25 knockdown reduced p62 ubiquitination ( F), which was effectively reversed by exogenously expressed TRIM25 in both HeLa and Caski cells ( Figure 1K). 
In HEK293T cells, the TRIM25-mediated reduction in p62 protein expression was blocked by treatment with the autophagy inhibitor bafilomycin (BAF) but not by treatment with the proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) ( Figure 2A). Upon undergoing ubiquitination, p62 enhances its interaction with LC3 through its LC3-interacting region (LIR) domain. This interaction enables p62 to be recruited to the phagophore membrane, where it facilitates the formation of autophagosomes. The subsequent fusion of the autophagosome with a lysosome leads to the degradation of both p62 and its associated ubiquitinated cargoes by lysosomal enzymes . Treatment with cycloheximide (CHX), a protein synthesis inhibitor, led to TRIM25-mediated degradation of ectopically expressed p62 in HEK29T cells ( Figure 2B). Further analysis revealed that TRIM25 promoted the degradation of wild-type p62 but not the K7/189R mutant ( Figure 2C). The protein level of endogenous p62 was greater in TRIM25-knockdown cells than in control cells in the presence of CHX ( Figure 2D).  
As p62 is an autophagy receptor, the effects of TRIM25-p62 ubiquitination signaling on the autophagy of cells were explored. GFP-LC3 puncta formation and LC3 II protein levels were greater in TRIM25-knockdown HeLa cells than in control cells ( Figure 2E–G). Further studies revealed that TRIM25 was able to reduce GFP-LC3 puncta formation and the level of the LC3 II protein activated by p62 ( Figure 2H–J). 
Taken together, TRIM25 has been identified as a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase for p62. It targets p62 for lysosomal degradation, thereby inhibiting autophagy activation in mammalian cells ( Figure 2K). Our experiments were performed mainly in cell lines, so the relevance of TRIM25-p62 ubiquitination signaling in in vivo models remains unclear and needs to be further investigated. Although several proteins, including UBCH5A/B and TRIM21 [ , ], have been identified as E3 ligases for p62, our study may provide new insights for the development of therapeutic strategies targeting these related pathophysiological processes. 

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
Supplementary Data
Supplementary data is available at Acta Biochimica et Biophysica Sinica online. 