PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
diseases: Crohn's disease
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Lps; Manganese; Oxidation; Cysteine; Ros

ABSTRACT:
Overproduction of reactive oxygen species and antioxidant superoxide dismutases (SOD1, SOD2) dysregulation contribute to chronic inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) pathogenesis. A kinetic redox proteomic strategy (OcSILAC) was used to explore the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) effect, together with the role of the Mn1 SOD-mimic, in the intestinal HT29-MD2 cellular model. Cysteine oxidation was the main early event of LPS treatment, attenuated over 6 h, as counteracted by rapid response systems on both protein levels (SOD1, NQO1, ALDH1) and post-translational levels (oxidized peroxiredoxins), and a late preponderant increased SOD2 level. Mn1 exerted a potent antioxidant effect, limiting the LPS-induced oxidation and increasing antioxidant enzyme levels, and a variable anti-inflammatory effect attenuating the level of most of the LPS-regulated proteins. Our results reveal the multifaceted LPS effect in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and highlight Mn1 as a potential effective anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory agent for IBD treatment, and a useful tool to explore the oxidation and inflammation interconnection.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Kinetic redox proteomic analysis reveals distinct lipopolysaccharide effects, limited by a manganese Superoxide Dismutase mimic

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Control intestinal epithelial cells were grown in heavy SILAC medium (Arg6, Lys8). Light cells underwent to differeant treatments (LPS, Mn-complex) and harvested at different times. Light and heavy cells were pooled and submitted to a biotin switch protocol using biotin-HPDP. The proteins were digested by trypsin and the resulting peptide mixtures were fractionated onto a streptavidin resin to enrich the oxidized cysteine containing peptides. The unbound  fractions containing cysteine free and reduced cysteine peptides were analyzed by LC-MSMS (Q-Exactive HF). The bound fractions were eluted with 10 mM DTT and analyzed by LC-MSMS.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files of LC-MSMS runs were exploited by MaxQuant. Carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was set on.  MaxQuant evidence and protein group files were used by an in hous R script to obtain quantitative information about cysteine oxidation.