PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Renal glomerulus; Renal glomerular capsule
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Mitochondria; Glycolysis

ABSTRACT:
Mitochondrial dysfunction has emerged as a key contributor to the pathogenesis of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) and genetic focal-segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). This study explores the role of mitochondrial integrity in podocyte biology, focusing on the impact of OMA1, a critical regulator of mitochondrial morphology. Using a model of disrupted mitochondrial homeostasis, we show that mitochondrial dysfunction sensitizes podocytes to insulin, triggering overactivation of mTOR signaling. Disruption of OMA1 function was achieved through deletion of Oma1 or a podocyte-specific knockout of its regulator Phb2. Remarkably, simultaneous Oma1 deletion extended the lifespan of severely affected Phb2pko mice, alleviated proteinuria, and restored mitochondrial morphology. Increased mTOR activity was observed in Phb2pko, Oma1del, and Phb2/Oma1 double-knockout mice. Our findings highlight the critical role of mitochondrial integrity in podocyte function and disease mitigation, providing potential therapeutic insights for mitochondrial dysfunction-associated nephropathies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mitochondrial IntegrityMitochondrial Integrity Modulates mTOR Signaling and Podocyte Function  Modulates mTOR Signaling and Podocyte Function

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic studies were conducted as previously described.60, 66 Briefly, cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and Pierce protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Chromatine was degraded using Athena Ultrasonic Probe Sonicator (Athena Technologies, Mumbai, IND) and cleared using centrifugation (16.000g, 45 minutes at 4°C). After determination of protein concentration with a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 800µg of total protein per sample was reduced with 5 mM DTT for 60 minutes and alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetamide for 60 minutes before adding 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate to the solution at a ratio of 1:4 and trypsin for over-night digestion supplemented to the solution at a ratio of 1:100. The following day 100% formic acid was added at a ratio of 1:200 to stop digestion and samples were cleared using centrifugation (16.000g, 10 minutes, room temperature). Purification was performed using Oasis HLB 1cc/30mg columns (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Before drying samples using speedvac, 30µg of total protein was stored at -20°C for proteome measurements. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit with immobilized metal affinity chromatography colums according to manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), dried using speedvac and resuspended in 0,1% formic acid. Peptides were analysed as previously described using an LTQ Orbitrap Discovery mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to a Proxeon EASY-nLC II nano-LC system (Proxeon/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a flowrate of 250nl/min over 150 minutes 60. MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-2000 m/z at a resolution of 70000. The 10 most intense peptides were isolated within a 2 Da window and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation as previously described.67 Four biological replicates were used per experimental group.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files were analysed using MaxQuant Suite 1.5.0.1 algorithms with LFQ and match between runs enabled and searched against mouse uniprot reference database. Mass accuracy was 20ppm with deisotoping option enabled while mass tolerance was 0,5 Da. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethylation of cystines, variable modifications were phosphorylation on S, T, Y and oxidation of methionine with a maximum of four modificatons allowed. Protein, peptide and site false discovery rate was set to be 0.1 by default. LFQ and phosphorylation site intensities were logarithmized, potential contaminants removed and normalized by substraction of the mean. Using Perseus 1.5, GO Terms were annotated and categorical 1D enrichment analysis by a Fisher’s exact test was performed.