PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: T cell; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Abpp; Chemical proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Lysine residue represents an attractive site for covalent drug development due to high abundance (5.6%) and critical functions. However, very few lysines have been characterized to be accessible to covalent ligands and perturb the protein functions, owning to their protonation state and adjacent steric hindrance. Herein, we report a new lysine bioconjugation chemistry, O-Cyanobenzaldehydes (CNBA), that enables selective modification of the lysine ε-amine to form iso-indolinones under physiological conditions. Proteome profiling enabled the mapping of 85 endogenous kinases in live cells, highlighting its potential for modifying buried catalytic lysines within the kinome. Further protein crystallography and mass spectrometry confirmed that K271_ABL1 and K162_AURKA are covalently targetable sites in kinases. Leverag-ing a structure-based drug design (SBDD), we incorporated CNBA into the core structure of Nutlin-3 to irreversibly inhibit MDM2-p53 interaction by targeting an exposed lysine K94 on the surface of MDM2. Importantly, we have demonstrated the potential application of CNBA as a lysine-recognized bioconjugation agent for developing new Antibody-drug conju-gates (ADCs). The results collectively validate CNBA as a new selective and efficient modifying agent with broad applica-tions for both buried and exposed lysine residues in live cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
O-Cyanobenzaldehydes (CNBA) Irreversibly Modify both Bur-ied and Exposed Lysine Residues in Live Cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell Culture and compound treatment Jurkat cells were treated with LH-10-81 or LH-10-18 (5 μM) in serum-free RPMI-1640 medium at 37°C for 12 h. An equal number of cells were treated by DMSO in serum-free medium as a control. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 100 g for 5 min and washed with PBS. Then cell pellets were lysed in a solution containing 50 mM HEPES pH 8.2, 1.5 % (vol/vol) Triton X-100, 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide, 1 mM aminoguanidine, 50 U/mL non-restriction nucleases (Beyotime, D7121), and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Beyotime, P1005) on ice. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000g for 6 minutes at 4°C, and the resulting supernatants were transferred to new tubes for the copper-catalyzed azide alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC). Cell lysis and click reaction. Dde biotin picolyl azide (Click Chemistry Tools) was dissolved in DMSO and added to the cell lysates to achieve a final concentration of 200 μM. The 10X CuAAC catalyst buffer was prepared based on a previous study with sight modifications [ , ]. Briefly, CuSO4, tris(3-hydroxypropyltriazolylmethyl) amine (THPTA), aminoguanidine, and freshly made sodium ascorbate solution were sequentially mixed and added to PBS to achieve final concentrations of 6 mM, 30 mM, 12 mM, and 60 mM, respectively. This catalyst buffer was placed on ice for 10 min and then added to lysates at a copper concentration of 0.6 mM, and incubated for 90 min at room temperature (RT).  Pulldown of the labeled proteins and on-bead digestion. The unreacted probes were removed by the methanol-chloroform protein precipitation method. The protein pellets were fully dissovled in urea-SDS buffer (6 M urea, 1% SDS, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Then proteins were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM TCEP and 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 50 mM ABC. The biotinlyated proteins were enriched with streptavidin beads (Cytiva #17511301; 1 μL bead volume for 106 cells) at RT for 4 h on an end-over-end rotator. Beads were then transferred to spin column, washed three times with urea-SDS buffer, once with 1.5 M NaCl, and three times with 20% ethanol to completely remove SDS. The beads were incubated in a mixture of 8 ng/μL trypsin (Promega) and 1.6 ng/μL Lys-C (Wako) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The on-bead digestion was performed on an end-over-end rotator at 37 °C overnight. Finally, the digestion mixtures were acidified using 0.5% TFA, desalted using StageTips, and lyophilized. LC–MS/MS analysis Peptide samples were dissolved in a solution containing 5% acetonitrile (ACN) and 4% formic acid (FA). Analysis was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled with a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 25% buffer B over 48 minutes, followed by a 5-minute gradient to 40% B, and 1 minutes to 97% B at a flow rate of 250 nL/min (Buffer A: 0.1% FA in water; Buffer B: 0.1% FA in 90% ACN). Eluted peptides were analyzed using a Top12 method, featuring full MS scans (m/z 360-1200) at 60,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3×106, and a maximum IT of 45 ms. For MS2 analysis, settings included a resolution of 15,000, an AGC target of 1×105, a maximum IT of 22 ms, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, HCD with an NCE of 27, and a dynamically excluded time of 30 seconds. Data acquisition was conducted using Xcalibur 4.6 software.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw ﬁles were analyzed by searching against the UniProtKB human proteome database (UP000005640; December 2023 release) using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) . The search included common contaminants and employed a reverse database to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR), which was set at 1% for both peptides and proteins. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was designated as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and asparagine deamidation were considered variable modifications. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed with a minimum ratio count of 1 and without the build-in normalization, and the "match between runs" option was activated to evaluate protein abundance. The data processing followed a previously published method with minor adjustments . Proteins identified as reverse hits, potential contaminants, "only identified by site," or those with fewer than two razor and unique peptides were excluded. The ﬁrst reviewed protein entry in each protein group was selected as representative. For quantification, proteins were selected if they were identified "by MS/MS" across all three replicates in at least one experimental group. The LFQ intensities were subjected to log2 transformation and median normalization. Missing values were estimated using a normal distribution model with a width parameter of 0.3 and a shift parameter of 1.8. Statistical analyses were conducted using the limma R package, version 3.60.4, employing an empirical Bayes moderated t-test for comparisons between two groups. The p-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Proteins with an adjusted p-value of less than 0.05 and an absolute log2 fold change greater than 1 were deemed to be statistically significant.