PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation; Acetyl
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Lc-ms; Human; E.coli

ABSTRACT:
We prepared a benchmark dataset where the various levels of spikeed-in E. Coli proteome that true fold change (i.e. 1 fold, 1.5 fold, 2 fold, 2.5 fold and 3 fold) and true identities of positives/negatives (i.e. E.Coli proteins are true positives while Human proteins are true negatives) are known. To best mimic the proteomics application in comparison of multiple replicates, each fold change

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
In-depth and reproducibly quantitation of benchmark dataset consiting of 20 files

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We prepared a set of spike-in samples by spiking E.Coli proteome(at small portions, representing altered proteins) into human proteome(large portion, representing unchanged background proteins). DH5α E. Coli lysate were spiked in human pancreatic cancer cells(Panc-1) lysate at five different levels: 1 fold(2% E.Coli), 1.5 fold(3% E.Coli), 2 fold(4% E.Coli), 2.5 fold(5% E.Coli) and 3 fold(6% E.Coli). The mixed samples were alkylated, precipitated and digested.4 µL of samples containing 2 µg peptides were loaded onto a reversed-

DATA PROCESSING:
Database searching: MS GF+ searching using concatenated human and E.Coli database; Searching result merging: Scaffold 4.0. Identification criteria: <1% Protein FDR and Pepetide FDR with at leat 2 unique peptides. Quantitation: IonStar(SIEVE+IonStar-processing

METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Sample Sets Used in This Study
Human Cell Samples for Development of Sample Preparation, Separation and MS Identification/Quantification
To benchmark and optimize the methods, a series of protein lysates from human MIA PaCa-2 cell line were employed. For evaluation of the sample preparation efficiency and reproducibility, we prepared 48 human MIA PaCa-2 cell samples that were treated by different regimen and collected at different time points. For development and optimization of LC and MS methods, a pooled sample is used. Additional details are in Supplementary Methods.
Spike-In Sample Set Benchmarking Quantitative Performance
In order for an extensive evaluation of the quantitative performances of the developed strategy, we prepared a set of spike-in samples by spiking small, variable levels of DH5α E. coli digest (representing altered proteins) into a large, constant level of human cell Panc-1 cell digest, as shown in Supplementary Figure S5. Protein extraction, digestion, and LC–MS analysis were performed using optimized procedures specified below. There are five groups each with a different level of spiked-in E. coli digest: 1 fold (labeled A), 1.5 folds (B), 2 folds (C), 2.5 folds (D) and 3 folds (E), with four replicates per group (N = 4) and totally 20 samples. Samples were analyzed by LC–MS in an alternating sequence in order to avoid bias. Group A was used as control group for ratio calculation. p-value of each comparison pair was calculated by two-sample Student’s t test.
Protein Extraction
Briefly, samples were placed in an ice-cold lysis buffer (containing 50 mM Tris-FA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and 2% SDS, 1.5% IGEPAL CA-630, pH 8.0) including Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN). The mixture was homogenized with a Polytron homogenizer (Kinematica AG, Switzerland) by repeating the homogenization (at 15 000 rpm, 5–10 s) and cooling (about 20 s) cycles for 5–10 times. Sonication was then performed using a probe. Each sonication cycle takes 20s, whereas each sample subjects to 3–5 cycles until the solution became pellucid. Then the mixture was centrifuged at 20 000g under 4 °C for 1 h. The supernatant was carefully transferred, and the protein concentration for each sample was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Inc., Rockford, IL) before storage under −80 °C.
Surfactant-Aided On-Pellet Digestion
Portions of 100 µg total proteins from each sample were transferred and then reduced by addition of 5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min, followed by alkylation by addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) and incubated in darkness for 30 min. The reduction and alkylation of proteins were both conducted under 37 °C with rigorous oscillation in an Eppendorf Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hauppauge, NY) at 200 rpm. The proteins were precipitated by stepwise addition of 6 volumes of chilled acetone with incessant vortexing, and were incubated under −20 °C for >4 h. After centrifugation at 20 000g under 4 °C for 30 min, the supernatants were discarded and the pellets containing precipitated proteins were washed with 500 µL of chilled acetone/water mixture (85/15, v/v %) and left to partially air-dry. For the on-pellet digestion, trypsin at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:20 (w/w), dissolved in 100 µL of Tris buffer (50 mM, pH 8.5), was added to the precipitated protein pellets, and the mixture was incubated under 37 °C for 6 h with constant vortexing in an Eppendorf Thermomixer. Digestion was terminated by addition of 1% formic acid.
Nano LC/UHF-Orbitrap LUMOS MS Analysis
The optimized LC–MS conditions are shown here, while the process of optimization is in the following sections. The nano-RPLC (reverse-phase liquid chromatography) system is consisted of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system and an Ultimate 3000 gradient micro-LC system with a WPS-3000 autosampler. The flow set up is shown in Supplementary Figure S2. A GE Healthcare Life Sciences (Princeton, NJ) zero-dead-volume conductivity sensor (taken from a MDLC system and data collected using Unicorn package) was connected between trap and column for debugging and real time flow monitoring. Mobile phase A and B were 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in 88% acetonitrile, respectively. Four µL of samples containing 4 µg peptides were loaded onto a reversed-phase trap (300 µm ID × 5 mm), with 1% mobile phase B at a flow rate of 10 µL/min, and the trap was washed for 3 min. A series of nano flow gradients (flow rate at 250 nL/min) was used to back-flush the trapped samples onto the nano-LC column (75-µm ID × 100 cm, packed with 3 µm Peptidemap C18) for separation, and the optimized gradient profile was as following: 4–13% B over 15 min; 13% to 28% B over 110 min; 28% to 44% B over 5 min; 44% to 60% B over 5 min; 60% to 97% B in 1 min, and finally isocratic at 97% B for 17 min. The trap was switched offline at 45 min to prevent hydrophobic matrix components from entering the column. The nano-LC column was heated at 52 °C to improve both chromatographic resolution and reproducibility. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used for MS analysis. For detailed MS parameters, see Supplementary Methods.
Protein Identification and Quantification
We employed a stringent set of criteria for protein identification, including low peptide and protein FDR (<1%) and ≥2 peptides per protein. An ion current-based data processing method (IonStar processing pipleline) was employed for MS1 quantification in large cohorts. More details are in Supplementary Methods.

RESULTS:
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
1. Development and Optimization of the IonStar Experimental Procedures for MS1 Quantification Based on an UHF-Orbitrap Platform
Here we extensively developed and optimized the IonStar experimental procedures for MS1 quantification, including (i) a new sample preparation protocol enabling reproducible and robust extraction, cleanup and digestion of biological samples and providing high and consistent protein and peptide recovery; (ii) nanoflow LC related developments (e.g., investigations of gradient delivery stabilization and enhanced quantitative loading capacity, and a selective trapping/delivery strategy) to achieve sensitive, in-depth and robust analysis of many samples with high run-to-run reproducibility; and (iii) optimal MS detection approaches for selective and sensitive procurement of high-resolution MS1 ion currents as well as extensive peptide identification; as the Q/UHF-Orbitrap affords dramatically improved sensitivity, cycle-time and rapid high-resolution measurement over lower-field-Oribitrap and thus substantially changes the detectable proteomics landscape, we developed new optimal MS approaches for MS1 ion current-based quantification using this platform. Taken together, these elements would provide a solid foundation for accurate, reproducible and in-depth ion current-based quantification in larger cohorts.
1.1. Surfactant-Aided Precipitation/On-Pellet-Digestion for Efficient and Reproducible Sample Preparation
To achieve reliable proteomic profiling of larger biological cohorts, it is critically important to develop a robust sample preparation procedure for efficient and reproducible proteins extraction, cleanup and digestion. Previously we reported an overnight on-pellet-digestion method for reproducible sample preparation; recently, our lab has described a surfactant-aided-precipitation/on-pellet-digestion(SOD) strategy for targeted LC/SRM-MS analysis of protein drugs, which affords rapid digestion of a target mAb in plasma and tissues. Nonetheless, this method has not been investigated in proteomics studies. Here we modified this protocol (e.g., investigation of detergent composition, proteolytic conditions, etc.) to attain optimal sample treatment for global proteomics quantification. Briefly, cell or tissue samples are thoroughly lysed using polytron homogenizer and sonication in a strong buffer containing an optimized cocktail of ionic and nonionic detergents (i.e., IGEPAL CA-630, SDS, sodium deoxycholate, details in Experimental Procedures). This procedure was found to achieve efficient disruption of cellular structures, as well as exhaustive and consistent protein extraction including membrane proteins. A following organic solvent precipitation step removes detergents and nonprotein components. The use of buffered detergent-cocktail prior to precipitation effectively removed detrimental matrix components such as phospholipids and fatty acids, as we showed previously, and the thorough protein denaturation by the detergents and precipitation permits robust and effective proteolytic cleavage. Although it was previously found an efficient on-pellet-digestion of antibody drug was achieved in only 30 min at 37 °C, for proteomics, we observed it takes 2 h to obtain the maximal protein identification numbers using a nano-LC coupled to a lower-field-Oritrap, while 6 h for a Q/UHF-Orbitrap (data not shown), likely due to the longer time required to accomplish digestion of low-abundance, hydrophobic proteins that were not detectable with lower-field-Orbitrap. The optimized SOD procedure provides ~20–40% more peptide identifications than popular methods such as in-solution digestion, in-gel digestion, FASP, and precipitation/on-pellet-digestion we described previously. An example for treating large-cohorts of biological samples is shown in Figure 1. The optimized SOD method achieved high and reproducible protein and peptide recoveries, robustly across the 48 biological samples (with >75% recovery and <15% CV, sample details are in Supplementary Methods). This level of efficiency and reproducibility constitutes a solid foundation for reliable large-cohort analysis.
1.2. Chromatographic and Trapping Strategies for Extensive, Highly Reproducible and Sensitive Analysis Across Large Cohorts
Extensive, reproducible and robust chromatographic separation across all biological samples is another critical requirement for reliable label-free quantification. Previously we reported a trap-column system featuring 7-h gradient separation, zero-dead-volume (ZDV)-Tee liquid junction and 2-µm particles. Nonetheless, the effects of configurations on separation reproducibility was not well understood or optimized at the time. In this study, we extensively investigated the mechanisms underlying separation reproducibility and devised a new, optimal chromatographic procedure. In the new design, a large-ID trap was placed on a ZDV valve, and bidirectional flows for loading and analysis were employed for reliable peak compression while preventing hydrophobic and hydrophilic components from entering the nano-LC–MS. An online nanoscale conductivity sensor was used to evaluate gradient delivery and for real-time debugging. The schematics is in Supplementary Figure S1. Moreover, it was discovered the use of 3-µm rather than 2-µm particles carries markedly better robustness for analysis of large cohorts, with a slight trade-off of peak capacity that was later found not critical. This design was found to be very resistant to contamination and individual variations in biological matrices (as is often the case in most clinical/preclinical studies), and provides rugged quantitative analysis of >100 complex biological samples in a single set (cf. Figure 2E).
1.2.1. Effects of Column and Gradient Lengths on Depth of Identification
Since most MS1-based methods rely on MS2 fragmentation information to assign peptide ID to quantified features, an in-depth MS2 identification is important. Previously we reported a 100 cm-long column with a 7-h gradient provided optimal identification when a low-field LTQ/Orbitrap (without quad isolation) was employed. Nonetheless, the much higher sensitivity, depth and cycle speed by the hybrid Q/UHF-Orbitrap likely shifts the optima of chromatographic conditions. Here we optimized the column length and gradient time by balancing the considerations of throughput and depth of proteomic analysis. Four column lengths (25–100 cm) and four gradient times (40 min to 5 h) were investigated using human cell digests (N = 3 replicates per condition). Representative results are shown in Supplementary Figure S2. With the exception of the 40 min gradient, it was found protein ID increases significantly (p < 0.01) with the length of column, and thus the 100 cm column was determined optimal. Although a 5-h gradient yields the highest protein ID, the increase of ID from 2.5-h to 5-h gradient is much less drastic than those from 1.5 to 2.5-h gradient. This observation is quite different from the observations on a lower-field Orbtirap, where longer gradients provided substantial benefits over shorter gradients. We speculate this is because the much faster scan rate, parallelizable MS1/MS2 processes, and higher sensitivity by the Quadrupole-UHF Orbitrap markedly decreases the need of achieving very high peak capacity. Considering the importance of a reasonable throughput for analysis of large cohorts, the 2.5-h gradient was chosen.
1.2.2. A Large-ID Trap and a Selective Trapping/Delivery Strategy Enabled Robust and Reproducible Separation of Large Cohorts
Previously we observed the use of a trap upstream of the nanocolumn may help to improve the reproducibility of nano-LC separation, but the underlying mechanism has yet not been fully investigated, nor was this approach further developed or optimized.
Here we hypothesized the use of a large-ID trap may contribute to high LC–MS analytical reproducibility and robustness in two ways: first, the trap could enable reproducible gradient delivery to the downstream column by providing homogeneous mobile phase mixing; second, a selective peptide trapping/delivery strategy can prevent detrimental hydrophobic and hydrophilic matrix components from entering the nano-LC–MS system, and thus effectively improving the reproducibility and robustness for both chromatographic separation and MS1 signal detection.
To examine the first point, we connected a ZDV conductivity sensor to the inlet of the column to monitor the consistency of gradient delivery in a real-time manner (Supplementary Figure S2). Figure 2A and B shows conductivity profiles for three consecutive runs without and with trap implemented, respectively. When the large-ID trap was not used in the setup, the fluctuating conductivity profiles (Figure 2A) reflect irreproducible gradient delivery to the column, most likely due to incomplete gradient mixing and pump noises (prevalent problems for typical nano-LC systems), which compromises LC–MS reproducibility by causing not only variations of peptide retention times owing to peptide’s strong dependency on the retention factor from the mobile phase composition, but also fluctuation in ionization arising from the micro-pulsation of the liquid phase compressibility and conductivity. Conversely, shown in Figure 2B, the use of an upstream large-ID trap enabled homogeneous mixing and dampened pump noise, as indicated by the smooth and reproducible conductivity profiles. As it is impractical to make a nanoscale mobile phase mixer, using a trap to enable homogeneous gradient mixing at nanoflow is a straightforward solution, which also provides benefits of selective sample clean up and enhanced analytical sensitivity (discussed below). Traps with a length of 5 mm and ID of 75–500 µm were evaluated and a 300 µm ID trap (i.e., 4:1 ID ratio for trap: column) was chosen based on balanced considerations on mixing efficiency, delay volume and loading capacity.
To examine the second point, we developed a novel selective trapping/delivery approach with the large-ID trap. The purpose is efficient recovery of peptides while preventing hydrophilic and hydrophobic matrix/buffer components from entering the nano-LC–MS system, which would otherwise severely compromise analytical reproducibility especially when analyzing a large number of biological samples. Injection without a trap introduces salts and polar compounds into the LC–MS, as evident by the >15 min spike of conductivity (Figure 2C), whereas this effect was eliminated by using the large-ID trap using a low-organic buffer (Figure 2D). More importantly, accumulation of components much more hydrophobic than typical peptides such as lipids and fatty acids on the column could rapidly deteriorate chromatographic and ionization performances. To remove these compounds, we experimentally identified the optimal trap-to-column delivery time, i.e. when the peptides are completely delivered from the trap to the column while more hydrophobic nonprotein components remain on the trap. Right at this time point, we switch the trap offline and employed high-organic mobile phase to flush the hydrophobic compounds to waste. We investigated delivery time from 15 to 120 min, and typical results of peptide ID vs delivery time is shown in Figure 2E. Significant loss of peptide ID were not observed until the delivery time was shortened to 30 min, suggesting 45 min is sufficient to deliver peptides from trap to column; this notion is supported by peptide intensity data as well (not shown). Interestingly, delivery time of 45 and 65 min resulted in more peptide identification (p < 0.01) than 120 min delivery (i.e., representing a nonselective delivery). This phenomenon was repetitively observed in different experimental settings. Further investigation suggested the decreased matrix effect by shorter delivery time most likely contributes to the increased ID. Consequently, 45 min delivery is determined optimal. This selective delivery approach substantially improves the robustness and reproducibility of LC–MS analysis of large cohorts. As shown in Figure 2F, with 45 min delivery, only <15% signal drop for analysis of >100 biological samples was observed without appreciable loss of chromatographic resolution (data not shown), indicating excellent capacity to analyze large biological cohorts. Such minor drop in intensity can be readily corrected by a normalization step. By comparison, using 120 min delivery only <20 samples can be reliably analyzed (assuming signal drop >20% being unacceptable). Such high level of LC–MS reproducibility constitutes another solid foundation for robust large-cohort analysis.
1.2.3. Increased MS1 Quantitative Sensitivity by High-Capacity Loading on the Large-ID Trap
The sensitivity of nano-LC is often limited by the low loading capacity for biological samples. Here we speculated the large-ID trap in conjunction with a relatively shallow gradient provides significantly improved loading capacity and thus the quantitative sensitivity for MS1-based quantification. To examine this hypothesis, we tested the quantitative performance of this system by injecting different amounts of a pooled human cell digest. We define that a loading amount exceeds the quantitative loading capacity of the system if one of the following is violated: (i) < 20% peptide peak broadening compared to a low, 0.25-µg loading; and (ii) S/N of peptides increases linearly with the loading amounts. As evident in Figure 3A and B, hydrophilic peptides (i.e., peptides eluting in the first 15 min of the elution window) are more susceptible to overcapacity most likely due to their lower affinity to the C18 sorbents; therefore these peptides determine the quantitative loading capacity. Without using a large-ID trap, compromised quantitative linearity was observed at 1 µg loading, and a rational quantitative loading capacity determined as ~0.5 µg (Figure 3A). Conversely, when the large-ID trap was employed, the S/N of hydrophilic peptides is almost linear for loading of up to 6 µg peptides, without appreciable peak broadening (Figure 3A). To ensure the robustness of the procedure, an optimal loading amount of 4 µg peptides is adopted in the current system. The high loading capacity markedly improves the sensitivity of ion current measurement, as exemplified in Figure 3B. Owing to the improved sensitivity, the 4-µg loading led to >25% more protein ID and >26.7% peptide ID than 0.5-µg loading without a trap, as shown in Supplementary Figure S3.
1.3. Optimal MS2 Identification Approach under High Loading Amount and Larger Sample Numbers
For ion current-based quantification, peptide/protein identification is important to assign peptide ID of the quantified ion current peaks. Although it was reported that HCD-IT (i.e., HCD fragment scan performed in a dual-cell ion-trap) achieved the best protein ID number among various choices on a hybrid Q/UHF-Orbitrap using 1-µg loading and without using a trap, the high-capacity loading achieved in this study and the use of lager cohorts may shift the dynamics of MS2 data acquisition. Consequently, we investigated the performance of various fragmentation and detection strategies in this study.
In line with previous observations, we found that MS2 fragmentation using quadrupole isolation and HCD generated slightly more identifications than in-trap-CID (data not shown), which is probably because HCD tends to offer more comprehensive backbone fragmentations and reduced window effects. We then compared the two analyzers for MS2 scan (i.e., dual-cell ion trap, IT vs Orbitrap, OT), while the MS1 scans were performed with OT in both cases. Despite that IT provides much higher scan rate and better absolute sensitivity (i.e., more detectable MS2 fragments) than OT, its resolution and mass accuracy are substantially lower. According to our preliminary data, though HCD-IT generated 30% more MS2 spectra than HCD-OT in analysis of the same samples, the percentage of successful PSM achieved by HCD-IT was ~20% comparing to ~50% achieved by HCD-OT when the same protein/peptide FDR were applied, which is again in agreement with previous observation. Then we evaluated the performance of HCD-OT vs HCD-IT at different loading amounts (i.e., 1, 2, and 4 µg of digested peptides). Interestingly, it was observed that HCD-IT identified more proteins than HCD-OT (N = 3) when loading amount was 2 µg or lower (in line with previous reports), most likely because the higher sensitivity of IT helps to identify more lower-abundance proteins at lower loading amount. Nonetheless HCD-OT outperforms HCD-IT at 4-µg loading when utilizing the large-ID trap (p < 0.01, N = 3/condition, Figure 4A), likely reflecting the fact the high resolution/accuracy of OT enables more confident identification and lower FDR, which appears to be a determining factor at higher loading amounts. We further discovered the advantage of high-confidence identification by HCD-OT is much more pronounced when analyzing larger number of samples, which is typically the case in pharmaceutical and biomedical investigations. HCD-OT was found to identify >15% more ID cumulatively than HCD-IT at 20 runs and 4-µg loading (Figure 4B). Moreover, while the gain in protein number along with increased number of runs nearly reached a plateau at 20 runs for HCD-IT, the ID by HCD-OT continues to trend upward. We speculate this is because false-positive identification by HCD-OT increases at a much slower pace along with the increase of runs than HCD-IT, owing to the high confidence of HCD-OT identification. Consequently, the proteomics analysis conducted in this study employs loading of 4 µg samples and HCD-OT for MS2 analysis to achieve in-depth identification and quantification.
1.4. High-Resolution MS1 for Accurate, Sensitive and Selective Quantification
For MS1 quantification, acquisition of peptide ion currents at higher resolutions likely enhances selectivity by lowering chemical noises arising from matrix components with close m/z, which in turn improves quantitative sensitivity, especially for lower-abundance proteins. A previous study showed that S/N increased proportionally to the square root of resolution increase on an Orbitrap Fusion. Here we examined whether high resolution MS1 with rapid scan cycle by UHF-Orbitrap could improve the quantitative performance for ion current-based quantification in complex biological samples. Significantly increased S/N and lower chemical noise for low-abundance peptides were observed at 120 k vs 60 k and 30 k, as exemplified in Figure 5A. In terms of quantification of a spiked-in sample set, using 120 k resolution afforded markedly better accuracy and precision for protein quantification than 60 k and 30 k (Figure 5B). Finally, higher resolution also enables more accurate mass measurement, as reflected by the much narrower distribution of mass differences than that of lower resolution (Supplementary Figure S4).
Though quantitative performances increased marginally beyond 120 k resolution (data not shown), 120 k was determined optimal for an UHF-Orbitrap, to maintain a reasonable throughput.
2. Extensive Evaluation of IonStar for Proteomics Quantification
We comprehensively evaluated the quantitative performances of the developed IonStar Experimental Strategy with a multigroup benchmark sample set. The design is shown in Supplementary Figure S5. Briefly, we spiked small (<6% of total protein mass), various portions of E. coli lysate (i.e., true-positive proteins, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, and 3 folds across the five groups, N = 4/group) into a much larger portion, constant amount of human cell lysate (i.e., true-negative proteins), and then prepared and analyzed with the developed experimental workflow, without any prefractionation. After removing shared peptides between the two species, a total of 6273 proteins were quantified with stringent criteria including low peptide/protein FDR for identification, strict quality control for feature generation and ≥2 peptides/protein. Among these, 6234 (99.4%) proteins were quantified in all 20 samples without missing value. This low level of missing value and excellent depth in proteomics analysis compared favorably to previously reported MS2-DIA methods, which is contributed by the reproducible, in-depth and robust experimental strategy developed here and the comprehensive feature generation by an ion current-based data processing method. Protein quantification results were provided in Supplementary Table S1.
Heatmap visualization of all the protein ratios is shown in Figure 6A. Hierarchy clustering results in a clear-cut between E. coli proteins and human proteins. Owing to the high sensitivity of the technique, quantified proteins span a wide protein abundance value range of 6.5 orders of magnitude, as shown Figure 6B.
For relative quantification, reproducibility of protein measurement profoundly affects both quantitative accuracy and precision. Therefore, we evaluated reproducibility of the method by correlating the quantitative values between two LC–MS analyses of the same sample. As shown in Figure 6C, high correlation (R2 > 0.99) were observed for the quantification of >6000 proteins. This high level of analytical reproducibility resulted in excellent quantitative precision among proteins, with median intragroup CV of 6–9% for all quantified proteins across the five groups (Figure 6D). The accuracies for quantification of E. coli proteins (i.e., the true positives) are summarized in Figure 6E. Median errors of E. coli protein ratios (i.e., relative deviation from the theoretical values) of all 4 comparison pairs were lower than 6%, suggesting superb quantitative accuracy despite of the wide dynamic range of E. coli proteins.
Finally, we evaluated the performance of IonStar in correctly discovering significantly different proteins, one of the ultimate goals for quantitative proteomics. False-positives represent a prominent problem that leads to incorrect biological clues and waste of resources in downstream analysis and validation. In the benchmark data set, false altered proteins discovery rate (FADR, defined in a previous publication) can be easily calculated because all E. coli proteins are true-positives and all human proteins are true-negatives. By applying a ratio cutoff determined by an Experimental Null method we described and p-value cutoff of <0.05, 2.96–7.94% FADR were achieved across the 4 comparison pairs, indicating reliable discovery (Figure 6F). In group pairs where ratio differences were 2–3 fold, >80% of true positives were correctly discovered with low numbers of false-positives; even for the pair with a quite subtle change (50%), >60% sensitivity was achieved. Considering all the true positives were spiked in at low-abundances and spanning a very wide dynamic range, the strategy demonstrated excellent ability in discovering altered proteins.
An application of the IonStar proteomics experimental strategy in characterization of temporary proteomic responses to combinational chemotherapy is shown in Supplementary Figure S6. Gemcitabine is the standard-of-care chemotherapeutics for treating pancreatic cancer (PaCA), however is subjected to high occurrences of drug resistance largely because of induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition and eventually tumor metastasis. Therefore, combining drugs capable of inhibiting epithelial-mesenchymal transition appears to be a viable solution to Gem resistance, and one potential candidate is fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) inhibitors. We have discovered that Gemcitabine combining BGJ398, an FGFR inhibitor, significantly suppressed cell growth/mobility and triggered sustained cell cycle arrest in Gem-resistant human PaCA cell lines (i.e., MIA-RG8). To further investigation underlying mechanisms, we applied the IonStar proteomics strategy to comprehensively characterize the temporal drug-responsive proteome changes. In total, >6000 unique protein groups were quantified without any fractionation and with at least 2 peptides and low FDRs, ~99.5% free of missing values in all the 39 biological samples. These reproducibly quantified proteins likely accounting for almost 50% of expressed human cellular proteome, demonstrating excellent depth of quantification. By applying a ratio threshold of 1.4 fold change and ANOVA p-value threshold of 0.05, 1302 proteins were determined as altered proteins. These proteins are closely related to key biological process such as cell cycle, apoptosis, cell migration and adhesion. A number of interesting biological insights were observed (details not elaborated in this technical paper) and the biological validation is ongoing.

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
For quantitative proteomic research in biomedical and pharmaceutical fields, it is often critical to employ a relatively large number of biological replicates (e.g., patients, animals or various cell conditions) to enhance quantitative reliability and statistical power, and to minimize the false-positive biomarker discovery arising from the typical large interindividual variability. Label-free approaches are often preferred over labeling methods owing to the theoretically unlimited replicate capacity, more flexible sample preparation options and lower cost. However, it is challenging to achieve reliable quantification of larger biological cohorts (e.g., ≥20) using label-free strategies. First, highly robust, reproducible and well-controlled sample preparation, LC separation and MS analysis across large cohorts is critical but difficult to achieve with most existing label-free analysis strategies. Second, missing data remains a prominent issue for both labeling and label-free approaches. While missing data may arise from biological factors, currently the vast majority of missing data in quantitative proteomics are due to technical reasons. Conceivably, poor efficiency and reproducibility in sample preparation and LC–MS analysis would significantly contribute to missing data. Another primary source is the quantitative strategy; for instance, most MS2-based quantification methods (e.g., spectral counting, MS2 total ion current) show high missing data arising from poor reproducibility of data-dependent acquisition (DDA). To enable more reproducible proteomic measurements, MS2-based “data-independent acquisition (DIA)” methods were developed. Though representing a ground-breaking advance, these methods often carry limitations associated with the high-interference spectra and limited depth.
Another label-free quantitative strategy is based on MS1 precursor chromatographic peak areas (i.e., ion current-based approach). Although DDA is often used to assign peptide ID to quantitative features (i.e., MS1 ion current peak areas of the same peptide across all samples), the quantitative features themselves are acquired in a strictly non-data-dependent manner. Therefore, MS1 strategy has a great potential to alleviate the missing data problem that plagues DDA-based proteomics quantification.
Optimal experimental strategies are essential to fully exploit these potentials; however this issue has long been overlooked and thereby not yet been extensively investigated. For example, it remains challenging for most methods to analyze large cohorts due to suboptimal experimental efficiency and reproducibly across many biological samples; moreover, the reported missing-value-rates of popular MS1-based quantitative methods were substantially >10% in >10 technical replicates. Previously we reported a reproducible ion current-based workflow with much lower missing data, but with quite limited depth of proteomics analysis (e.g., quantification of <2000 proteins in human cell lysates). Furthermore, three additional issues have not been addressed: first, we observed using a trap substantially promoted run-to-run reproducibility for LC separation, but the underlying mechanisms were not well-characterized; second, it is possible to perform a selective trapping/delivery strategy to improve reproducibility, sensitivity and robustness, but this potential has not been exploited; third, it was reported the large-ID trap enables loading of higher amount of peptide digests, but it is not clear as to the effects of larger loading mass on quantitative sensitivity of peptides of different polarities.
Finally, the use of quadrupole/ultrahigh-field Orbitrap (Q/UHF-Orbitrap) provides substantially higher MS resolution, scan speed and sensitivity than the lower-field instruments, which holds great promises for in-depth and reproducible MS1-based proteomics analysis. However, so far the vast majority of developmental efforts on this platform is centered on achieving more peptide identifications in a few of samples. Despite of the tremendous advances in this regard, the existing strategies are not likely suitable for MS1 quantification in larger cohorts. Moreover, as the key parameters of MS1-based strategy are heavily dependent on the performance and the characteristics of the MS analyzer, an extensive investigation of the experimental approaches in order to take advantage of this new platform in MS1 quantification, is highly desirable but have not been adequately addressed thus far. To name a few examples: (i) previously we reported a 7-h gradient on a long column is optimal on a lower-field Orbitrap; however, the characteristics of Q/UHF-Orbitrap may shift the optima, e.g., higher-resolution MS1 markedly enhance the quantification and identification selectivity and faster MS scans may shorten the duty cycle thus reducing the need of long-gradient separation; (ii) recent works showed HCD-IT provided the highest ID number among several fragmentation/scan options on a tribrid UHF-Orbitrap instrument; whether this holds true for a large cohort and larger loading amounts remains to be examined; (iii) previously up to 60 k resolution for MS1; conceivably using higher MS1 resolution, as made practical by the new high-field-Orbitrap, could enhance quantitative selectivity and decrease noise. This potential has not been evaluated yet.
In this study, we investigated comprehensively the key experimental parameters including these for sample preparation, LC separation and MS analysis on the MS1 quantification of larger cohort, and developed a new “IonStar” experimental pipeline enabling consistent, sensitive and reliable data acquisition for many biological replicates, and thus contributing to in-depth proteomic quantification with high accuracy, precision, reproducibility, and low missing data and low false-positives. The performance in quantification of the changes of lower-abundance proteins was evaluated by analyzing a 20 samples, 5 groups sample set.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
           ASSOCIATED CONTENT         
           Supporting Information         
Table S1, protein quantification results described in Figure 6 (XLSX)
Figures S1–S6; Supplementary Methods (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.7b00061. 
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
All the raw files of the benchmark data set will be available on ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with accession number PXD005590.