PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Retina; Retinal cell
diseases: Retinal degeneration
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Retinal degeneration; Retinal proteome; Rpe65-/-; Inherited retinal degenerations; Rd10; Retinitis pigmentosa; P23h

ABSTRACT:
Inherited retinal degenerations (IRDs) are a leading cause of blindness among the young population in the developed world.  Approximately half of IRDs initially manifest as gradual loss of night vision and visual fields, characteristic of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Due to challenges in genetic testing, and the large heterogeneity of mutations underlying RP, targeted gene therapies are an impractical largescale solution in the foreseeable future. For this reason, identifying common key pathophysiological pathways in IRDs that could be used as targets for mutation-agnostic and disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) is warranted. In this study, we investigated retinal proteome of three distinct IRD mouse models, comparing to sex- and age-matched wild-type mice. Specifically, we used the Pde6βRd10 (rd10) and RhoP23H/WT (P23H) mouse models of autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant RP, respectively, as well as the Rpe65-/- mouse model of Leber´s congenital amaurosis type 2 (LCA2).  The mice were housed at two distinct institutions and analyzed using LC-MS in three separate facilities/instruments following data-dependent and data-independent acquisition modes. This cross-institutional and multi-methodological approach signifies the reliability and reproducibility of the results. The largescale retinal proteome profiling, coupled with in vivo electroretinography recordings, provided us with a reliable basis for comparing the disease phenotypes and severity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Retinal proteome profiling of inherited retinal degeneration across three different mouse models suggests common drug targets in retinitis pigmentosa

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The retinas were suspended in Urea buffer containing 8 M Urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 1 % protease inhibitor cocktail, and ultrasonicated on ice for 4 min, followed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 ºC for 10 min. The resulting supernatant (i.e., extracted retinal proteins) was collected for digestion using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method (Wiśniewski, 2019). In brief, the extracted retinal proteins were loaded into an Amicon centrifugal filter (Millipore) with a 30-kDa cutoff. The proteins were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 ºC for 1 h and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature (RT) in the dark for another 1 h. Subsequently, the buffers were replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBi) through three washes of the filter membrane. Modified trypsin (Promega) was added to the protein solution in a 1:50 (w/w) ratio and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. The digested peptides were collected via centrifugation, along with an additional water rinse. This solution was then vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 200 μL of 0.5 % acetic acid. The peptide mixture was desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction (provided by The Nest Group, Inc.), and vacuum-dried. For each analysis, 0.5 μg of digested proteins was loaded for LC-MS/MS analysis in randomized order.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed using MaxQuant (version 2.1.0.0) (Cox et al., 2014), with the spectra matched against the Uniprot mouse database (UP000000589, updated in April 2022) and cRAP contaminant database (updated in March 2019). For peptide identification, the mass tolerances applied were 20 ppm for initial precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Specific Trypsin/P digestion and up to two missed cleavages were permitted in the tryptic digests and spectral search. Cysteine residues were treated as static modifications, and oxidation of methionine was considered a variable modification. Peptide identification filtering was conducted at a 1 % false discovery rate.