PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
organism parts: Plant cell; Rosette
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; acetylated residue; carbamoylated residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Arabidopsis thaliana; Thylakoid membrane; Curvature; Grana margins; Grana core; Stroma lamellae; Thylakoid domains; Connecting domain

ABSTRACT:
The thylakoid membrane in land plants is organized into an appressed domain (grana), enriched in photosystem (PS) II, and a non-appressed domain (stroma lamellae) enriched in PSI. This ultrastructure ensures control over excitons spillover from PSII to PSI. The bulky machinery required for the repair and biogenesis of PSII and other proteins of the stacked, appressed domain is located in the non-appressed membranes. Thus, the connecting domain (CD) between grana and stroma lamellae, also known as the grana margins (GM), is the key player in both the structural and functional integrity of the photosynthetic machinery.  To elucidate the properties and composition of the GM proteome, we have analyzed the different thylakoid domains isolated from membranes in native conformation as well as from thylakoids artificially unstacked to induce a homogeneous protein composition. We show that the composition of the CD is strictly distinct from that of the highly curved structures (the curvature) present at the periphery of grana discs, which are not physically connected to the stroma lamellae. Furthermore, a detailed map of the composition, distribution and interaction of the protein complexes involved in thylakoid membrane function is provided for the grana, CD, curvature and stroma lamellae domains.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Arabidopsis thylakoid domains proteome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Plant growth, thylakoid isolation and fractionation To understand how the solubilization with digitonin (DIG) affects the distribution of the thylakoid protein complexes in fractions collected at increasing centrifugation speed, the following experimental procedure has been set up. Plants of wild-type Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ecotype Col-0 were grown under 120 µmol phot m-2s-1 (8 h light/16 h dark) using OSRAM PowerStar (Munich, Germany) HQIT 400/D Metal Halide lamps as the light source, for 32 days. Thylakoid membranes were isolated in dim light and at 4°C two hours after the onset of the light period from fresh whole rosettes ground in ice-cold buffer containing 50 mM Tricine/NaOH (pH 7.8), 400 mM sorbitol, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF. After filtration through two layers of Miracloth, thylakoids were pelleted at 2739 x g at 4°C for 5 min, re-suspended in a shock buffer [15 mM Tricine/NaOH (pH 7.8), 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF] and centrifuged again at 630 x g at 4°C for 5 min. Thylakoids were washed with resuspension buffer [15 mM Tricine/KOH (pH 7.8), 100 mM sorbitol, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM NaF], centrifuged at 630 x g and finally re-suspended in the same buffer = resuspension buffer.  Next, thylakoid membranes were washed 6 times in either presence (washed) or absence (linearized) of MgCl2. The two preparations were subjected to solubilization with [DIG] corresponding to 0.1% w/v (0.8 mM), 0.25% (2 mM) or 0.4% (3.2 mM), as described in Trotta et al., 2019. A strong pellet was collected after centrifugation at 1,000 x g (unsolubilized material pellet, named UP or 1k), 10,000 x g (grana, G or 10k), 40,000 x g (grana margins, M or 40k) and 144,000 x g (stroma thylakoids or stroma lamellae, SL or 144k). Besides the strong pellets, a loose pellet (LP) was visible in all fractions (Supplemental Figure 1), and it was collected always at 144,000 g and, when indicated, at 40,000 x g (Figure 1A, see below). The LP at 144,000 x g, when needed, was further centrifuged as strong pellet at 178,000 x g. The chlorophyll (chl) content was measured according to (Porra et al., 1989). For analysis in mass spectrometry (MS) of intact thylakoid membranes and fractions proteomes, proteins equivalent to 5 µg of chlorophyll were loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel containing 6 % acrylamide and 6 M urea 6%, run approximately 0.5 cm and excised for MS analysis. The excised gel pieces (~ 1 mm3) were shrunk completely by incubating 3 times for 10 min in 100 µl of 100% acetonitrile (ACN), incubated in 25 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)/100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56°C in a Thermomixer (Eppendorf) and, after shrinking as above, alkylated for 20 min with 55 mM of iodacetamide (IAA)/ 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 22°C in the dark. After two consecutive washes alternating 100% ACN and 100 mM NH4HCO3, the gel pieces were completely shrunk as described above. For protein digestion, the gel pieces were completely re-hydrated in a solution of 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN with either 0.13 µg/µl (150 µl for total soluble proteins) of trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin V5111, Promega, Madison) at 4°C. After adding 20 µl of 40 mM NH4HCO3/10% ACN, the gel pieces were incubated at 37°C in the Thermomixer (Eppendorf) shaking at 600 rpm for 13-14 hours. The tryptic peptides have been extracted by an equal volume of 100% ACN  and incubating for 15 min at 37°C. The supernatant has been collected in a new Eppendorf and the gel pieces have been incubated two more times for 15 min with 50% ACN/5% formic acid (FA) to collect the remaining peptides. The supernatants have been pooled and dried in a speed-vac for 3 hours, and dissolved in 2% FA to be analyzed by nLC-ESI MS/MS. For mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides samples were separated on a C18 precolumn (5 × 0.3 mm, PepMap C18, LC Packings) and a C18 nanocolumn (15 cm × 75 μm, Magic 5 μm, 200 Å C18, Michrom BioResources, Sacramento, CA) with a flow rate of 300 nL/min using 0.1% FA, 2% ACN as a buffer A and 0.1% FA, 80% ACN as a buffer B. Gradients comprised 3 % to 43 % solvent B over 60 min (, followed by 43 % to 100 % solvent B for 5 min, and finally 100 % solvent B for 10 min. The mass spectrometer used was a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific), with resolution set to 120000, scan range 300 to 1800 m/z for MS1, and 15000 with scan range 200 to 2000 m/z for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and up to 15 masses with m/z ≥2+ were selected for MS2 for every MS1 scan.

DATA PROCESSING:
The obtained MS/MS spectra have been analyzed via Mascot (v.2.6.1) and Sequest HT using Proteome Discover 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the embedded ptmRS algorithm to validate the identified modifications. The variable modifications allowed were the followings: Met oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, Ser, Thr and Tyr phosphorylation. As fixed modificationC ys carbamidomethylation was set. The MS/MS spectra were matched against a non-redundant Arabidopsis proteome database (TAIR10; https://www.arabidopsis.org/) supplemented with most common contaminants (35,502 entries in total). False discovery rate of the identified peptides was evaluated using the Percolator node (v. 3.01.1) with the following settings:  Target/Decoy Selection:  Concatenated; Validation based on:  q-Value; FDR Targets:- Target FDR (Strict):  0.01 - Target FDR (Relaxed):  0.05. Posterior error probabilities was evaluated accordingly with the following Peptide Validator processing node setting: Validation Mode:  Automatic (Control peptide level error rate if possible).  For protein quantification, the following parameters were set in the Precurson Ions Quantifier node (Proteome Discover 2.4.0.305). Peptides to use: unique + razor. Precursor abundance based on: Area. Minimum number of replicates: 67%. Normalization mode: total peptide amount. Scaling mode: On controls average. Protein adundance calculated as: Summed abundances. Protein ratio calculation: protein abundance based. Maximum allowed fold change: 100. Imputation mode: low abundance resampling. Hypothesis test: ANOVA (Individual proteins). For grouping and quantification, the intact starting material (intact thylakoids) was set as control and the protein abundances in the fractions calculated relative to control (n=3).

METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plant growth, thylakoid isolation and fractionation
To understand how the solubilization with digitonin (DIG) affects the distribution of the thylakoid protein complexes in fractions collected at increasing centrifugation speed, an experimental procedure described in Figure 1(a) has been set up. Plant growth, thylakoid isolation and fractionation were performed as in Trotta et al.  with slight modifications. Plants of wild‐type Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) ecotype Col‐0 were grown in phytotron under 120 μmol photons m−2 sec−1 (8 h light/16 h dark) using OSRAM PowerStar (Munich, Germany) HQIT 400/D Metal Halide lamps as the light source at 25°C for 32 days. TMs were isolated in dim light at 4°C from fresh whole rosettes collected 2 h after the onset of the light period and ground in ice‐cold buffer containing 50 mm Tricine/NaOH (pH 7.8), 400 mm sorbitol, 10 mm NaCl, 5 mm MgCl2 and 10 mm NaF. After filtration through two layers of Miracloth, thylakoids were pelleted at 2739  g  at 4°C for 5 min, resuspended in a shock buffer (15 mm Tricine/NaOH [pH 7.8], 10 mm NaCl, 5 mm MgCl2 and 10 mm NaF) and centrifuged again at 630  g  at 4°C for 5 min. Thylakoids were washed with resuspension buffer (15 mm Tricine/KOH [pH 7.8], 100 mm sorbitol, 10 mm NaCl, 5 mm MgCl2 and 10 mm NaF), centrifuged at 630  g , and finally resuspended in the same buffer = resuspension buffer.
Next, TMs were washed six times in either presence (stacked) or absence (linearized) of MgCl2. The two preparations were subjected to solubilization with [DIG] corresponding to 0.1% w/v (0.8 mm), 0.25% (2 mm) or 0.4% (3.2 mm) as in Trotta et al. . The details about the fractionation procedure, gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting, 77 K fluorescence measurements and TEM are provided in Data S3.
Mass spectrometry analysis and protein quantification
Intact stacked thylakoids and the 10k, 40k, 144k and LP fractions obtained after solubilization with 0.25% DIG have been processed for tryptic digestion as described in (Gollan et al., ; Trotta et al., ). Analysis by liquid‐chromatography electrospray‐ionization MS/MS was performed as in (Gollan et al., ; Trotta et al., ), except that a Q‐Exactive HF electrospray ionization‐hybrid quadrupole‐orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used, the scan range was 300 to 1800 m/z, with up to 15 data‐dependent MS/MS spectra acquired in each scan and dynamic exclusion set for 30 sec. The acquired MS/MS spectra have been analyzed as described in Trotta et al.  except that Proteome Discover v2.4 (PD v2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) was used for label‐free protein quantification with Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA). For protein quantification, intact thylakoids were set as control and the protein abundances were calculated as percentage of the control (n = 3). The PD v2.4 settings used for protein quantification are reported in Data S1.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Overall pattern of pigment protein complexes from stacked and linearized TMs
Since thylakoid stacking is a native property to segregate the pigment‐protein complexes into different TM domains, we first evaluated the overall composition of TM protein complexes in light‐acclimated Arabidopsis plants grown under a low light intensity (see “Materials and Methods” section), both directly after TM isolation (control) and after repeated washes in the presence (stacked) or absence (linearized) of MgCl2 (Figure 1b), followed by TM solubilization with 1% DIG or 1% β‐dodecyl‐n‐maltoside (β‐DM) and separation of the protein complexes by lpBN‐PAGE (Figure 2a). Despite the presence of the same protein complexes in these three TM preparations, the DIG solubilization quantitatively revealed a higher abundance of PSII monomer, as well as L‐LHCII and M‐LHCII (Rantala et al., ), in linearized thylakoids compared to stacked thylakoids (Figure 2a, first three lanes). On the other hand, β‐DM solubilized thylakoids were largely depleted of PSII‐LHCII supercomplexes (sc) in linearized TM compared to stacked TM (Figure 2a, last three lanes). Notably, the PSI‐LHCII complex, present only in DIG solubilized TM, was not appreciably affected by thylakoid linearization, in agreement with previous reports based on analysis of the fluorescence emission spectra at 77 K (van der Weij‐de Wit et al., ).
Subfractionation of linearized and stacked thylakoids produces different patterns of protein complexes
Stacked and linearized thylakoid preparations were then subjected to fractionation using 0.25% DIG solubilization to examine the separation of thylakoid proteins (complexes). This [DIG] was lower than generally used in previous reports (Kyle et al., ; Trotta et al., ), due to the fact that the purity of the CURT1‐containing fraction increases by decreasing [DIG] (Trotta et al., ). Here, in addition to the strong pellets obtained after centrifugation steps at 1000  g  (unsolubilized thylakoid pellet, or 1k), 10k (grana core), 40k (connecting domain, CD) and 144k (stroma lamellae, SL), a loose pellet (LP) was also collected at 144k (Figures 1b and 2; Figure S1, see below).
The chl a/b ratio of the different fractions obtained from linearized thylakoids hardly differed from each other, ranging between 3.0 and 3.2, close to that of intact stacked thylakoids (Figure 2b, bottom of the lpBN‐PAGE), due to the homogeneous redistribution of PSII‐LHCII and PSI‐LHCI complexes along the linearized TM (Figure 2). Instead, a classical increase from 2.5 (10k fraction) to 5.3 and 6.0 (40k and 144k fractions, respectively) (Kyle et al., ; Trotta et al., ) was observed in the corresponding fractions from stacked thylakoids (Figure 2b), indicating strong lateral heterogeneity of PSII, LHC and PSI.
Consistently, the composition of protein complexes from linearized TM was very similar in 10k, 40k and 144k fractions, in contrast to the highly heterogeneous distribution in fractions from stacked TM of, for example, the PSII‐LHCII, the M‐ and L‐LHCII complexes, all of which were depleted in 40k and 144k fractions (Figure 2b,c; Figures S2 and S3). However, consistent with the chl a/b ratio, the 40k fraction from stacked TM contained M‐ and L‐LHCII complexes to some extent, indicating that this fraction originated from SEM closer to grana with respect to 144k. Notably, the PSI‐LHCII complex, which is highly visible in intact thylakoids, was partially lost during the fractionation procedure (Figure 2b; Figure S3). However, the highest percentage of residual PSI‐LHCII was found in the 40k fraction (enriched in CD) of stacked thylakoids and, to a lesser extent, in the 144k fraction (enriched in SL) as well as in the 1k fraction (unsolubilized pellet) (Figure 2b and indicated by blue arrows in Figures S2 and S3).
As a consequence of TM linearization (Figure 2b; Figure S3), several PSI bands (PSI‐LHCII complex, PSI* and PSI‐LHCI, see blue arrows in Figure S3) were visible in the 10k fraction in addition to those in the 40k and 144k fractions. Distinct PSII‐LHCII sc were also visible in the strong pellets from linearized thylakoids, probably corresponding to C2S, C2S2 and C2SM complexes (Caffarri et al., ) (Figure S3). Notably, the PSI‐LHCII complex was not visible in the LP fractions from either linearized or stacked thylakoids (Figure 2b; Figure S3) (see below).
Structural analysis of the TM subfractions
Characterization of the fractions obtained with 0.25% DIG by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealed the presence of vesicles of similar shape but different size in the 10k, 40k and 144k fractions of linearized TM (Figure 3; Figure S4). Higher magnification showed the possible presence of ATP synthase in all fractions from linearized TM, confirming the randomization of protein complexes (Figure 3). In contrast, the 10k fraction from stacked TM contained the highest percentage of largest vesicles (Figure S4), representing grana core as previously observed (Kouřil et al., ), while the 40k contained smaller vesicles, which were often bent, and the 144k contained even smaller vesicles (Figure S4), which, in contrast to 10k and 40k, showed the presence of ATP synthase complexes (Figure 3).
The fluorescence emission spectra recorded at 77 K were almost identical in all strong pellets of linearized TM, and very similar to those of the corresponding intact linearized TM (Figure 2d). Conversely, the strong pellets from stacked TM showed an enrichment of the PSII signal (peaking at 685 and 695 nm) in 1k and 10k fractions, whereas the PSI signal (peaking at 733 nm) was enriched in 40k and 144k fractions (Figure 2d). These results (Figures 2 and 3) further confirmed that linearization of the TM leads to randomization of the chl‐binding protein complexes and consequently to energy spillover from PSII to PSI (van der Weij‐de Wit et al., ).
Effect of DIG concentration on separation of Cyt b6f, ATP synthase and PSII subcomplexes in LP 
In sharp contrast to the uniform distribution of protein complexes observed in the 10k, 40k and 144k fractions of linearized thylakoids, the corresponding LP showed marked differences, being particularly depleted in PSII‐LHCII sc and PSI (Figure 2b,c; Figures S3 and S5). Furthermore, thylakoid linearization did not alter the strong accumulation of ATP synthase, PSII monomer, Cyt b6f and CP43‐less PSII in the LP fraction, which similarly characterized the LP obtained from stacked thylakoids (Figure 2b,c; Figures S3 and S5a). The 77 K fluorescence spectra of LPs showed a strong presence of PSII monomer (685 nm) and detached LHCII (680 nm), the latter being more prominent in LP from stacked TM (Figure 2d). The visualization with TEM of LP from stacked TM revealed a strong predominance of very small (<3000 nm2) vesicles (Figure S4), many of which may contain ATP synthase (Figure 3). In contrast, the LP from linearized TM was a mixture of very small vesicles (<3000 nm2) and larger vesicles (3000–11 750 nm2), which could harbor the M‐ and L‐LHCII complexes observed in BN‐PAGE (Figure 2b,c; Figure S3b).
Semi‐quantitative immunoblot analyses further confirmed that the distribution of PSI, PSII and LHCII in the 1k, 10k, 40k and 144k fractions from linearized thylakoids was more homogeneous along the TM compared to the corresponding fractions from stacked thylakoids (Figure 4a,b). However, the other major protein complexes, that is, Cyt b6f and ATP synthase, together with the CURT1 proteins (CURT1A and 1B), were mostly concentrated in the LP from both the stacked and linearized thylakoids (Figure 4a,b). A similar differential separation was obtained by solubilizing the stacked thylakoids with 0.4% DIG (Figure 4a; Figure S5b). However, comparing the two LPs obtained with 0.4% and 0.25% DIG by 2D‐lpBN/SDS‐PAGE, it turned out that the relative abundance of CURT1 protein, PSII monomer, CP43‐less, Cyt b6f and ATP synthase was lower at 0.4% DIG (Figure 4c). Since SDS‐PAGE is loaded on a chl basis, this effect is due to increased contamination/accumulation of chl‐binding protein complexes such as PSI and LHCII in the LP upon use of higher [DIG] to solubilize thylakoids (see Trotta et al., ).
The above results regarding the LP fraction, are in apparent contradiction with the idea that linearization of stacked TM leads to a uniform distribution of all protein complexes in all fractions or TM domains (Figure 1a) (Anderson & Vernon, ). These discrepancies suggest that the composition of the protein complexes in the LP fraction probably does not only reflect that of the curvature domain but is also influenced by specific interactions between DIG and the annular lipids of individual protein complexes, resulting in accumulation of specific protein complexes in the LP. The interaction of DIG with membranes such as cholesterol‐free TM has been postulated to involve only the penetration of the outer leaflet of lipid bilayers. This results in the disruption of TM into smaller vesicles to re‐equilibrate the asymmetric curvature created by the insertion of DIG molecules into one of the two layers (Figure 4d) (Fan & Heerklotz, ; Sudji et al., ). However, some TM protein complexes were clearly solubilized in DIG micelles, as indicated by the bands resolved in our BN‐PAGE (Figures 2a,b and 4d) and by the small size of a part of the vesicles observed by TEM (Figure 3; Figure S4).
To visualize which protein complexes are easily solubilized by DIG, the stacked TM was solubilized with either 0.4% DIG or 1% DIG before loading on the BN‐PAGE. As shown in Figure 5(a), the PSII monomer, Cyt b6f and ATP synthase were already solubilized by the micelles at 0.4% DIG and resolved in clearly visible bands. In contrast, PSII‐LHCII sc, PSI sc and LHCII were only visible at 1% DIG. This result is consistent with the fact that proteins from different TM domains are more prone to be solubilized even by [DIG] as low as 0.25% (Figure S5c) (Trotta et al., ).
To further investigate the solubilization of TM protein complexes by DIG, both stacked and linearized thylakoids were solubilized lowering [DIG] to 0.1%, which has been shown to still separate the appressed and non‐appressed domains (Benz et al., ), and the fractions were collected as in Figure 1(b). The chl a/b ratio of the fractions obtained from the stacked thylakoids showed the typical increase from 10k to 144k observed at [DIG] ≥0.25% (Figure 5b; Trotta et al., ). Accordingly, from the stacked TM, the PSII and LHCII accumulated in the 10k fraction and PSI in the 40k and 144k fractions (Figure 5c). On the contrary, while ATP synthase was enriched in the 40k and 144k fractions, the Cyt b6f was almost equally present in all fractions (Figure 5c), in agreement with the results obtained by mechanical fractionation of spinach TM (Tikkanen et al., ). Similar behavior of Cyt b6f and ATP synthase was also observed in linearized thylakoids solubilized with 0.1% DIG (Figure 5c). Importantly, the CURT1 proteins, although still predominantly present in the LP, were partially distributed along all fractions (Figure 5c). Analysis by lpBN‐PAGE (Figure 5d; Figure S5d) showed that the PSII monomer, either from the stacked or from the linearized TM, no longer accumulated mainly in the LP but, together with CP43‐less, was equally present in all fractions from the linearized TM (compare Figure 5d with Figure 2b,c). Thus, when the interaction of DIG with TM was limited by low DIG concentration, the solubilization and segregation of the Cyt b6f, ATP synthase and PSII subcomplexes changed significantly. This suggests that at least these three protein complexes interact differently with DIG than other protein complexes such as PSII‐LHCII and PSI.
Residual DIG in LP fraction modulates the properties of protein complexes
To investigate whether the presence of residual DIG and/or thylakoid lipids modulates the properties or distribution of thylakoid proteins and protein complexes in the LP fraction, we re‐examined the 144k strong pellet (i.e., the SL fraction) and the co‐isolated LP. Samples were homogenized to 0.25 mg chl/ml in the presence or absence of β‐DM (as in Figure 2d) and loaded on BN‐PAGE (Figures S6a and S7). As expected, the strong 144k pellet without β‐DM did not even enter the stacking part of the BN gel, whereas the LP sample mostly entered the gel and was separated into several protein complexes (Figures S6a, right gel, and S7). Analysis by 2D BN/SDS‐PAGE of the LP fraction with and without β‐DM revealed that, in addition to the high MW band composed of PSI, PSII, LHCII and ATP synthase, two other protein complex bands were clearly resolved: PSII monomer and Cyt b6f (Figure S6a,b), and to some extent also ATP synthase (Figure S7b). On the contrary, no protein complexes could be seen from the strong 144k pellet without solubilization by β‐DM (Figures S6a and S7a). A likely explanation is that the protein complex bands in LP (Figure S6a,b) represent the smallest vesicles observed by TEM in LP (Figure 3), which might contain residual DIG. To test this hypothesis, the LP sample was re‐centrifuged at 178 000  g  (178k), to form a strong pellet, and loaded onto a lpBN‐PAGE without prior solubilization with β‐DM (Figures S6c and S7b). As a control, the original LP was loaded alongside, either solubilized (first lane) or not (second lane) with β‐DM (Figures S6c and S7). Indeed, when the LP became a strong pellet, it could no longer enter the BN‐gel (Figure S6c), and no traces of Cyt b6f and PSII monomer could be found in 2D‐lpBN/SDS‐PAGE (Figure S7b). Furthermore, pelleting of LP at 178k resulted in a shift of the 77 K fluorescence emission peak from 680 (corresponding to free LHCII) to 685 nm (corresponding to PSII CP43) (Figure S6d), indicating that the presence of residual DIG interfered with the LHCII trimer structure and/or association with PSII, as was recently described (Graça et al., ). Thus, pelleting removed the disruptive effect of DIG, but did not induce aggregation of the protein complexes, which indeed separated in a pattern similar to that of the original LP upon solubilization with 1% DIG prior loading (Figure S7c). This latter result provided evidence that the PSII monomer and Cyt b6f segregate into LP due to a different interaction with the DIG micelles compared to other protein complexes. This effect was strongly attenuated by lowering [DIG] to 0.1%, as seen by running the corresponding LP in lpBN‐PAGE without prior solubilization with 1% DIG (Figure S5d) where the PSII and Cyt b6f bands are not visible.
To test whether PSII monomer and Cyt b6f segregate into lighter vesicles (LP) at any centrifugation speed, we collected the LP already formed at the 40k centrifugation step (CD LP) (Figure 1b; Figure S1), as well as the strong pellet and LP formed at the next 144k step (named as S′ and LP′, respectively) and compared them with the standard 144k and LP fractions (144k and LP) (Figure S8a). Similar to the control LP collected at 144k, both PSII monomer and Cyt b6f were clearly enriched in the CD LP fraction (Figure S8b), indicating that they are excised by DIG from TM vesicles and accumulated as the lightest fraction (the LP) at any speed. In addition, two spots of CURT1A and CURT1B were clearly visible in the CD LP (Figure S8b). Interestingly, the 77 K fluorescence spectrum of CD LP showed the detached LHCII peak around 680 nm similar to that in LP and LP′ (Figure S8c), confirming that this peak is due to interference from residual DIG in the sample (see Figure S6d).
Proteome composition of thylakoid subfractions after 0.25% DIG solubilization
The biochemical characterization of the LP fraction showed a different tendency of thylakoid protein complexes and/or domains to be solubilized by 0.25% DIG (Figures 2 and 3). Based on the results presented so far, it could be assumed that the fractions obtained at 10k, 40k and 144k  g  represented from heavier to lighter membrane vesicles derived from stacked and stroma‐exposed TMs (Figure 4d). To determine how much they are enriched in the functional domains (grana core, CD, SL and curvature), the relative abundances of the proteins from the three fractions, together with LP and the intact thylakoids, were evaluated by quantitative proteomics (Figure 6). A total of 1122 proteins identified with at least two peptides were found in all fractions, of which 821 were plastidial or possibly plastidial (see legend in Data S1), while 301 were contaminants from other cellular compartments (Figure 6a; Data S1). Approximately 86% of the plastidial accessions were partially or fully characterized proteins that could be categorized by their association with protein complexes, metabolic pathways or functional categories (see legend in Data S1 for detailed description). The localization of the majority (69%) of the plastidial proteins was in the TM (membrane spanning or associated with membrane protein complexes), while smaller fractions could be localized in the chloroplast envelope (11%), thylakoid lumen (7%), plastoglobuli (4%) and the remaining (9%) were stromal proteins associated with carbon and amino acid metabolism (Figure 6a, pie chart 1).
Subsequent quantification of the relative abundance of the proteins, with respect to the intact thylakoids, revealed a strong enrichment of the majority of identified plastidial proteins in the LP (Figure 6b). This was not surprising considering that: (i) the TM fractions were quantified on the basis of chl and (ii) the procedure (reduction of [DIG] to 0.25%), which led to the accumulation of CURT1 as a kind of signature of ‘purified’ curvature in the LP, resulted in a very low yield of chl‐binding proteins in the LP (Figure 4; Trotta et al., ). Therefore, by digesting the proteins based on the same [chl] in all samples, it is highly conceivable that the non‐chl‐binding proteins were overrepresented in the CURT1‐containing LP fraction (Figure 6b). However, a relative quantification of the protein amounts in the thylakoid fractions based on the protein content, which includes non‐plastidial contaminants, would also have biased the results, but in the opposite direction. To dissect the content of the CURT1‐containing fraction (curvature domain), the identified plastidial proteins were further sorted into functional categories related to chloroplast metabolic, biosynthetic and repair processes (Figure 6a, pie charts 2 and 3; Data S1).
A large number of proteins/complexes (Figures 6b and 7; Figure S9; Data S1) showed the highest enrichment in the grana core fraction – 10k (e.g., PSII core, LHCII complexes, PSBS and STN8; for the full name of the proteins mentioned hereafter refer to Data S1). The SEM collected as a CD fraction (40k) showed on average the highest enrichment in PSI, LHCI belt, NDH‐1 complex and FTSH protease complexes. Interestingly the thylakoid formation 1 (THF1) protein co‐localized at 40k with a similar relative abundance to the FTSH protease complex (Figures 6b and 7; Figure S9; Table 1). The SPPA peptidase, which may have overlapping functions with Clp and FTSH (Nishimura et al., ), was also mostly enriched in the 40k and 144k fractions (Table 1). Proteins from another functional category – the chloroplast translation machinery (ribosomes and associated proteins) – showed the highest enrichment in either the 40k or 144k fraction, but a clear depletion in the LP, with some exceptions such as RPL16, a component of the chloroplast ribosomal large subunit, which segregated in the LP (Data S1). In addition to ribosomes, the SEM collected as the SL fraction (144k) also showed the highest average enrichment of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) and VESICLE‐INDUCING PROTEIN IN PLASTIDS 1 (VIPP1), involved in membrane remodeling (Gupta et al., ; Zhang et al., ).
The LP fraction, which accumulated the CURT1 proteins as a fingerprint (Figures 6b and 7; Figure S9), was also highly enriched in Cyt b6f and ATP synthase complexes, in line with the immunoblot results (Figures 4 and 5), as well as the STN7 kinase, while the counteracting phosphatase TAP38 (Rochaix et al., ) was enriched in the 40k and 144k. LP also contained most of the proteins related to thylakoid architecture, such as RIQ2, the photoprotection‐related protein SOQ1 and the chloroplast lipocalin (CHL), as well as most of the proteins involved in tetrapyrrole metabolism or associated with plastoglobuli (Figures 6b and 7; Figure S9; Table 1; Data S1). More specifically, the proteins of the tetrapyrrole biosynthetic pathway that are physically associated with the TM (Wang & Grimm, ) were indeed found to be enriched in the LP, whereas the other proteins that do not directly interact with the TM were essentially lost during fractionation (Data S1), with notable exceptions. CHLG, which converts chlorophyllide (chlide) to chlorophyll and contains a transmembrane domain (TMD), was enriched in both 144k and LP. CAO, which converts both chlide and chl a to chl b (Wang & Grimm, ), was enriched in 10k and LP. The transmembrane spanning FLU was equally enriched in all SEM fractions, whereas its interactors CHL27, Glu‐TR and POR were only enriched in LP.
A number of auxiliary proteins involved in PSII assembly/repair processes at different levels (Järvi et al., ; Lu, ; Nickelsen & Rengstl, ) were highly enriched in the LP. These include the DEGP proteases, which are involved in D1 degradation, and the chaperones HCF244 and OHP1/2, which are associated with pre‐D1 co‐translational insertion into the TM (Figures 6b and 7; Figure S9). On the other hand, several other proteins, which are involved in assisting PSII repair and/or insertion of PSII subunits into the TM (such as HHL1, MPH2, HCF107, HCF173, PAM68, TRXM‐4, PDF1B, ALB3, TERC and PSBN) were enriched or partially enriched (such as LPA1 and cpSRP54) in the 40k and 144k fractions (Figure 6b; Figure S9; Table 1; Data S1). Curiously, although the insertase ALB3 interacts with the cpSEC1 TM translocase machinery, the components of the latter, that is, SCY1 and SECA1/AGY1 were mainly enriched in LP, as was SECE1, which was also partially enriched in 40k. The components of the cpTAT pathway HCF106, TATA and TATC/APG2, which are involved in the translocation of folded proteins, were all enriched in LP.
Among the proteins involved in PSII assembly/repair and other processes, several are lumenal proteins that were not enriched in any fraction or were rather lost during fractionation (CTPA, FKBP20‐2, PLASTOCYANIN 1 and 2, PSBP and PSBQ, CYP38, HCF136 and DEGP8). Others, however, were found instead at 10k (PSBO) or 40k (TL20.3), while many soluble proteins naturally present in the thylakoid lumen or loosely associated with the TM on the stromal or lumenal side, were often segregated with LP (DEGP1, DEGP5, VDE, ZEP, CHL and PPL1) (Figure 6b; Figure S9; Table 1; Data S1).
The 10k fraction also contained several proteins associated with the membrane‐bound transcriptionally active chromosome (TAC) (Figure 7; Figure S9; Table 1; Data S1). These included most of the subunits of the plastid‐encoded RNA polymerase (PEP) (Figure 7), the PLASTID TAC (PTAC) proteins (‐3, ‐5, ‐6, ‐10, ‐11/WHIRLY3, ‐12, ‐14 and ‐16), the PEP‐interacting protein MurE (Garcia et al., ) and a partial enrichment of associated proteins such as FLN1, FLN2, TRX‐Z and FSD2 (Wu et al., ) (Figure 7). Interestingly, the protein pTAC5, as well as SULFITE REDUCTASE (SIR), which, in addition to its enzymatic activity, also binds nucleoids and interacts with PTAC10 (Jeon et al., ), both showed a strong enrichment at 40k (Table 1). Another protein with moonlighting activity like SIR, that is, the E2 subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) which binds psbA mRNA (Watkins et al., ), was instead enriched in the 144k fraction. A further set of mRNA‐binding proteins, the pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins, which are involved in mRNA processing with high specificity (Meng et al., ), were found to be associated with the TM (Figure 6b; Figure S9; Data S1). These include AT5G13770, SVR7 (involved in ATP synthase accumulation), MRL1 (involved in Rubisco accumulation), PPR4 and CRP1 (involved in Cyt b6f subunit accumulation), and the psbA mRNA binding protein HCF173, all of which were enriched in the 40k and 144k fractions. Further two RNA binding proteins, that is, CSP41B (which, like HCF173, is a member of the short dehydrogenase‐reductase (SDR) family) and SOT1, which is involved in rRNA processing, were instead mostly present in the 10k fraction (Figure 6b; Figure S9; Table 1; Data S1).

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
The thylakoid membrane (TM) of land plant chloroplasts houses the photosynthetic machinery capable of light‐driven oxidation of water in photosystem (PS) II and subsequent reduction of NADP+ by PSI, with concomitant generation of a proton gradient across the TM for production of ATP. The major protein complexes, PSII, PSI, light‐harvesting complex (LHC) I and II, Cytochrome (Cyt) b6f and ATP synthase are heterogeneously distributed between the two main domains of the TM: the appressed (stacked) grana membranes and the non‐appressed stroma‐exposed membranes (SEM). This organization, among other things, controls the spillover of excitons from PSII to PSI, which are mainly located in the appressed stacked membranes and the non‐appressed SEM, respectively (Anderson, ; Anderson et al., ; Andersson & Anderson, ). Grana are organized as stacked discs surrounded by right‐handed helices of stroma lamellae (SL) which in turn are connected to grana membranes by several fret‐like structures per disc (Bussi et al., ), defined here as connecting domains (CD). The flat TM sacks end with highly curved stroma‐exposed structures, defined here as curvature domains (Figure 1a). This domain is found at the periphery of all grana discs (Daum & Kuhlbrandt, ; Rantala et al., ; Raven, ), but also at the periphery of the SL and wherever the TM sacks are highly curved, such as the aqueous conduits for diffusion of stromal proteins formed by the left‐handed helical structures observed in the SL (Bussi et al., ). The three domains, SL, CD and curvature, together with the end membranes on the grana disks (Figure 1a), form the SEM.
Advances in electron tomography have definitively shown that the periphery of the same grana disc is formed by alternating domains of curvature and CD (Bussi et al., ; Daum & Kuhlbrandt, ). Biochemical TM fractionation, however, has generally made no distinction between these two structural domains (curvature and CD in frets) and they have been collectively referred to as grana margins (GM) (Figure 1a). In fact, the definition and composition of the GM has long been debated with no broad consensus reached (Anderson, ; Dekker & Boekema, ; Mazur et al., ; Rantala et al., ; Raven, ). Historically, the GM has been defined as the protein‐free, highly curved domains at the periphery of the grana discs (Dekker & Boekema, ; Murphy, ), which cannot accommodate large membrane‐spanning protein complexes, according to initial cryo‐EM and tomography studies (Anderson et al., ; Daum et al., ). However, parallel research based on mechanical TM fractionation assigned a specific TM domain also as a GM, which instead contained large protein complexes (Danielsson & Albertsson, ; Wollenberger et al., ). Such a GM cannot coincide with the highly curved region (curvature, Figure 1a) at the periphery of the grana discs, due to both the steric hindrance of the large protein complexes and the lack of continuity with the stroma lamellae, where the ribosomes and the rest of the translation machinery can be located (Yamamoto et al., ). To avoid these nomenclature problems, we have marked GM in Figure 1(a) to contain both the curvature and the connecting (CD) domains. The CD represents a site where the assembly and repair machinery are closest to the final location of their substrates (i.e., PSII, LHCII and Cyt b6f), and can be defined as the functional domain of the GM (Järvi et al., ; Rantala et al., ). One of the best functional examples in CD is the PSII repair cycle: upon photodamage to the D1 protein of PSII in the grana core, the PSII‐LHCII complexes are disassembled and the PSII monomer gains access to the CD, where a new copy of D1 is co‐translationally inserted into the CP43‐less PSII monomer (hereafter: CP43‐less) (Järvi et al., ; Lu, ; Theis & Schroda, ; Zhang et al., ).
In grana stacks, the strong curvature of the grana discs is maintained by the action of the CURT1 proteins (Armbruster et al., ) (Figure 1a, curvature domain). The CURT1 containing curvature domain was isolated by detergent‐based fractionation of the TM, using the sterol‐based saponin digitonin (DIG) (Koochak et al., ; Puthiyaveetil et al., ; Trotta et al., ), or the synthetic glycodiosgenin (Maeda et al., ; Nishioka et al., ). Sterol‐containing detergents such as DIG, cholate and CHAPS have been instrumental in the isolation and purification of thylakoid protein complexes such as ATP synthase and Cyt b6f (Hurt & Hauska, ; Nelson & Neumann, ; Pick & Racker, ). Due to the weak interaction of sterol‐based detergents with cholesterol‐poor biological membranes (Fan & Heerklotz, ; Sudji et al., ), their effect on the solubilization of specific protein complexes is not fully understood. Nevertheless, the use of DIG in the pioneering work of Emil Smith initially led to the discovery of thylakoid domains enriched in PSII and PSI activities (Smith,  and references therein). Subsequently, the application of ultracentrifugation steps at increasing speeds (10 000  g  [10k], 40 000  g  [40k] and 144 000  g  [144k]) allowed the separation of TM fractions characterized by increasing chlorophyll (chl) a/b ratios, from PSII‐LHCII enriched appressed membranes via CD to PSI enriched in SL (Anderson & Boardman, ; Anderson & Vernon, ). The loss of lateral heterogeneity of the TM, achieved by depletion of Mg2+ and K+ which leads to unstacking of the appressed domains, results in a similar chl a/b ratio of the light (144k), medium (40k) and heavy (10k) fractions (Anderson & Vernon, ). This is consistent with the randomization of the protein complexes after linearization of the TM, resulting in the spillover of excitation energy from PSII to PSI (Anderson & Vernon, ; van der Weij‐de Wit et al., ). The protocol for the separation of the 10k, 40k and 144k fractions, which are assumed to be enriched in grana core, CD and SL, respectively, has been widely used by researchers based on the experimental design developed by Kyle et al. . The 40k fraction was defined as CD by (Kettunen et al., ; Rantala et al., ) because it has an intermediate protein composition and chl a/b ratio with respect to 10k and 144k, similar to a fraction obtained after TM sonication and fractionation by two‐phase partitioning (Danielsson et al.,; Wollenberger et al., ). However, several recent publications have collected the CD and the grana core together in a single step at 40k.
Although the structural details of the TM architecture can be conveniently studied by electron tomography, this technique does not provide details on the distribution and localization of most proteins and protein complexes in different TM domains. For this purpose, the best approach would be to apply proteomics to the vesicles obtained by mechanical fractionation of the TM, but unfortunately this method has not been successful in Arabidopsis, which has one of the best annotated genome databases among the model plant species. On the other hand, the enrichment of proteins and protein complexes in different TM domains by detergent fractionation, the most popular fractionation method, is prone to contamination due to the fusogenicity of membrane vesicles (Dlouhý et al., ) and various interactions between detergents and lipid microdomains surrounding the membrane protein complexes, which must be considered when interpreting the results.
In this work, we have thoroughly investigated the lateral heterogeneity and domain composition of the TM using the DIG solubilization followed by the differential centrifugation method. We have paid particular attention to the distinction between the TM ‘curvature’ and the TM ‘connecting domain’ (CD) (collectively referred to here as the grana margin, GM, for historical reasons – see above) in terms of their functional role and location in the laterally heterogeneous TM. Our results provide an explanation for the puzzling solubilization of protein complexes such as Cyt b6f or PSII monomer complexes. Furthermore, we provide a detailed map of the distribution of more than 800 proteins in the fractions isolated by an optimized protocol using DIG. This database will not only highlight the specific functional role of the CD, but will also serve as a reference for plant scientists to localize their proteins of interest in the widely used DIG‐based fractionation protocol of TM.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository (Perez‐Riverol et al., ) with the dataset identifier PXD046544 and DOI: 10.6019/PXD046544.