PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Dental plaque
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Human; Dental calculus; Dental plaque; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Archaeological dental calculus has emerged as a rich source of ancient biomolecules, including proteins. Previous analyses of proteins extracted from ancient dental calculus revealed the presence of the dietary milk protein β-lactoglobulin, providing direct evidence of dairy consumption in the archaeological record. However, the potential for calculus to preserve other food-related proteins has not yet been systematically explored. Here we analyse shotgun metaproteomic data from 100 archaeological dental calculus samples ranging from the Iron Age to the post-medieval period (8thC BC - 19thC AD) in Britain, as well as dental calculus from contemporary dental patients and recently deceased individuals, to characterise the range and extent of dietary proteins preserved in dental calculus. In addition to milk proteins, we detected proteomic evidence of foodstuffs such as cereals and plant products, as well as the digestive enzyme salivary amylase. We discuss the importance of optimized protein extraction methods, data analysis approaches, and authentication strategies in the identification of dietary proteins from archaeological dental calculus. Our ability to detect dietary proteins, although limited, demonstrates the potential of these methods to robustly identify foodstuffs in the archaeological record that are under-represented due to their poor preservation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Evidence of Dietary Sources in Ancient Dental Calculus

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
A total of 100 archaeological samples of dental calculus were analyzed in this study, along with an additional 14 dental calculus deposits from living (n=10) or recently deceased (n=4) individuals. 38 of the 100 samples included existing datasets previously published in Warinner et al. (2014) focussing on populations from the UK. Raw data were downloaded from ProteomeXchange (Accession ID: PXD001362) and converted to mgf files using Proteowizard MSConvert (version 3.0.4743). For newly generated datasets, samples were extracted using one of two extraction methods: a Filter-Aided Sample Preparation Protocol (FASP) previously published in Warinner et al. (2014a, 2014b), or a Gel-Aided Sample Preparation Protocol (GASP) based on Fischer and Kessler (2015) modified for ancient mineralized samples. Protein extractions were performed at three locations: the BioArCh ancient protein laboratory at the University of York, UK; the ancient DNA laboratory of the Palaeogenomics and Bio-Archaeology Research Network (PalaeoBARN) at the University of Oxford, UK; and at the Laboratories of Molecular Anthropology and Microbiome Research (LMAMR) at the University of Oklahoma, USA. MS/MS analysis was performed at two locations: the mass spectrometry laboratories at the Target Discovery Institute, University of Oxford, UK); and at the Functional Genomics Center, University of Zurich, Switzerland.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw spectral data was converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) using Proteowizard MSConvert (version 3.0.4743) using the 200 most intense peaks in each MS/MS spectrum. MS/MS ion database searching was performed on Mascot (Matrix ScienceTM, version 2.4.01), against UniProt and the Human Oral Microbiome databases. Searches were performed against a decoy database to generate protein false discovery rates, which were adjusted to less than 5%. For samples extracted using GASP, propionamide (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetylation (protein N-terminus), deamidation (NQ), methionine oxidation, propionamide (K) and propionamide (N-terminus) were set as variable modifications. For samples extracted using FASP post-translational modifications were set as carbamidomethylation (fixed modification), and acetylation (protein N-term), deamidation (NQ), glutamine to pyroglutamate, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance was 10 ppm, and MS/MS ion tolerance was 0.07 Da. Tryptic peptides were searched with up to 1 missed cleavage; semi-tryptic peptides were also searched with up to 1 missed cleavage for a subset of the samples. Protein results were filtered to a protein false discovery rate of less than 5% and an ion score of >25, and containing a minimum of two distinct peptides matching to different regions of the protein.

METHODS:
Material and methods
Summary
Detailed methodological information on protein extraction and identification can be found in the electronic supplementary material. Provenience information for the archaeological skeletons may be found in electronic supplementary material, table S2. A total of 100 archaeological samples of dental calculus were analysed, along with an additional 14 dental calculus deposits from living (n = 10) or recently deceased (n = 4) individuals. Of the total 114 samples analysed in this study 76 are newly generated datasets and 38 are a re-analysis of publicly available raw mass spectra data from Warinner et al. (electronic supplementary material, table S1). The 38 previously published samples, as well as the 14 modern samples extracted in this study underwent a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) previously published in Warinner et al.. For the 62 new archaeological samples from the post-medieval period, we applied a GASP based on Fischer & Kessler. This protocol involves demineralizing the dental calculus matrix, followed by the copolymerization of solubilized proteins with acrylamide, enabling reduction, alkylation and enzymatic digestion; like the FASP method, GASP is designed to deal with high SDS abundance. For two of the modern samples, we applied both the FASP and the GASP extraction methods to compare the efficacy of both methods. Spectral data were converted to Mascot generic format (mgf) and LC–MS/MS ion database searching was performed on Mascot (Matrix Science, v. 2.4.01), against UniProt and the Human Oral Microbiome database (HOMD). Searches were performed against a decoyed database to generate protein false discovery rates, which were adjusted to less than 5%. Protein results were filtered to an ion score of greater than 25, and containing a minimum of two distinct peptides matching to different regions of the protein. Based on initial Mascot results we assigned protein identifications into the following classifications: contaminants, human, non-human animals and plants. We took a conservative approach and assigned any protein identified in our blank controls or injection blanks to the ‘contaminant' category. Initially, all non-human animal and plant proteins were considered as potential dietary proteins, and were further interrogated using BLAST (NCBI). Any non-human animal or plant peptides that also matched identically to human or microbial proteins were not considered as possible dietary proteins. Likewise, any non-human animal or plant peptides deriving from proteins identified within the ‘contaminant' dataset (electronic supplementary material, table S4) were also eliminated as potential dietary proteins.

RESULTS:
Results and discussion
Identified proteins
We identified a total of 59 putative dietary proteins in the entire assemblage, with 31 detected in archaeological samples, and 28 found in modern samples (electronic supplementary material, table S3). Overall, we found a low proportion of putative dietary proteins when compared with microbial and human components (figure 2), with 26 of 100 archaeological samples and 4 of 14 modern samples yielding at least one dietary protein. In archaeological samples, putative dietary proteins were dominated by dairy proteins (figure 3). The whey protein β-lactoglobulin was the most commonly identified dietary protein, present in 19 of the 100 archaeological samples. After excluding all collagens, keratins and egg-derived proteins as possible laboratory contaminants, only a single protein, haemoglobin deriving from the Pecora infraorder (i.e. ruminant) could be confidently assigned as a non-dairy animal protein. Plant proteins, including those from oats (Avena sativa), peas (Pisum sativum) and cruciferous vegetables (Brassica spp.), were also identified in the archaeological samples. In modern samples (n = 14), we identified a suite of plant proteins, including potato (Solanum tuberosum), soybean (Glycine sp.) and peanut (Arachis hypogea), as well as milk proteins. In one remarkable modern sample (Z100), 432 putative dietary peptides were identified, with 82% of these derived from six different peanut proteins, which may suggest that this dental patient consumed peanuts near to the time of periodic plaque mineralization or just prior to calculus collection. No dietary-derived proteins were detected in any laboratory extraction blanks (n = 9), which, in contrast to the dental calculus profiles, were dominated by trypsin, human skin proteins (e.g. collagens, keratins, dermcidin) as well as conserved microbial peptides, which could rarely be resolved to species.  
Protein diagenesis and individual variation
We observe that the relative proportion of putative dietary proteins within dental calculus is low compared with microbial and human proteins (figure 2). Within the ancient and modern datasets, microbial and human proteins account for 38–98% (mean 83%) and 0–25% (mean 9.9%) of identified protein families, respectively. This finding is consistent with previous proteomic analyses of dental calculus and with the fact that dental calculus is a calcified plaque biofilm. In contrast, non-human animals and plants represent 0–2% (mean 0.4%) of identified protein families within the archaeological samples and 0–3.5% (mean 0.3%) in the modern samples (figure 2; electronic supplementary material, table S3). In spite of their relatively low frequency, putative dietary proteins were identified in all time periods, spanning the Iron Age to the post-medieval period, suggesting they are not prone to selective loss from the system. On average, 35% of individuals from any given archaeological site produced dietary information, and only three sites yielded no putative dietary proteins (absent in Heslington East, Roman, n = 2; Tickhill, medieval, n = 4; Radcliffe Infirmary, post-medieval, n = 10). Even within the modern dataset, only 28% of individuals displayed dietary proteins, suggesting that the sporadic detection of dietary information is not linked exclusively to taphonomic factors, and that dietary proteins may not be observable in all individuals using current methods.
Our temporal transect of dental calculus samples recovered from a consistent geographical area (England) provides insights into broad-scale trends in archaeological protein preservation (figure 4). There was a statistically significant difference in total protein identifications between time periods as determined by one-way ANOVA (F5,110 = 8.898, p < 0.0005); however, Games-Howell post hoc tests revealed that this was primarily due to significantly higher average number of protein identifications in the GASP-extracted post-medieval samples compared with all previous time periods (p < 0.0005). When only those samples extracted using the FASP protocol were compared, modern samples had significantly higher protein yields compared with samples from the Iron Age, Roman and Anglo-Saxon periods (p = 0.016, p = 0.012, p = 0.015, respectively), but not the medieval period (p = 0.147), suggesting a gradual decline in protein preservation over time and highlighting the fundamental importance of the sample preparation method. In spite of this taphonomic trend, the detection of dietary proteins remains relatively constant through time, with only a single modern individual exhibiting an ‘over-representation' of dietary proteins (specifically, an unusually high number of peanut proteins identified in sample Z100; electronic supplementary material, figure S4). Interestingly, we observe that milk proteins are consistently detected throughout all time periods and within 20% of ancient and modern individuals overall. 
In addition to broad temporal trends in protein preservation, our analyses also displayed inter-site and intra-site differences in overall protein preservation. To assess inter-site differences in overall protein preservation we compared the total number of protein identifications in individuals from contemporaneous time periods which were extracted using the same methodology. Independent t-tests revealed no significant differences between the two Roman period sites of Oxford Road and Driffield Terrace (t10 = −0.384, p = 0.709), but significant differences between the two medieval sites of Wighill and Tickhill (t8 = 3.876, p = 0.005). Within the post-medieval period, no differences could be observed in the overall protein identifications among Fewston (North Yorkshire), St Brides Farringdon and Spitalfields (London); however, a one-way ANOVA revealed significant differences between Royal London Hospital and all other sites (F3,47 = 15.144, p = 0.001). The inconsistencies in overall protein yield between contemporaneous sites within a confined geographical area suggest that site-specific taphonomic factors and/or skeletal curation conditions also influence overall protein yields. We also detect high levels of individual variation in terms of total and dietary protein identifications, with no correlation between the quantity (mg) of dental calculus analysed per individual and the total number of identified proteins within that sample (electronic supplementary material, figure S1), an observation also noted by Mackie et al.. High inter-individual variation in the total number of identified proteins was observed at all sites and across all time periods, including in modern samples, suggesting that the detection of putative dietary proteins using current methods is stochastic, and that the failure to identify dietary proteins for a given sample cannot be attributed to consumption habits or poor preservation alone. Little is currently known about how dietary proteins become trapped within dental calculus, and variation in this process may influence downstream protein recovery and identification success. Until we understand the degradation of these proteins, we cannot conclude that the absence of evidence is the evidence of absence.
The stochastic nature of dietary evidence in calculus is not an issue confined to proteins; similar site- or population-level variation has been reported for plant phytolith and starch microparticles, as well as dietary DNA in dental calculus. In spite of the serendipitous nature of their detection, however, dietary proteins offer valuable information for identifying foodstuffs, such as dairy products, meats and certain edible plant tissues, that are otherwise not be detectable or distinguishable using microscopy or DNA.
Animal proteins
Milk proteins were the most frequently identified dietary proteins in archaeological dental calculus samples. Only ruminant milk proteins were detected, and peptide sequences enabled taxonomic assignment at various levels, including the infraorder Pecora (ruminants, n = 1), the family Bovidae (bovids, n = 9) and the subfamily Bovinae (cattle, bison, water buffalo, n = 9). Among archaeological samples, milk proteins were dominated by the whey protein β-lactoglobulin (BLG, as previously described in), and only one post-medieval sample (FAO18) contained a non-BLG milk protein—caprine specific α-S1-casein, the most abundant protein in ruminant milk. In modern dental calculus samples, milk proteins were detected in 4 of 14 samples, including three identifications of β-lactoglobulin and two of α-S1-casein. No other milk proteins were identified.
It is unclear why only these two milk proteins have been detected in dental calculus, or why β-lactoglobulin, a protein found in far lower abundance in whole milk than α-S1-casein, is typically the only milk protein identified in archaeological samples. β-lactoglobulin is known to be a highly robust protein with enhanced resistance to enzymatic digestion, as well as microbial proteolysis, and heat and acid denaturation, which may contribute to its long-term survival in the archaeological record. Further research is necessary to understand the mechanisms of protein, and especially milk protein, preservation within dental calculus; nevertheless, these results highlight the utility of the proteomic analysis of dental calculus for identifying the consumption of dairy foods.
Proteomic evidence for the consumption of non-dairy animal products was limited to one putative faunal blood protein: a haemoglobin protein of likely ruminant origin identified in a single post-medieval individual (FAO14). This underrepresentation of non-dairy derived animal proteins is strongly influenced by the fact that many of the most abundant proteins in muscle, skin, and bone (i.e. collagens, keratins, actin and myosin) are expressed by highly conserved genes with little or no sequence variation, and thus peptides deriving from these proteins may not be resolvable below the taxonomic level of class or order. When such dietary proteins are not distinguishable at the sequence level from those of the human host, they are unlikely to be recognized as dietary constituents at all. Actin, for example, is an abundant globular protein that forms microfilaments in muscles (and, therefore, meat), but its sequence is highly conserved among species (e.g. 0 amino acid differences between humans, cows and sheep), and, therefore, it is not possible to assign as a dietary protein. In contrast, the milk protein β-lactoglobulin, which is not encoded by the human genome, is characterized by numerous species-specific amino acid sequence polymorphisms across taxa, for example, 10 differences between cows and sheep.
Furthermore, conclusively demonstrating that animal proteins are derived from ancient dietary sources can be challenging. Laboratory reagents commonly contain a range of enzymes derived from non-human animal proteins and, therefore, laboratory contaminants can easily be misidentified as putative dietary evidence. Here, we took a conservative approach to ruling out common laboratory contaminants from our dataset (discussed below), and as a blanket rule, excluded all collagens, keratins and egg proteins from our list of identified proteins. It is possible that proteins derived from animal sources are present but remain unidentified using our current bioinformatic approaches. Ancient DNA analyses have revealed a range of putative animal DNA sequences within dental calculus, and, therefore, ancient metagenomics, in combination with metaproteomics, may provide greater insights into the range of animal species consumed.
Plant proteins
We identified putative plant proteins originating from oats (A. sativa), peas (P. sativum) and Brassicaceae in archaeological dental calculus and from potato (S. tuberosum), soybean (Glycine) and peanut (A. hypogaea) in modern individuals. We also detected six ancient and 14 modern conserved plant proteins that could only be resolved to broad taxonomic levels, such as rosids and fabids. Plant proteins were identified in samples across the entire dataset, however, those detected in earlier time periods failed to meet our ‘two-peptide' identification criterion. Only within the GASP-extracted post-medieval and modern samples were we able to robustly identify plant-derived food proteins, suggesting that different extractions methods may influence the recovery of plant proteins within dental calculus.
The generally low abundance of plant proteins within the dataset, especially cereal proteins, is intriguing considering the known importance of bread wheat in post-medieval diets in the UK. It is possible that in addition to protein extraction techniques, cooking processes may also influence both the preservation and recovery of plant proteins, for example, through greater rates of Maillard reactions due to the relatively higher proportion of (reactive) sugars in plant tissues. Nevertheless, the recovery of plant protein sequences demonstrates that this approach has potential for future investigations of ancient plant consumption. In particular, ancient protein sequence analysis offers a method by which to identify not only plant taxa but also the utilization of specific plant tissues. For example, in the dental calculus of one post-medieval individual from Yorkshire (FW450), we identified peptide sequences specific to the 12S seed storage protein of A. sativa (oats), a protein which specifically expressed in the grain of this cereal.
While we know that individuals both today and in the past target the edible seeds of cereals, the fact that shotgun proteomics can identify specific plant tissues is a novel development for understanding plant utilization in past populations. For example, while microscopic analyses of starches within dental calculus have been instrumental in documenting cereal preparation and consumption across multiple geographical areas and time periods, proteomic analyses may uniquely provide insight into those plants that do not produce diagnostic starches, or where the leafy green portion of the plant is consumed. Reference sequence databases upon which this approach depends, however, are highly biased towards commercially significant species, such as key domesticates. Even when ‘dietary' taxa are represented in protein reference databases, they may be constrained to particular classes of proteins or biological pathways. Among entries derived from plant species in the UniProt database, there is a bias towards photosynthetic genes and proteins, or allergenic proteins, which may not represent the full range of plant portions that may have been consumed. For example, in one individual (STB21) we found peptide evidence of an allergenic epitope (Bra j 1-E) expressed specifically within brassica seeds. Although multiple portions of brassica plants are edible, including bulbs, stems, leaves and seeds, restrictions in current reference databases may currently mask our ability to detect the consumption of these other tissues. As databases expand to include a wider variety of plant species and tissues, however, our ability to detect plant consumption may likewise improve.
Analysis of microfossil remains in ancient dental calculus can also reveal evidence of inhaled or ingested plants remains that result from non-dietary sources, including inhaled pollens, wood particles, charcoal, textile fibres, etc. In this study, we found no evidence of plant proteins which could be assigned to non-dietary sources, nor evidence of plant tissues or species used for textile manufacture (e.g. flax, cotton). This lack of non-dietary plant proteins may be influenced by multiple factors, including: protein diagenesis in particular plant tissues, a lack of analytical sensitivity to detect non-dietary plant proteins, low abundance of proteins in (cellulose and lignin rich) structural tissues, and limitations in current protein databases which focus primarily on proteins of other scientific interests.
Host digestive enzymes: alpha-amylase
In addition to proteins derived from dietary sources, we also identified the digestion-related protein α-amylase. This salivary digestive enzyme is the first stage in the breakdown of dietary starch through the hydrolysis of 1,4-α-glucoside bonds in oligo- and polysaccharides. Salivary amylase gene (AMY1) copy number, and in turn, amylase protein expression levels, vary significantly between individuals but on average correlate with histories of starch consumption in human populations. We detected α-amylase peptides in 48 individuals, representing all time periods except for the Anglo-Saxon period (electronic supplementary material, figure S2). The average number of α-amylase peptides per individual increases through time, suggesting that overall protein preservation may play a role in the detection of this dietary enzyme. Even when the average number of α-amylase peptides are normalized by the total number of identified peptides for each individual, the modern individuals display an increased proportion of amylase peptides compared to previous time periods (electronic supplementary material, figure S2). Although no significant differences were observed in the detection of amylase peptides between time periods (one-way ANOVA, 4,114 = 1.21366, p = 0.31), these findings do suggest that quantitative analysis of salivary amylase in dental calculus may be an additional method by which dietary starch consumption can be studied in the future. Nevertheless, further research is necessary to identify the extent to which taphonomic (e.g. protein degradation), biological (e.g. AMY1 copy number variation, amylase enzyme production) and dietary factors (e.g. starch consumption) influence its detection in dental calculus.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Archaeological dental calculus is a rich source of ancient DNA and proteins, providing insights into past oral microbial communities and ancient diets. Dental plaque accumulates on the tooth surface during life and, in the presence of calcium and phosphate ions in saliva and gingival crevicular fluid, mineralizes to form dental calculus (tartar). In doing so, dental calculus entombs and preserves biomolecules associated with the oral microbiota, the host, and inhaled and/or ingested microdebris, including environmental or occupational debris and food particles such as starches and phytoliths. Specifically, traces of foodstuffs can be sourced directly from the human mouth, uniquely revealing precise evidence of particular foods consumed, as opposed to evidence of food preparation (e.g. from residues on ceramic vessels) or of bulk diet (e.g. stable isotope analysis). In addition, dental calculus harbours favourable conditions for biomolecular preservation, given that biomolecules become entrapped rapidly by mineralization in situ and are thus relatively protected from environmental alteration during the postmortem interval.
Many foodstuffs are under-represented in the archaeological record due to poor preservation of diagnostic tissues. While microscopic fragments of these foodstuffs may persist in dental calculus, as well as in soils, ceramics and other objects of material culture (such as grindstones), taxonomic identification can be challenging. Plant microfossils (e.g. phytoliths, starch granules, pollen) are frequently non-diagnostic or only identifiable at a high level of taxonomic rank, such as kingdom (e.g. monocot) or family (e.g. Poaceae), and secondary animal products (e.g. milk, eggs) may leave little or no visible archaeological traces. By contrast, proteins are robust and highly diagnostic molecules that can survive for thousands to millions of years in archaeological and paleontological contexts. Moreover, proteins are often expressed in specific tissues, allowing the different parts of plants (e.g. seeds versus leaves) and animals (e.g. muscle versus milk) to be distinguished. If such diagnostic proteins are preserved, they may more precisely identify foodstuffs compared with other lines of archaeological evidence, such as faunal remains, ancient DNA and stable isotope analysis.
In terms of dietary reconstruction, the analysis of ancient proteins is revealing new insights into the identification of past foodstuffs and vessel contents. Examples include the identification of protein residues adhering to vessels, and the ingredients in preserved remains of sourdough bread and fermented milk products. These approaches have been particularly promising in contexts which favour biomolecular preservation, such as anaerobic, waterlogged, cold and arid conditions. The recent discovery of preserved milk proteins within ancient archaeological dental calculus further extends dietary protein recovery beyond the analysis of extraordinary finds from unusually well-preserved contexts, to a substrate that routinely preserves in many skeletal assemblages. Although many dietary DNA sources have been reported in calculus, to date, only a single class of dietary proteins (i.e. milk) has been investigated.
In order to explore this question further we reanalyse 38 previously published shotgun proteomics datasets from the Iron Age through to the Victorian period in England (figure 1). We then apply a newly developed protein extraction method, gel-aided sample preparation (GASP), to 62 dental calculus samples from eighteenth- and nineteenth-century England. Finally, we analyse proteins identified in 14 samples of modern dental calculus in order to explore the presence and preservation of dietary proteins in contemporary samples. 

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material
Ethics
Dental calculus from living subjects was collected under informed consent, and research protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board for Human Research Participant Protection at the University of Oklahoma (IRB#4543).
Data accessibility
Mass spectrometry data are available via the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the accession PXD009603.