PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Hepatocyte
diseases: Hepatocellular carcinoma
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Protein phosphatase; Mitogen-activated protein kinase; Microcystin-lr; Protein phosphorylation; Phosphoproteomics; Heparg cells

ABSTRACT:
Microcystin-LR (MCLR) exposure has been associated with development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Many of the carcinogenic mechanisms for MCLR have been attributed to the induction of cell survival and proliferation through altered protein phosphorylation pathways by inhibition of protein phosphatases 1 (PP1) and PP2A. The current study determined MCLR effects on the phosphoproteome in human HepaRG cells. Differentiated HepaRG cells were treated with either vehicle or MCLR followed by phosphoproteomic analysis and Western blotting of MAPK-activated proteins. MCLR decreased cell viability at 24 h at doses as low as 0.03 µM. MCLR also caused a dose-dependent increase in phosphorylation of signaling and stress kinases. The number of decreased phosphosites by 0.1 µM MCLR was similar between the 2 h (212) and 24 h (154) timepoints. In contrast, a greater number of phosphosites were increased at 24 h (567) versus the 2 h timepoint (136), indicating the hyperphosphorylation state caused by MCLR-mediated inhibition of PPs is time-dependent. A kinase perturbation analysis predicted that MCLR exposure at both 2 h and 24 h increased the function of aurora kinase B (AURKB), checkpoint kinase 1 (CHEK1), and serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1). STRING database analysis of the phosphosites altered by MCLR exposure revealed pathways associated with cell proliferation and survival, including ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RSK), and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR2)-mediated vascular permeability. In addition, several cancer-related KEGG pathways were enriched at both 2 h and 24 h timepoints, and multiple cancer-related disease-gene associations were identified at the 24 h timepoint. Many of the kinases and pathways described above play crucial roles in the development of HCC by affecting processes such as invasion and metastasis. Overall, our data indicate that MCLR-mediated changes in protein phosphorylation involve biological pathways related to carcinogenesis that may contribute to the development of HCC.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Microcystin-LR activates serine/threonine kinases and alters the phosphoproteome in human HepaRG cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Phosphoproteomics and phosphosite analyses were completed as previously described (Lynch et al., 2023). Briefly, cells were washed with PBS twice and collected (n = 3 wells per treatment group). The cell pellet was lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 1% protease inhibitor, and 1% phosphatase inhibitor) at 40°C for 30 min. The samples were centrifuged at 16,000 xg for 15 min, and the supernatant was collected. Total protein concentration was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sample equivalent to 500 µg total protein was reduced with 25 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C for 1 h and alkylated with 60 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. After adding an additional 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer to dilute the urea buffer, the sample was digested with trypsin at a 1:40 (trypsin to protein) ratio for overnight digestion at 37°C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Phosphosite analysis was performed with RStudio version 2022.2.2.485 using the Bioconductor package PhosR (Kim et al., 2021). PhosR package vignette and published code were used for MaxQuant data processing and analysis (Kim et al., 2021). Only phosphopeptides with a localization threshold ≥ 0.75 were included in the analysis because that threshold is commonly used in different phosphoproteomics pipelines to reduce the number of false positives (PMID: 31975593). Phosphosites were filtered to retain those with at least 50% quantification rate in one or more treatment conditions

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Microcystin-LR (MCLR) exposure has been associated with development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Many of the carcinogenic mechanisms for MCLR have been attributed to the induction of cell survival and proliferation through altered protein phosphorylation pathways by inhibition of protein phosphatases 1 (PP1) and PP2A. The current study determined MCLR effects on the phosphoproteome in human HepaRG cells. Differentiated HepaRG cells were treated with either vehicle or MCLR followed by phosphoproteomic analysis and Western blotting of MAPK-activated proteins. MCLR decreased cell viability at 24 h at doses as low as 0.03 μM. MCLR also caused a dose-dependent increase in phosphorylation of signaling and stress kinases. The number of decreased phosphosites by 0.1 μM MCLR was similar between the 2 h (212) and 24 h (154) timepoints. In contrast, a greater number of phosphosites were increased at 24 h (567) versus the 2 h timepoint (136), indicating the hyperphosphorylation state caused by MCLR-mediated inhibition of PPs is time-dependent. A kinase perturbation analysis predicted that MCLR exposure at both 2 h and 24 h increased the function of aurora kinase B (AURKB), checkpoint kinase 1 (CHEK1), and serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase 1 (SGK1). STRING database analysis of the phosphosites altered by MCLR exposure revealed pathways associated with cell proliferation and survival, including ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RSK), and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR2)-mediated vascular permeability. In addition, several cancer-related KEGG pathways were enriched at both 2 h and 24 h timepoints, and multiple cancer-related disease-gene associations were identified at the 24 h timepoint. Many of the kinases and pathways described above play crucial roles in the development of HCC by affecting processes such as invasion and metastasis. Overall, our data indicate that MCLR-mediated changes in protein phosphorylation involve biological pathways related to carcinogenesis that may contribute to the development of HCC.