PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Malignant cell; Kidney
diseases: Renal cell carcinoma
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Trim44，ip-ms

ABSTRACT:
By using the TRIM44 antibody, identify the interacting proteins that can bind to TRIM44 in 769-P and Caki-1 cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Co-immunoprecipitation binding proteins of TRIM44

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell lysates from 769-P and Caki-1 cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-TRIM44 antibody, separated by SDS-PAGE, and stained with Coomassie blue.

DATA PROCESSING:
Target bands were excised for in-gel trypsin digestion and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd.

METHODS:
Experimental procedures
Patient samples and ethics statement
A total of 144 matched ccRCC and adjacent non-tumorous samples were collected from patients at the Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University from 2015 to 2018. All diagnoses were confirmed by histopathological examination. Half of the obtained tissues were snap-frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen and the other half were fixed in 4% formaldehyde. Patient information was obtained from the hospital’s medical record system, and each patient was followed up every 6 months. All patients provided informed consent. The study was approved by the Ethical Review Boards of Hebei Medical University Fourth Affiliated Hospital (2023KS035) and adhered to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. All samples were used for experimental research.
Cell lines and cell culture
The human RCC cell lines (786-O, 769-P, OSRC-2, ACHN, Caki-1, SN12-PM6) were donated by Professor Wang from the Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University. The HEK-293T cell was kept in the laboratory and purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). 786-O, 769-P, OSRC-2, and ACHN cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 (Gibco), Caki-1 and SN12-PM6 cells in McCoy's 5A (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and 1% penicillin (Invitrogen), respectively. HEK-293 T cells were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, Gibco) with 10% FBS. Culture conditions were carried out at 37 °C in an incubator (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 5% CO2 and 95% air.
Proteomics analysis
Proteins extracted from ccRCC cell lines (786-O, 769-P, OSRC-2, ACHN, Caki-1, SN12-PM6) were enzymatically digested and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The MS raw data were processed using the MASCOT search engine (v2.2, Matrix Science) integrated into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for protein identification and quantification, with statistical significance thresholds set at fold-change >1.2 or < 0.8, and p < 0.05. All experimental procedures were performed by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining
ccRCC sections were sequentially fixed in 4% formaldehyde, deparaffinized in xylene, and rehydrated through graded ethanol. Then, using the pressure cooker to recover the antigen and block the endogenous peroxidase through 3% H2O2 for 30 min at room temperature. Next, slides were blocked with 10% goat serum and incubated with primary antibodies (listed in Table S2) overnight at 4 °C in turn. On the second day, slides were incubated with polymer helper and polyperoxidase anti-mouse/rabbit IgG at 37 °C and finally stained with diaminobenzidine (DAB). Finally, an Olympus microscope (OLYMPUS, BX71, Tokyo, Japan) was used to capture images. The average integrated optical density value was quantified to indicate the expression of protein by Image Pro Plus (Media Cybernetics). The colorectal cancer section was selected as the positive control, while the negative control was set up using PBS rather than the primary antibody.
Plasmid and transfection
Flag-TRIM44, Myc-TRIM44, Myc-TRIM44-ZF, Myc-TRIM44-BB, Myc-TRIM44-CC, Myc-TRIM44-ΔB, HA-vimentin, Flag-Ub plasmids, Flag-Ub-K48, and Flag-Ub-K63 were purchased from YouBio by cloning the corresponding human full-length DNA sequence into the MYC or HA or 3xFlag-pcDNA 3.1(+), and its mutant expression plasmid was generated by in-fusion cloning kits. Specifically, Flag-Ub-K48 and Flag-Ub-K63 mutants were generated by mutating all ubiquitin lysine residues to arginine (R) except for K48 or K63, respectively. Three shRNAs of TRIM44 were constructed and selected according to the knockdown efficiency (Fig. S2). All mutation primers were listed in Table S1. Transfection experiments using Lipofectamine 3000 reagents (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA, #L3000015) under the manufacturer's protocols.
Viruses and transduction
Lentivirus of shTRIM44 and a negative control were obtained from Hanbio. The transfection methods were performed according to the manufacturer's protocols. The cell lines were treated with puromycin for 2 weeks to obtain a stably expressed cell line.
Western blot assay
Total protein from ccRCC and HEK-293T cells or the tissue from patients with ccRCC was extracted with RIPA lysis buffer. An equal amount of protein extracts (30 μg) was separated by 10 or 12% SDS-PAGE and then transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore). The membranes were blocked with 5% nonfat milk for 1.5 h at 37 °C. Then the membranes were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies (listed in Table S2). On the second day, the membranes were incubated with a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit or mouse IgG antibody. After washing, the images were captured using the LI-COR Odyssey Infrared Imaging System. All experiments were repeated at least three times.
Cell wound scratch assay
A straight line was drawn by a sterile 200 μl pipette tip in the 6-well plates. Then, replace the medium with an FBS-free medium and measure the initial and unhealed width. Each of the wells was randomly selected from three different visual fields three times, and the average value was taken.
Transwell migration and invasion assay
Cell migration and invasion were measured using a two-chamber transwell system (8 μm pore size). ccRCC cells (5 × 104) were seeded into upper chambers using an FBS-free medium. The lower chamber was filled with medium supplemented with 10% FBS. After co-culturing at 37 °C for 24 h, the lower surface of the upper chambers was fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min and stained with crystal violet for 30 min at room temperature. As for the invasion assay, the procedure was performed as described above with the upper chamber membrane precoated with Matrigel (Corning).
Colony formation assay
A total of 4000 transfected cells were seeded into the 6-well plates and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 14 days. Using 4% paraformaldehyde to fix cells in the 6-well plates for 20 min and staining with crystal violet for 15 min. The Image Pro Plus (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD) was used to measure the colony.
Immunofluorescence and EdU proliferation staining
The ccRCC cells were inoculated in 6-well plates, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at room temperature, and lysed with 0.3% Triton X-100 for 15 min at room temperature. Then, cells were blocked with 10% goat serum at 37 °C for 1 h and incubated with primary antibodies (listed in Table S2) at 4 °C overnight. The next day, cells were incubated with FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG/TRITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG at 37 °C for 2 h followed by treatment with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Southernbiotech). The sections were observed with a Leica Laser Confocal Microscope (Leica). The ccRCC cell proliferation level was evaluated by measuring the incorporation of EdU using the EdU Cell Proliferation Kit (Beyotime Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, adding EdU (10 μM) to the culture medium for 2 h before collecting cells, then following the Immunofluorescence steps described above, and using a Lecia Laser Confocal Microscope (Leica) to observe the positive signal, which was located in nuclei and red granular, and the positive ratio was quantified by Image Pro Plus (Media Cybernetics).
Real-time PCR assay
Total RNA of cells was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen). RNA concentration was measured by NanoDrop 2000. Reverse transcription was performed by HiScriptⅢ RT SuperMix for qPCR (Vazyme, R323), and polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed with ChamQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, Q711) following the manufacturer's instructions. The 2−ΔΔCT method was used to normalize the qPCR cDNAs. All experiments were repeated at least in triplicate.
Immunoprecipitation and MS
Cells were lysed with RIPA lysis buffer for 40 min, and the proteins were quantified using a BCA assay kit. The lysate (800 μl) was incubated with primary antibodies (listed in Table S2) on a mixer for 24 h at 4 °C and then incubated with protein A/G beads (20 μl) on the mixer at 4 °C overnight. The samples were then washed three times with immunoprecipitation washing buffer at 500g for 5 min at 4 °C. Bromophenol blue protein indicator buffer was added, and the extracted proteins were boiled at 100 °C for 7 min.
For IP-MS, cell lysates from 769-P and Caki-1 cells were immunoprecipitated with anti-TRIM44 antibody, separated by SDS-PAGE, and stained with Coomassie blue. Target bands were excised for in-gel trypsin digestion and subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis by Shanghai Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd.
Proximity ligation assay
A Duolink Proximity Ligation Assay kit (Sigma, DUO92101) was used to detect direct binding relationships between proteins. First, 1 × 106 cells were seeded into 6-well plates. On the second day, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution, permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100, blocked with Duolink Blocking Solution, and probed with antibodies directed against TRIM44 (1:100) and vimentin (1:500) at 4 °C overnight. The following day, the cells were incubated with in situ PLA probes anti-mouse plus and anti-rabbit minus (diluted 1:5) at 37 °C for 1 h. The cells were then washed with Buffer A solution, and the Ligation buffer was added and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min, followed by two washes. Amplification buffer was then added and incubated at 37 °C for 100 min, and the cells were washed three times with Wash Buffer B solution and once with 0.01× diluted Wash Buffer B solution. Cells were mounted using Mounting Medium with DAPI, and images were taken under a Leica Laser Confocal Microscope (Leica).
In vitro ubiquitination assay
Recombinant TRIM44-BB protein (GENEWIZ) and TRIM44-ΔB protein (GENEWIZ) used in this study were commercially synthesized and produced in a mammalian expression system (HEK293T cells), while recombinant vimentin protein (Sino Biological, 10,028-H08 B) was produced in the baculovirus system (Sf9 insect cells). Recombinant vimentin protein and recombinant TRIM44 protein were incubated with E1 Enzyme (UBE1), E2 Enzyme (UBE2D3, also known as UBCH5C), Ubiquitin, and ATP-Mg solution of a ubiquitination kit (Yeasen, 20439ES20) for 3 h at 37 °C, and the resulting reaction mixtures were used for Western blot analysis.
Animal study
All animal experiments were performed with the approval of the Committee on Ethics of Biomedicine, Hebei Medical University (2023KY081). Cells (5 × 106 cells/mouse) in 100 μl of phosphate-buffered saline (769-P NC, 769-P shTRIM44) were injected into the tail vein of 5-week-old male BALB/c nude mice (HFK BIOSCIENCE). The mice were euthanized, and the lungs were dissected to count the number of pulmonary metastatic foci. All mice were randomized to either the 769-P NC or 769-P shTRIM44 group, and the investigators were blinded to the group assignment.
Haematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining
Tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution and using the gradient ethanolxylene to dehydrate and transparent. Then immersing in wax and embedding, sectioning into 2-μm slides, deparaffinizing after drying, and placing in hematoxylin-iridine stain in red solution, washing with water after dyeing, dehydrating with gradient ethanol, transparent xylene, and mounting with neutral gum. Finally, observing the histopathological changes through the microscope.
Statistical analysis
The results were expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. The data were analyzed using SPSS 25.0 (SPSS, Inc.) and GraphPad Prism 8 software (GraphPad Software). Variables were compared between the two groups using Student’s and paired samples t-tests. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to evaluate the significance of differences among multiple groups by Bonferroni’s correction. Survival analysis was carried out using the Kaplan–Meier method and analyzed by the log-rank test. Independent prognostic factors were analyzed by Cox’s proportional hazards regression model. In this study, p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS:
Results
TRIM44 was downregulated in RCC
To determine the critical protein in metastatic ccRCC, we performed proteomics analysis using different ccRCC cell lines. There were 72 up-regulated and 90 down-regulated proteins in metastatic (ACHN, Caki-1, and SN12-PM6) compared with primary ccRCC cell lines (786-O, 769-P, and OSRC-2) (Fig. 1A). ACHN, Caki-1, and SN12-PM6 cell lines were obtained from pleural effusion, skin metastasis, and lung metastasis of ccRCC, respectively. TRIM44 was one of the most significantly down-regulated proteins in metastatic ccRCC cell lines compared with primary ccRCC cell lines (Fig. 1B). We further investigated the expression and significance of TRIM44 in ccRCC by detecting its expression in six cell lines and ccRCC tissues from 144 patients by Western blot and IHC, and we analyzed the correlations between TRIM44 expression and clinical pathological parameters. TRIM44 expression levels were lower in metastatic ccRCC than in primary ccRCC cell lines (Fig. 1C). In addition, IHC showed that TRIM44 was mainly localized in the nucleus and cytoplasm in ccRCC, and its expression was lower in ccRCC tissues compared with non-cancerous adjacent tissues (Fig. 1, D–F). Importantly, TRIM44 protein expression was downregulated in advanced-stage compared with early-stage tumors (Fig. 1D). Correlation analysis showed that TRIM44 expression was significantly negatively correlated with tumor size (p < 0.001), Fuhrman grade (p < 0.001), TNM stage (p < 0.001), lymph node metastasis (p = 0.019), distant metastasis (p = 0.001), and a poor prognosis of ccRCC (p < 0.001) (Table 1). The results of univariate and multivariate analyses are shown in Table 2. Univariate analysis identified TNM stage, tumor size, Fuhrman grade, lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis, and TRIM44 staining as factors associated with overall survival (OS), while multivariate analysis identified TRIM44 as an independent predictor for postoperative OS in patients with ccRCC. According to the clinical information for the 144 patients, the median OS of patients with high TRIM44 expression was higher than that of those with low TRIM44 expression (Fig. 1G). In conclusion, low expression of TRIM44 was identified as a prognostic marker in patients with ccRCC.
The TNMplot (https://tnmplot.com/analysis/) and The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) databases showed similar results (Fig. S1, A–C). Furthermore, another analysis of ccRCC survival status based on the TCGA database demonstrated that TRIM44 downregulation predicted decreased disease-free survival and OS benefits (Fig. S1, D and E). Overall, TRIM44 was a vital protein with an important role in ccRCC tumorigenesis and metastasis.
TRIM44 restrained ccRCC progression in vitro
We investigated the potential function of TRIM44 in ccRCC progression by transfecting 769-P and OSRC-2 cells with TRIM44 short hairpin RNAs, and transfecting Caki-1 and ACHN cells with a TRIM44-overexpression plasmid, and then we detected the transfection efficiencies by Western blot and real-time polymerase chain reaction (Fig. S2). In addition, the cells’ migration, invasion, and proliferation abilities were detected by scratch assay, Transwell assay, and EdU incorporation and clone assays, respectively. TRIM44 suppression enhanced the invasion, migration, and proliferation of 769-P cells and OSRC-2 cells, while upregulating TRIM44 attenuated those abilities in Caki-1 cells and ACHN cells (Figs. 2, A–D, S3, A–D).
EMT and stemness are vital processes in tumor invasion and migration. We further explored the possible mechanism of TRIM44 in the progression of ccRCC by detecting markers of EMT and stemness. Knockdown of TRIM44 resulted in low E-cadherin and high vimentin and Snail levels, while TRIM44 overexpression had the opposite effects (Fig. 2, E and F, Fig. S3, E and F); however, regulating TRIM44 expression did not affect the level of stemness marker (Fig. S4). Collectively, these results indicate that TRIM44 is critical for the EMT process in ccRCC cells.
TRIM44 bound to vimentin in the cytoplasm in ccRCC cells
To further elucidate the underlying mechanism of TRIM44 in ccRCC metastasis, we used immunoprecipitation combined with mass spectrometry (MS) and detected hundreds of proteins (Fig. 3, A and B). Previously, we found that TRIM44 was significantly correlated with the EMT process, we analyzed EMT-related proteins based on dbEMT2.0 database and compared them to our IP-MS result, which suggested that vimentin might have its function in this process. However, vimentin indeed plays an important role as an EMT marker in breast cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and other cancers.
We firstly verified the interaction between TRIM44 and vimentin by immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence assays, which showed that TRIM44 interacted with vimentin in 769-P and Caki-1 cell lines (Fig. 3, C–E), and in OSRC-2 and ACHN cell lines (Fig. S5, A–C). In addition, TRIM44 is combined with vimentin mainly in the cytoplasm (Fig. 3E, S5C). We further investigated this interaction by co-immunoprecipitation of isolated nuclear and plasma proteins. TRIM44 and vimentin showed a stronger combination in the cytoplasm in primary ccRCC cell lines (769-P and OSRC-2) than in metastatic ccRCC cells (Caki-1 and ACHN) (Figs. 3F, S5D) but showed little combination in the nucleus (Figs. 3G, S5E). PLAs are used to detect the existence of a direct binding relationship between two proteins. TRIM44 interacted directly with vimentin in the cytoplasm (Fig. 3H, S5F). Collectively, these results suggest that TRIM44 could directly bind to vimentin in the cytoplasm of ccRCC cells.
TRIM44 negatively regulated vimentin by promoting its degradation via ubiquitination
We determined the effect of TRIM44 on vimentin expression in ccRCC cells. Vimentin expression was increased after knockdown of TRIM44 in 769-P cells and decreased after TRIM44 overexpression in Caki-1 cells (Fig. 2E). Notably, quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed no corresponding changes in vimentin mRNA levels (Fig. 4, A and B), suggesting that TRIM44 regulated vimentin protein expression at the post-translational level. We further investigated whether TRIM44 could affect the stability of vimentin using cycloheximide (CHX, a protein synthesis inhibitor) and MG132 (a proteasome inhibitor). Western blot results showed that vimentin expression was increased compared with control, after adding MG132 alone or in combination with TRIM44 knockdown (Fig. 4, C and D), while vimentin expression decreased after overexpressing TRIM44 together with the addition of MG132 (Fig. 4E). CHX could be used to detect the stability of proteins. We therefore added CHX to ccRCC cells at different times, and Western blot results indicated that downregulating TRIM44 enhanced vimentin stability (Fig. 4, F and G), while overexpressing TRIM44 had the opposite effect (Fig. 4H). Considering MG132 may affect autophagy, we co-treated cells with MG132 and the autophagy inhibitor 3-MA. As presented in Figure S6, treatment with 3-MA showed no significant effect on vimentin protein levels regardless of TRIM44 status, in contrast to the marked stabilization observed with MG132 treatment. In summary, TRIM44 regulated vimentin via proteasome-mediated degradation.
TRIM44 targeted vimentin for K48-linked polyubiquitination
Protein degradation occurs via the ubiquitin–proteasome system and/or the autophagy–lysosome system. The ubiquitin–proteasome system comprises ubiquitin, ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), ubiquitin ligase (E3), and 26S proteasomes. The role of TRIM44 in the ubiquitination degradation of vimentin is unknown. We conducted an immunoprecipitation assay to determine if TRIM44 could polyubiquitinate vimentin. Knockdown of TRIM44 decreased the polyubiquitination of vimentin in 769-P cells, while its overexpression increased vimentin polyubiquitination in Caki-1 cells (Fig. 5, A and B) and HEK-293T cells (Fig. 5C, S7A), suggesting that TRIM44 can affect polyubiquitination of vimentin protein.
TRIM44 has several known functional domains. We accordingly generated the following mutant TRIM44 protein constructs to identify the domains responsible for binding with vimentin: (i) full-length TRIM44 (FL, 1–344), (ii) TRIM44 with only a zinc finger domain (ZF, 13–48), (iii) TRIM44 with only a BB domain (174–215), (iv) TRIM44 with only a coiled-coil domain (CC, 290–325), and TRIM44 with a deleted BB domain, a construct without the BB domain (△BB, del 174–215) (Fig. 5D), and we transfected them into HEK-293T cells. Surprisingly, only the TRIM44 BB domain could bind to vimentin (Fig. 5E). To structurally characterize the TRIM44-vimentin interaction, we performed protein-protein docking using the HDOCK server (http://hdock.phys.hust.edu.cn). The HDOCK analysis revealed a preferential binding interface between vimentin (shown in yellow) and TRIM44 (displayed in rainbow colors). Notably, the interaction mainly occurred in the BB domain of TRIM44 and was not related to the ZF and CC domains of TRIM44 (Fig. 5F). We also performed the in vitro ubiquitination assay by using recombinant TRIM44-BB protein and recombinant TRIM44-ΔB protein to determine if the BB domain of TRIM44 had E3 ligase activity. The results demonstrated its biochemical function as an E3 ligase (Fig. 5G).
Ubiquitination modification generally occurs in the protein substrate’s lysine residues, with polyubiquitination at different lysine sites having different functions. For example, lysine-48 (K48)-linked polyubiquitination is mainly related to the degradation of target proteins, while lysine-63 (K63)-linked polyubiquitination could regulate the activation of target proteins. To confirm if TRIM44 polyubiquitinated lysine-48 in vimentin, we co-transfected the mutated plasmid with MYC-TRIM44-BB and HA-vimentin into HEK-293T cells. The BB domain of TRIM44-mediated ubiquitination of vimentin relied on K48-linked polyubiquitination (Fig. 5, H and I). Although high ubiquitination signals on vimentin were observed on K63, we co-transfected HEK-293T cells with the mutated plasmid with MYC-TRIM44-BB, HA-vimentin, and Ub-K48 or Ub-K63, together with CHX, at different times. As shown in Figure 5, J and K, the degradation of vimentin was unaffected by Ub-K63 but degraded with Ub-K48. Taken together, these findings indicate that the BB domain of TRIM44 is essential for K48-linked polyubiquitination of vimentin.
TRIM44 correlated with vimentin and affected the progression of ccRCC in vivo
To further verify the function of TRIM44 on ccRCC in vivo, we constructed 769-P cells stably expressing low levels of TRIM44. We then injected these cells into the tail veins of nude mice to establish a ccRCC metastasis mouse model. Consistent with the cytological results, mice in the shTRIM44 group showed more pulmonary metastatic foci than mice in the shNC group (Fig. 6, A and B). Hematoxylin and eosin staining confirmed the increase in metastatic sites and greater tumor fusion area in the shTRIM44 group (Fig. 6C). Vimentin signals were localized in the cytoplasm, while E-cadherin was located in the cytomembrane and/or cytoplasm, and Ki-67 was located in the nuclei (Fig. 6D). Mice in the shTRIM44 group showed increased expression of Ki67 and vimentin and decreased E-cadherin compared with the control group (Fig. 6C). We also examined the factors correlated with expression levels in ccRCC clinical samples. We retrospectively examined the expression levels of vimentin, E-cadherin, and Ki-67 proteins in 144 ccRCC tissues by IHC. TRIM44 expression was negatively correlated with vimentin and Ki-67 expression and positively correlated with E-cadherin in the ccRCC group (Fig. 1D). We confirmed the above conclusions in 12 pairs of ccRCC and matched peritumoral tissues by Western blot (Fig. 1F). Notably, patients with high TRIM44 combined with low vimentin expression levels had the worst prognosis (Fig. 1H). In summary, low expression of TRIM44 promoted ccRCC progression in vivo.

INTRODUCTION:
Kidney cancer is one of the 10 leading cancer types, according to Cancer Statistics 2023. Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most common subtype of renal cell carcinoma, accounting for approximately 75% of cases. Partial or radical nephrectomy is used to treat patients with early or localized ccRCC, with a 5-year survival rate of 92.6%. About one-third of patients, however, including those undergoing nephrectomy, are diagnosed at the metastatic stage, and despite several new approaches for metastatic ccRCC, the progression and metastasis of ccRCC remain unsolvable problems. The precise mechanism responsible is currently unclear. Thus, there is an urgent clinical need to discover a novel therapeutic target for metastatic ccRCC.
Ubiquitination, a critical post-translational modification, is mediated by sequential actions of E1 activating enzymes, E2 conjugating enzymes, and E3 ligases that attach ubiquitin chains to target proteins, thereby regulating their degradation or functional activation. As one of the largest E3 ligase families, TRIM proteins participate in diverse biological processes, including cancer progression, inflammation, autophagy, and intracellular signaling through their ubiquitin ligase activity. Emerging evidence reveals the dual roles of TRIM family members in tumorigenesis, where TRIM3 functions as a tumor suppressor by sequestering p21 to inhibit cyclin D1-CDK4 accumulation, while TRIM17 promotes gastric cancer through BAX stabilization and apoptosis inhibition. Similarly, TRIM22 exerts tumor-suppressive effects in osteosarcoma by destabilizing nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 and activating ROS/AMPK/mTOR/autophagy signaling. TRIM44 demonstrates context-dependent oncogenic or tumor-suppressive functions across different cancers, including its role in lung adenocarcinoma, ovarian cancer, and gastric cancer where it regulates lysyl oxidase-like 2 stability to remodel extracellular matrix and modulate tumor immunity. Despite these advances, the precise role and molecular mechanisms of TRIM44 in ccRCC progression remain to be elucidated.
Progression and metastasis are the ultimate and most deadly manifestations of cancer, and numerous studies have shown that most cancer patients die from metastatic disease rather than from the primary tumor. TRIMs is also been reported to play a vital role in tumor metastasis. For example, TRIM50 facilitated Snail1 degradation to reverse epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and inhibit pancreatic cancer progression, while Xiong et al. found that TRIM44 activated the Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and modulated the EMT process to promote the proliferation, migration, and invasion of esophageal cancer cells. Notably, tumor metastasis is associated with aberrant reactivation of EMT, which is regulated by a complex network, including transcription factors (Snail1/2, Twist1, and Zeb1/2), post-translational control, and noncoding RNA-mediated regulation, leading cells to switch between epithelial and mesenchymal states. However, it is unclear whetherTRIM44 can regulate the EMT processes to affect ccRCC progression, and clarifying its mechanism will provide a new direction for the treatment of ccRCC metastasis.
In this study, we investigated the relationship between TRIM44 expression and cancer progression in cell lines and in patients with ccRCC. We then elucidated the precise mechanism by which TRIM44 regulated ccRCC progression in vivo and in vitro.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
The data used and analyzed in this study are available from the corresponding author upon request. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD065914 and PXD065922.
Supporting information
This article contains supporting information.
Ethical statement
The study was approved by the Ethical Review Boards of Hebei Medical University Fourth Affiliated Hospital (2023KS035). All patients signed informed consent forms. And animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Hebei Medical University (2023KY081).
Supporting information