PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Protein cleavage; Cyclic imide; Cereblon; Protein damage; Post-translational modifications; Deamidation

ABSTRACT:
C-Terminal cyclic imides are post-translational modifications (PTMs) that can arise from spontaneous intramolecular cleavage of asparagine or glutamine residues resulting in a form of irreversible protein damage. These protein damage events are recognized and removed by the E3 ligase substrate adapter cereblon (CRBN), indicating that this class of aging-related modifications requires cellular quality control mechanisms to prevent deleterious effects.  However, the factors that determine protein or peptide susceptibility to C-terminal cyclic imide formation or their effect on protein stability have not been explored in detail. Here, we characterize the primary and secondary structures of peptides and proteins that promote intrinsic formation of C-terminal cyclic imides in comparison to deamidation, a related form of protein damage. Extrinsic effects from solution properties and stressors on the cellular proteome additionally promote C-terminal cyclic imide formation on proteins like glutathione synthetase (GSS) that are susceptible to aggregation if they are not removed by CRBN. This systematic investigation provides insight to the regions of the proteome that are prone to these unexpectedly frequent modifications, the effects of this form of protein damage on the protein stability, and the biological role of CRBN.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Genesis and regulation of C-terminal cyclic imides from protein damage

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The proteomics sample preparation protocol was adapted from Donovan and coworkers(4) and off-line fractionation protocol was adapted from Batth and coworkers(5). Global proteomics samples were prepared in biological quadruplicate for each of the 4 conditions (untreated, oxidative stress, heat stress, pH elevation). 2.0×106 HEK293T CRBN-KO cells were seeded in 6-well plates and treated with each of the stress conditions for the indicated time: untreated cells were seeded in unadjusted DMEM+/+ (pH 7.3) and incubated at 37 °C for 4 h; for oxidative stress, cells were seeded in DMEM+/+ with 100 µM H2O2 for 40 min; for heat stress, cells were collected in a Falcon tube with DMEM+/+ and placed in a heat block preheated to 55 °C for 40 min; for pH elevation, cells were seeded in DMEM+/+ at pH 7.8 for 4 h. After treatment, the media was replaced with fresh, unadjusted DMEM+/+ and all samples were further incubated at 37 °C for a total of 24 h. Cells were collected by PBS washes, lysed by probe sonication (5 sec on, 3 sec off, 15 sec in total, 11% amplitude) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, 1×protease/phosphate inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4), and cleared by centrifugation (21,000 × g, 4 °C, 10 min). After protein quantification by BCA protein assay, the lysates were diluted to 2 mg/mL with the lysis buffer. The samples (200 µg protein per sample) were reduced by addition of dithiothreitol (5 mM) at 24 °C for 30 min then alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide (15 mM) and incubation in the dark at 24 °C for 30 min. Proteins were precipitated by methanol-chloroform precipitation. Four volumes of methanol were added to the cell lysate, followed by one volume of chloroform, and finally three volumes of water. The mixture was vortexed and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was carefully aspirated. The precipitated protein was washed with three volumes of methanol, centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C, and the resulting protein pellet was dried for 10 min in a vacufuge. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 4 M urea, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4 (25 µL) and 200 mM HEPES pH 7.4 (75 µL) was subsequently added for 1 M final urea concentration. The samples were first digested with LysC (2 µg) for 4 h at 22 °C. The mixture was then diluted by the addition of 200 mM HEPES pH 7.4 (100 µL), and further digested with trypsin (4 µg) for 16 h at 37°C. For each sample, half of the digested peptides (ca. 100 µg) was taken to labeling by TMTpro 16-plex reagent (34 µL). The labeling reactions were performed for 1¬.5 h at 22 °C and quenched by the addition of 1 M Tris-Cl, pH 7.6 (20 µL) and incubation for 15 min at 22 °C. The channels were combined, dried in a vacufuge, and desalted using a Pierce peptide desalting spin column (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The desalted sample was offline fractionated into 80 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC (Agilent 1260 Infinity II) through an Aeris peptide XB-C18 column (Phenomenex 00G-4507-E0) with mobile phase A containing 5% acetonitrile and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and mobile phase B containing 90% acetonitrile and 1 mM ammonium bicarbonate (both pH 7.4). Fractions (0.7 mL each) were collected using a fraction collector in a deep 96-well plate. Samples were initially loaded onto the column at 1 mL/min for 4 min, after which the fractionation gradient was set as follows: 1% B to 27% B in 50 min, 60% B in 4 min, and ramped to 70% B in 2 min. Fraction collection was stopped at this point, and the gradient was held at 70% B for 5 min before being ramped back to 1% B to wash and equilibrate the column. The 80 resulting fractions were dried and pooled in a non-continuous manner into 20 fractions. The 20 final fractions were resuspended in 40 µL 0.1% formic acid.

DATA PROCESSING:
Analysis was performed in Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer version 2.4.1.15. The raw data were searched against SwissProt human (Homo sapiens) protein database (21 February 2019; 20,355 total entries) and contaminant proteins using the Sequest HT algorithm. Searches were performed with the following guidelines: spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5; mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor ions and 0.02 Da for the fragment ions; semi-trypsin digestion at the peptide N-terminus only to search for cleavage peptides and full trypsin digestion to search for deamidated peptides and quantify total protein level; fewer than 2 missed cleavages; static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da); static TMTpro 16-plex labeling (+304.207 Da) at lysine residues and N-termini; variable oxidation on methionine residues (+15.995 Da); variable dehydration on asparagine and glutamine residues at C-terminus only (–18.015 Da). To search for deamidation sites, the variable dehydration modification was replaced with variable deamidation on asparagine residues (+0.984 Da). The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier node and normalized to the total peptide amount. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using Target Decoy PSM Validator. For the quantification of total proteins, the data were further filtered to include only master proteins with high protein FDR confidence, at least 3 unique peptides, and exclude all contaminant proteins. To derive the list of peptides generated from internal cleavage at N or Q, the data were filtered to include only peptides without oxidation modifications, bearing N or Q residues at the peptide C-terminus with or without dehydration, and derived from non-contaminant proteins. The peptides that were mapped back to the protein C-terminus were excluded. To derive the list of peptides with deamidation modifications, the data were filtered to include only peptides without oxidation modifications, bearing at least one deamidated N residue, no missed cleavages, and derived from non-contaminant proteins.  The abundance ratios and their associated p-values were calculated by one-way ANOVA with TukeyHSD post-hoc test.