PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Affinity proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Fragment; Tauopathy; Screening; Chemoproteomics; Photoactivation

ABSTRACT:
Tauopathies are characterized by the formation of tau protein-based neurofibrillary tangles which impede neuronal function and contribute to the pathology of highly prevalent neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Pick’s diseases. Despite the impact of these diseases, the underlying biology is poorly understood. Current therapeutic efforts to reduce and remove tau aggregates target a variety of cellular mechanisms including altering tau phosphorylation through kinase inhibition, stimulating autophagy and upregulating protein quality control mechanisms such as the endoplasmic reticulum associated protein degradation pathway (ERAD), however these efforts have not thus far resulted in effective therapeutic interventions. Here, we sought to identify new targets and mechanisms that might be exploited to address tauopathies, through a chemoproteomic-integrated phenotypic screen using a cellular model of tau-aggregate clearance. An optimized analogue derived from this effort induced tau aggregate clearance in both SH-SY5Y and iPSC-derived human neuron models of hTauP301L aggregation at nanomolar concentrations and led to the activation of the ERAD pathway. Chemoproteomic studies revealed interactions with several resident endoplasmic reticulum proteins containing thioredoxin domains whose activities are involved in the ERAD pathway and protein quality control. Genetic knockdown of one of these targets, protein disulfide isomerase 1 (P4HB), was found to recapitulate the tau aggregate-clearance phenotype, indicating that modulation of this protein may be of therapeutic benefit for tauopathies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification of a Potent Tau-Aggregate Clearing Compound Using Chemoproteomic-Integrated Phenotypic Screening (Full-proteome and phospoproteomics)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
SH-SY5Y cells expressing hTauP301L-GFP were plated in 18 x 10 cm dishes at 5×106 per dish in 10 mL of growth media. The cells were allowed to attach and expand to ~80 % confluency over 48 h prior to dosing. Fresh stock solutions of 2a and 4 solubilized to 10 mM in DMSO were diluted to 210 µM in growth media and 0.5 mL dosed into the 10 cm dishes to achieve a final compound concentration of 10 µM. DMSO-dosed samples were generated by combining the same volume of 100 % DMSO in growth media and dosing in the same manner. All samples were dosed in triplicate. The dishes were returned to the incubator and nine were harvested after 2 h, and another nine harvested after 6 h. For harvesting, the growth media was first carefully aspirated and the cells gently washed in 3 mL of salt-free, room temperature PBS. After aspirating the wash, another 5 mL of PBS was added and the cells scraped to dislodge. The cells were isolated by centrifugation and the PBS was carefully removed by pipette prior to snap-freezing on dry ice.  18 samples from 6 experimental groups each containing 3 replicates per group were lysed in 8 M urea lysis buffer, reduced, and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide. 500 µg from each sample was aliquoted for TMT labeling. Urea content was reduced from 8 M to 1 M after reduction and alkylation with 50 mM Tris pH 8 and 10 µg trypsin-LysC, at a ratio of 1:50 trypsin to protein amount, was added to the samples for an overnight digestion at 37 °C in a thermomixer (Eppendorf 2231001005) at 750 rpm. The next day, samples were acidified to approximately pH 2 with TFA, desalted with polymeric reverse phase columns, dried down, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, and then labeled with TMTPro 18plex isobaric tags at a ratio of 1:3 sample to tag ratio for an hour at room temperature. All TMT labeled samples were quenched, mixed 1:1, and desalted. 300 µg of the pooled sample was set aside for proteomics. The desalted proteomics pooled aliquot was dried down, resuspended in 200 µL of 20mM ammonia formate pH 8, fractionated into a 96 well plate using an 8–45 % acetonitrile (ACN) gradient over 38 min on a Waters Acquity UPLC, and concatenated into 15 fractions. The remaining ~8700 µg of pooled samples was set aside for phosphopeptide enrichment using immobilized metal affinity chromatography. 4.5 mL of Ni-NTA magnetic agarose beads were first washed and quenched. Fe3+ was then chelated onto the NTA magnetic agarose beads for 30 min at room temperature at 1350 rpm in a thermomixer. Beads were then washed and resuspended in the buffer (80 % ACN and 0.15 % trifluoroacetic acid) and incubated with the samples for 30 min in a thermomixer at room temperature and 1350 rpm. Phosphopeptides were eluted thereafter with 50 % ACN 0.7 % NH4OH solution and immediately acidified with 4 % formic acid (FA). The eluate was dried down and then resuspended in 200 µL of 20 mM ammonia formate pH 8 and fractionated using an 8–45 % ACN gradient over 38 min on a Waters Acquity UPLC into 96 wells. These were then also concatenated into 15 fractions.  Both proteomics and phosphoproteomics fractions were dried down, resuspended in 0.1 % FA, and analyzed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 and a Thermo Fisher Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides for proteomics or phosphoproteomics were eluted with a linear gradient from 5 % ACN to 25 % ACN over 70 min, then eluted with a linear gradient up to 35 % ACN over 25 min, followed by 10 min of washing the column at 90 % ACN. For proteome fractions, the Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode, with an MS1 scan range from 300–800 m/z at 120,000 resolving power. Peptides from charge state 2–7 were considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion set to 30 s. Peptides were selected with a 1.0 m/z isolation window and an HCD normalized collision energy of 34 %. Tandem mass spectra were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolving power, a 50,000 AGC target, and 120 ms maximum injection times. For phosphoproteome fractions, all Lumos mass spectrometer settings were kept the same as the proteomics method, except tandem mass spectra were analyzed with a 100,000 AGC target.

DATA PROCESSING:
All data were searched using MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 with the experiment type set to TMTPro 18-plex chemical modifications.7  Enzyme digestion was specified as tryptic with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Chemical modifications considered for data searching included a fixed modification of carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, acetylation of protein N-termini, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues. All data were searched against a target-decoy UniProt human proteome database containing both canonical sequences and protein isoform sequences, downloaded on March 25, 2022. Peptide spectral matches were filtered to a FDR of less than 1 % using a target-decoy strategy.70 Protein identifications were also filtered to obtain a protein FDR of less than 1 % using a target-decoy strategy to model false positives.71 Reporter ion MS spectra were used for TMTpro quantification with a precursor ion mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm for determining relative peptide and protein quantitation. All protein group and phosphosite quantitation MaxQuant tables were exported and filtered to consider quantifiable protein groups or phosphosites for which 17 or more quantitative measurements were observed across all samples. Of those protein groups or phosphorylation sites that remained, missing values were imputed from the normal distribution of each samples’ protein or phosphosite quantitation. Protein group or phosphosite intensities were summed and median normalized to account for TMTpro mixing differences across the samples. Quantified phosphosites for each sample were normalized to their source protein abundance. Volcano plots of protein group or phosphorylation site stoichiometry changes were generated using unpaired two-sample T-tests. Prediction of pathway activation and upstream regulators was evaluated using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. At the protein level, log2-transformed fold-changes of protein groups abundance between different experimental groups and significance parameters that were applied (p <0.05 and 1 standard deviation of fold-change values) were placed into IPA for the calculation of activation Z-scores that predict a pathway’s activation state. At the phosphosite level, log2-transformed fold-changes of phosphosites normalized to source protein abundance were used instead. IPA software was also used to identify enriched diseases or functions.