PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Breast cancer; Dia; Mitochondrial metabolism; Orbitrap; Fasp; Extracellular vescicles

ABSTRACT:
In this study, we employed proteomic analysis to gain deeper insights into the role of EVs in breast adiponcosis, providing novel evidence on the role of adipocyte-derived EVs in sustaining mitochondrial metabolism in breast cancer cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
3T3-L1A-derived Extracellular Vesicles Impact the Proteomic Profile of Breast Cancer Cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) from the conditioned media derived from 3T3-L1A cells were isolated. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERα)-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells were treated for 48 h with 2 μg/ml EVs and then cells were subjected to analysis by label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS), by using Filtered Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol and Data Independent Acquisition (DIA).

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were analyzed by using Spectronaut (version 13.0, Biognosys AG, Switzerland) and Perseus (version 2.0.6.0) software.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Antibodies and reagents
Dexamethasone, 3-Isobutyl-1-Methylxanthine and bovine insulin were purchased from Merck KGaA. KC7F2 (cat. no. S7946) from Selleck Chemicals LLC. Tumor susceptibility gene 101 (Tsg101; cat. no. MA1-23296) was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc. ALIX (cat. no. ab186429) and total OXPHOS (cat. no. ab110411) cocktail was purchased from Abcam. CD81 (cat. no. sc-166029); Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90; cat. no. sc-7947); Calnexin (cat. no. sc-11397), HIF-1α (cat. no. sc-13515), TOM20 (cat. no. sc-17764), β-Actin (cat. no. sc-47778) and GAPDH (cat. no. sc-166545) were acquired from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.
Cell cultures
Human MCF-7 (cat. no. HTB-22), ZR-75-1 (cat. no. CRL-1500) and BT-474 (cat. no. HTB-20) BC epithelial cells and murine 3T3-L1 (cat. no. CRL-1500) pre-adipocytes were acquired from American-Type-Culture-Collection (ATCC) and cultured in accordance with supplier specifications. MCF-7 and ZR-75-1 cells were cultured in EMEM medium and RPMI-1640 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.), respectively, containing 10% FBS, 1% L-glutamine and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). BT-474 cells were cultured in ATCC Hybri-Care Medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Every six months, cells were authenticated by single tandem repeat analysis at our Sequencing Core; morphology, doubling times and estrogen sensitivity and tested for mycoplasma negativity (MycoAlert; Lonza Group Ltd.).
Isolation of extracellular vesicles (EVs)
Isolation of 3T3-L1 adipocyte-derived EVs
EVs were isolated from murine 3T3-L1 and 3T3-L1 adipocytes (3T3-L1A) conditioned media. Briefly, 3T3-L1 and 3T3-L1A cells were cultured in serum-free medium for 24 h and EVs were obtained from the resulting conditioned medium using differential ultracentrifugation.
Isolation of normal weight (NW) and overweight/obese (OW/Ob) EVs
EVs from serum samples of NW and OW/Ob female patients with BC were isolated by the ExoQuick isolation agent (System Bioscience, Palo Alto, CA, USA), following the manufacturer's instructions. A total of 45 biological samples, with an age range of 30-73 years for NW group and 36-83 years for OW/Ob groups, were collected, between May 2016 and February 2020, at the Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples Federico II. The samples were stored at −80°C until use. The study protocol was reviewed and approved (approval no. 107/05) by the Ethics Committee of the University of Naples Federico II (Department of Advanced Biomedical Sciences).
Isolated EVs were stored at −80°C and characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) and immunoblotting. For TEM analysis, the EV-containing aliquots were diluted in sterile NaCl 0.9% and then added onto formvar-carbon coated grids (Electron Microscopy Sciences, cat. no. FCF400-Cu). The grids were blotted dry at room temperature. The imaging process was conducted using a Jeol JEM 1400 Plus transmission electron microscope (JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) operated at an accelerating voltage of 80 kV. NTA was performed as previously reported. As storage at −80°C maintains EV stability, with minimal changes in size, concentration and protein content, these EVs were used in the respective experiments reported in the current study.
Gene silencing transfection
Cells were transfected with small interfering (si)HIF-1α silencer validated siRNA (cat. no. 4390824; ID s6541) and with silencer select negative control (NC; cat. no. 4390843) (Ambion; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.), using Lipofectamine® RNAi/MAX reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) according to the manual instructions. Specifically, 35×104 MCF-7 BC cells were transfected with 50 pmol of both validated (si)HIF-1α silencer siRNA and silencer select negative control and plated in 6-well plates. After 24 h, transfected cells were plated for mitotracker analysis (35×104 cells in 6-well plates) and for seahorse analysis (104 cells in XFe-96 well plates). Assays were then performed as described.
Immunoblot analysis
Immunoblot were performed as previously described. Specifically, cell extracts or EV lysates were obtained using RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich), supplemented with protease inhibitor. 50 μg of proteins, previously quantified by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (cat. no. 23227; Thermo Fishers Scientific, Inc.) were resolved on 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes by using power blotter XL system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). Nitrocellulose membranes were blocked with 5% milk in tris-buffered saline for 1 h at room temperature, which was followed by incubation overnight at 4°C in bovine serum albumin 5% with primary antibodies. Specifically, anti-Tsg101 (cat. no. MA1-23296; dilution 1:1,000); anti-ALIX (cat. no. ab186429; dilution 1:1,000); total OXPHOS cocktail (cat. no. ab110411; dilution 1:1,000); CD81 (cat. no. sc-166029; dilution 1:500); HSP90 (cat. no. sc-7947; dilution 1:500); Calnexin (cat. no. sc-11397; dilution 1:1,000), HIF-1α (cat. no. sc-13515; dilution 1:200); TOM20 (cat. no. sc-17764; dilution 1:1,000), β-Actin (cat. no. sc-47778; dilution 1:10,000) and GAPDH (cat. no. sc-166545; dilution 1:10,000) primary antibodies were used. IRDye 600 and 800CW Goat anti-Mouse or anti-Rabbit (LI-COR, Inc.) IgG secondary antibodies were used at 1:15,000 dilution. Images were acquired using Odyssey FC (LI-COR, Inc.) and ImageJ software was used to quantify the band of interest (v.1.52a, NIH, USA).
Proteomic analysis
Filter-aided sample protocol (FASP) digestion
The cells were lysed with RIPA buffer and the protein digestion procedure was subsequently performed according to the FASP method using 10 kDa molecular cut-off microcon filters. According to the digestion protocol, 50 μg of cell lysate was mixed with 10% SDS, 500 mM DTT, 1 M Tris HCl, pH 8.0 and incubated at 650 rpm for 10 min at 95°C. After incubation, the samples were allowed to reach to room temperature and loaded onto the FASP filter. The protocol is characterized by several distinct steps including two washes with 200 μl of 8M UREA (8 M UA, 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0) and subsequent centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 20 min at room temperature, followed by the addition of 50 μl of 50 mM Iodioacetamide (IAA) and centrifugation at 6,000 × g for 20 min at room temperature. After the alkylation reaction, two washes with 8M UREA and two washes with 50 mM TEAB were performed. Enzymatic digestion was then performed overnight at 37°C by adding 500 ng of proteomics grade trypsin (MilliporeSigma) in 60 μl of 50 mM TEAB buffer at pH 8.5.
SCX (strong cation exchange) purification
The next day H2O (140 μl) was added and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min at room temperature to collect 180-200 μl of digest. Then, 40 μl (corresponding to 10 μg of digested peptides) of each extract were purified by StageTip SCX as described by Rappsilber et al, to remove detergent residues. Before proceeding with SCX purification, tryptic digests were acidified with 360 μl of Wash B [80% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid (v/v)], to reduce the salt concentration. Acidified tryptic peptides were then loaded onto StageTips containing approximately 100 μg of a cation exchange resin (Millipore Extraction Disks; MilliporeSigma) that had before been conditioned with Wash A [20% acetonitrile/0.5% formic acid (v/v)] and Wash B. After two washes with 50 μl of Solution W2 and 50 μl of Solution W1, respectively, the peptides were eluted by the addition of 10 μl of 500 mM ammonium acetate-20% acetonitrile and were then diluted by adding 90 μl of 0.1% formic acid. Then, 1 μl of the purified sample was used for preliminary liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Following the preliminary injections, the final injections were performed. In particular, for each biological replicate, three LC-MS/MS injections were performed (technical replicate).
LC-MS/MS analysis
For peptide separation, the present study employed an easy nlC-1000 chromatographic instrument coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). For LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were separated using a 14 cm, 75 μm i.d. column, packed in-house with 3 μm C18 silica particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). The peptides were eluted from the column with a binary gradient of 140 min and a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The following mobile phases were used: Mobile phase A [2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v)] and mobile phase B [80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v/v)]. The peptide separation were obtained at a flow rate of 300 nl/min as follows: From 0% B to 3% B in 1 sec, from 3% B to 8% B in 40 min and from 42% B to 100% B in 13 min; the column was cleaned for 5 min with 100% B. The samples were analyzed in Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode. The DIA method included 60 windows (45 windows with an isolation window of 8 m/z, 10 windows with an isolation of 16 m/z and 5 windows with an isolation of 28 m/z). Full MS scans were performed in the range from 350 m/z up to 1,000 m/z with 60000 of resolution (AGC target Custom; maximum injection time 50 and collision energy 25).
Statistical analysis of proteome data
The RAW files were analyzed using the Spectronaut software (version 13.0; Biognosys AG). The search was performed with Direct DIA mode. Protein quantification was performed using the following parameters: Active precursor filtering (it required the precursor to be quantified in at least 20% of the runs); imputation by run wise imputing, Major Group Top N (Max 10-Min 1). Missing values at the protein quant level were 2006, averaging at ~111 proteins per sample (2.5%) and were handled in Spectronaut using the following parameters: Active precursor filtering (it required the precursor to be quantified in at least 20% of the runs); imputation by run wise imputing. The resulting matrix, which contained no missing values since already imputed in Spectronaut, was then imported into Perseus (version 2.0.6.0; Max-Planck-Gesellschaft) to perform the necessary statistical analysis. The data were transformed using a logarithmic scale (log2). Protein quantities from technical replicates (separate LC-MS/MS injections) were combined using the median value. Finally, the unpaired two-sample t-test was used to assess the statistical significance of protein abundances. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was permutation-based (FDR <0.05). The principal component analysis (PCA) plot was generated by using the R packages (version 4.4.2; https://www.R-project.org/), 'Factoextra' (version 1.0.7, https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=factoextra) and 'ggplot2' (version 3.5.2; https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org); 95% confidence limits within the PCA plot were calculated using the function 'fviz_pca_ind' in the 'Factoextra' package.
Analysis of protein annotations
The resulting protein list was subjected to different annotation tools for further in-depth analysis. For functional makeup of the identified proteins Bionic Visualizations Proteomaps was used (https://www.proteomaps.net). All de-regulated proteins (39 upregulated and 59 downregulated) were used for the analyses.
Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction
The PPI network of the candidate proteins was generated using STRING version 12.0 (https://string-db.org/cgi/input?sessionId=bp7GGoXn66Fl&input_page_show_search=on).
Functional enrichment analysis
De-regulated proteins identified in MCF-7 cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs were subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) and biological pathway enrichment analysis using FunRich tool (http://www.funrich.org) against human FunRich background database. P≤0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference and the GO results were ranked by P-value. The top 10 significant pathways in the de-regulated proteins were exhibited as bar charts. The same bioinformatics tool was employed to construct a Venn diagram, with the objective of evaluating the potential overlap between the identified de-regulated proteins and EV proteins that have been previously annotated in Vesiclepedia (version 5.1, http://www.microvesicles.org/) and Exocarta (version 3.1, http://www.exocarta.org/) databases.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
GSEA was performed using the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB; https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb) to examine the gene expression profiles of de-regulated proteins identified in MCF-7 cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs. The analysis included overlaps with GO categories: GO:BP (Biological Process), GO:CC (Cellular Component) and GO:MF (Molecular Function). Results were visualized using the ggplot2 package in R.
Pathway enrichment analysis
The analysis of signaling pathways in which de-regulated proteins identified in MCF-7 cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs are involved was performed using the REACTOME free online database (https://reactome.org/). The resulting data were visualized in R using the ggplot2 package.
Seahorse XFe96 metabolic profile analysis
By using XFe-96 well cell culture plates MCF-7, ZR-75-1 and BT-474 cells were seeded in 150 μl of regular growth medium for 24 h (104 cells/well). The next day, 2 μg/ml of 3T3-L1A-EVs were added to Exo-depleted medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) for 48 h. The real-time oxygen consumption rates (OCR) and extracellular acidification rates (ECAR) were assessed by using mito stress and glycolysis stress assays, respectively (Agilent Technologies, Inc.). The day prior to assay a sensor cartridge was hydrated using Seahorse XF Calibrant at 37°C for 1 h in a non-CO2 incubator. On the day of the experiment, cells were in prewarmed XF assay media (10 mM glucose, 1 mM pyruvate, 2 mM L-glutamine to assess OCR levels; 2 mM L-glutamine to measure ECAR levels and adjusted to pH 7.4) and cells were maintained at 37°C for 1 h in a CO2-free incubator. Then, 1.5 μM Oligomycin, 0.5 μM FCCP and 0.5 μM Rotenone/0.5 μM Antimycin A mix were sequentially injected to measure mitochondrial activity. To assess glycolytic activity 10 mM glucose, 1 μM Oligomycin and 50 mM M2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) were sequentially injected. The data were then normalized using the sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay.
Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA; 10%) was added to cells (1 h at 4°C), then SRB dye was used (30 min; Acid Red 52; Merck KGaA) and the cells washed two times with 1% acetic acid. The cells were left to air dry for a minimum of 3 h. Finally, 10 mM Tris pH 8.8 solution was added and the absorbance measured at a wavelength of 565 nm (Multiskan SkyHigh; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.).
Determination of cellular ATP levels
MCF-7 cells were plated in 1.5 ml of Exo-depleted medium into 6 well-plates for 24 h (35×104 cells/well) and the next day treated or not with the same amount (2 μg/ml) of EVs for 48 h. Intracellular ATP levels were determined by using an ATP Assay Kit (cat. no. ab83355; Abcam) and optical density (570 nm) was measured using a microplate reader (Multiskan SkyHigh; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). ATP levels were normalized to cell number.
Assessment of mitochondrial mass and mitochondrial membrane potential
Cells were plated in 1.5 ml of regular growth medium into 6 well-plates (35×104 cells/well) and the next day were treated or not with 2 μg/ml of 3T3-L1A-EVs for 48 h in Exo-depleted medium. At the end of the treatment, cells were trypsinized and equally divided into two separate tubes. Each aliquot was then incubated with a different probe [MitoTracker® Deep Red FM or MitoTracker® Orange CMTMRos (Thermo Fisher scientific, Inc.) 10 nM in PBS for 30-60 min at 37°C] to assess mitochondrial mass and membrane potential, respectively, by FACS analysis (CytoFLEX Beckman, Beckman Coulter, Inc.). For data analysis, manual gating was used to remove debris and doublets and analysis was performed at constant events (104) in each sample (Fig. S1). Data analysis was performed using CytExpert Beckman Coulter software (version 2.4, Beckman Coulter, Inc.).
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with unpaired Student's t test for the comparison between two groups and one-way ANOVA with Tukey's multiple comparisons post hoc test for the comparison between multiple variables by using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, Inc.; Dotmatics) and the results were reported as the mean ± SD or ± SEM, as indicated, of at least 3 independent experiments, each performed in triplicate. P<0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.
Availability of data materials
The data generated in the present study may be requested from the corresponding author. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059789.

RESULTS:
Results
3T3-L1A-derived EVs affect the proteomic profile of BC cells
In order to evaluate the effect of EVs on the proteomic profile of BC cells, the present study used stored and fully characterized EVs, which had previously been isolated from the conditioned media derived from 3T3-L1A cells, the most commonly used in vitro model for white adipocytes. EVs were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) and immunoblotting. Specifically, TEM analysis confirmed that EVs exhibited the characteristic oval or cup-shaped morphology, enclosed within a lipid bilayer membrane (Fig. S2A) and the NTA analysis revealed that the mode diameter remained consistently below 200 nm in all isolated EVs (Fig. S2B). Immunoblotting showed an enrichment of the EV hallmarks, including Alix, CD81, Tsg101 and HSP90, while the negative marker Calnexin was not detected in all isolated EVs (Fig. S2C). Estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) MCF-7 BC cells were treated for 48 h with 2 μg/ml EVs and then cells were subjected to LC-MS/MS, by using FASP protocol and DIA. Raw data were analyzed by using Spectronaut and Perseus (statistical analysis) software. A schematic diagram of the experimental design of the study is shown in Fig. 1.
PCA indicated good reproducibility of the technical replicates and injections demonstrating the different two-dimensional distribution between the three replicates of each sample (untreated and treated samples). Furthermore, the PCA revealed that the EV-treated cells clustered separately from the untreated cells, highlighting a significant difference in the proteomes of the two different conditions (Fig. 2A). LC-MS/MS analysis allowed us to identify 4,411 proteins (FDR <0.05). Prior to imputation, only very few proteins were exclusively identified and quantified in either one of the two conditions; in particular, syntenin-1, ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 4 and vinexin were exclusively identified in control MCF-7 cells, whereas skin-specific protein 32 was exclusively detected in 3 analyses of 3T3-L1A-EV-treated MCF-7 cells. Among the proteins revealed by LC-MS/MS analysis, 98 proteins were found to be differentially expressed in 3T3-L1A-EV-treated MCF-7 cells, with a P≤0.05 (Table I). Of these, 39 proteins were upregulated and 59 proteins downregulated, as reported in the volcano plot (Fig. 2B). The hierarchical cluster analysis confirmed the alteration in protein levels between MCF-7 cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs and untreated cells (Fig. 2C). In addition, when the de-regulated proteins were compared with those identified in the Vesiclepedia and Exocarta databases, it was found that 40 of them could be attributed to vesicular origin (Fig. 2D). Furthermore, the association of the 98 differentially expressed proteins in 3T3-L1A-EVs-treated MCF-7 cells were investigated with the 'extracellular exosome' gene ontology (GO:0070062). It is notable that a total of 13 proteins (gene names: PLG, APOD, PRKCA, CLIC1, SAMM50, HLA-B, GPRC5A, GSTM2, PPIC, AASDHPPT, NEDD8, LAMTOR1 and VTN) were found to be associated with the 'extracellular exosome' gene ontology (Fig. 2E).
To investigate the biological significance of the 98 de-regulated proteins revealed by proteomic analysis, the proteome of 3T3-L1A EV-treated MCF-7 cells was summarized into a proteomap (https://www.proteomaps.net), wherein each protein is represented by a polygon which size is proportional to the protein's abundance. Taking into account the protein fold regulation, the present study gathered functional information clustered in five categories: Genetic information processing (blue), metabolism (orange), environmental information processing (cyan), cellular processes (red) and organismal systems (pink) (Fig. 3A). At the broadest level, most proteins identified in EV-treated MCF-7 cells have been assigned to the following biological processes: Genetic information processing and metabolism, especially in terms of biosynthesis and energy metabolism. In the category of metabolism, the de-regulated proteins were involved into the oxidative phosphorylation, lipid/steroid metabolism, glycan metabolism, cofactor biosynthesis, amino acid metabolisms and pentose phosphate metabolism (Fig. 3A). The interactions of the 98 de-regulated proteins identified by proteomic analysis were analyzed using the STRING software (https://string-db.org/cgi/input?sessionId=bAzNH23SoAwP&input_page_show_search=on). The established network shown in Fig. 3B contained 98 nodes and MRLP4, MTIF2 and NDUFAB1 had more degree of connection. Subsequently, a functional enrichment analysis was conducted, which corroborated the aforementioned findings. The 98 de-regulated proteins were found to be involved in metabolic processes and in mitochondria. In particular, cellular metabolic process (58 proteins; FDR: 0.0015), cellular component organization or biogenesis (52 proteins; FDR 0.0018), cellular nitrogen compound metabolic process (37 proteins; FDR 0.0046) and metabolic process (64 proteins; FDR 0.0021) were among the first five biological processes (Fig. 3C). In addition, mitochondrion (18 proteins; FDR 0.0124) was the top subcellular localization (Fig. 3D). In the Reactome Pathway analysis (https://reactome.org/), the present study found 'Metabolism of RNA', 'SUMOylation', 'SUMO E3 ligases SUMOylate target proteins', 'Interferon alpha/beta signaling', 'Mitochondrial translation' and 'Mitochondrial translation initiation' among the top five enrichment pathways ranked by P-value (Fig. 3E). Moreover, among the cellular component GOs, 'mitochondrion' resulted the top enriched GO in the Molecular Signatures Database analysis (MSigDB; https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/; Fig. 3F), in term of overlap and P-value. In order to conduct a more thorough investigation into the function of the 98 de-regulated proteins identified in MCF-7 cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs, the present study also conducted an evaluation of their potential association with other GOs, including 'ATP biosynthetic process', 'ADP metabolic process', 'response to hypoxia' and 'glycolytic process'. No relevant associations were found, except for NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase chain 2, which showed an association with 'ATP biosynthetic process' and 'response to hypoxia' and for Acyl carrier protein, mitochondrial, which was associated with 'ATP biosynthetic process' (data not shown).
The present study also used FunRich (http://www.funrich.org) platform to obtain GO enrichments of the all de-regulated proteins. According to the cellular component, the de-regulated proteins were clustered in 'mitochondrion' (21.2%), in 'nucleolus' (17.6%) and in 'cytoplasm' (52.9%; Fig. S3A). In the context of 'biological process', the investigated proteins were markedly enriched in GOs such as 'protein modification' (2.1%), 'anti-apoptosis' (2.1%), 'lipid metabolism' (2.1%) and protein metabolism' (13.4%; Fig. S3B). Moreover, among the GO 'molecular functions' the de-regulated proteins were mainly related to 'chaperone activity' (4.1%), a family of proteins known to be regulators of metabolic processes (Fig. S3C).
Therefore, the present study sought to ascertain whether 3T3-L1A-EVs might exert an influence on metabolism in BC cells.
3T3-L1A-EVs support oxidative phosphorylation of ER-positive BC cells
In order to validate the hypothesis that EVs isolated from 3T3-L1 adipocytes can affect the metabolism of BC cells, the present study investigated possible changes in the OCR and the ECAR by using the Seahorse Extracellular Flux (XFe96) Analyzer. OCR is a well-established indicator of mitochondrial respiration rate because oxygen consumption by respiration is a fundamental function of the mitochondria, mainly used in the process of ATP production. Thus, the present study performed Mito Stress Test that measures OCR levels in real time by sequential injections of oligomycin, an inhibitor of ATP synthase (complex V), carbonyl cyanide p-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP), an uncoupling molecule that disrupts the mitochondrial membrane potential and a mixture of rotenone and antimycin A, inhibitors of complex I and III, respectively (Fig. 4A). 3T3-L1A-EVs markedly increased basal (Fig. 4B) and maximal respiration (Fig. 4C) of MCF-7 cells compared with the control group. Meanwhile, by sequentially injecting a saturating concentration of glucose, oligomycin and 2-DG, an analogue of the glucose that inhibits glycolysis, ECAR, the release of protons into the extracellular milieu generated by anaerobic glycolysis, was estimated (Fig. 4D). The data showed that 3T3-L1A-EV treatment did not affect glycolysis (Fig. 4E) or glycolytic reserve (Fig. 4F), but they markedly increased the glycolytic reserve capacity (Fig. 4G), which is the difference between glycolytic capacity and glycolysis rate. It is noteworthy that the glycolytic reserve is indicative of the capacity of cells to enhance ATP production via glycolysis in response to stress or other physiologically demanding circumstances. It was found that pre-adipocyte-derived EVs (3T3-L1-EVs) had no detectable effects on mitochondrial activity in MCF-7 cells (Fig. S4), further confirming previous data that 3T3-L1-EVs failed to promote malignant features in BC cells and supporting the notion that functional changes in tumor cells are specifically driven by EVs from differentiated adipocytes.
To further support these findings, we also used two additional ER+ BC cell lines as ZR-75-1 (Fig. 5A-C) and BT-474 (Fig. 5D-F) and found that 3T3-L1A-EVs affected mitochondrial respiration of both experimental models. Therefore, EVs isolated from mature adipocytes may promote the mitochondrial metabolism of BC cells, leading to an increase in energy production in different cellular background.
As it is widely known that ATP production through oxidative phosphorylation is markedly greater than that produced by glycolysis alone, the present study also investigated the ATP amounts in BC cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs. Notably, 3T3-L1A-EVs enhanced the ATP production in MCF-7 BC cells (Fig. 6A). Furthermore, the present study investigated the mitochondrial phenotype of MCF-7 cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs employing FACS analysis by using two different dyes able to discriminate mitochondrial mass (MitoTracker Deep Red) and mitochondrial membrane potential (MitoTracker Orange). There was a slight reduction of mitochondrial mass along with a significant increase in mitochondrial membrane potential in MCF-7 cells treated with 3T3-L1A-EVs compared with the control group (Fig. 6B and C). Consequently, the ratio of mitochondrial membrane potential/mitochondrial mass confirmed elevated mitochondrial activity in MCF-7 EVs-treated cells compared with the control group (Fig. 6D). In addition, an increase in mitochondrial markers from Complexes I to V was observed in EV-treated MCF-7 cells compared to control (Fig. 6E).
The aforementioned events confirmed the role of 3T3-L1A-EVs in regulating cell energy production by sustaining mitochondrial function in BC cells.
HIF-1α is a potential mediator of the effects of 3T3-L1A-EVs on BC cell metabolism
We have previously demonstrated that HIF-1α plays a role in mediating the effects of 3T3-L1A-EVs on BC cell biology. Indeed, treatment of BC cells with 3T3-L1A EVs resulted in increased mRNA and protein expression of HIF-1α as well as in an upregulation of well-known HIF-1α target genes (such as VEGF, Ob, MMP-2, MMP-9 and SERPINE1). Accordingly, inhibition of HIF-1α activity using KC7F2, able to downregulate HIF-1α protein synthesis and its transcriptional activity, or using a specific siHIF-1α, resulted in the reversal of the promoting effects of 3T3-L1A-EVs on BC cell motility, invasion and metastasis. In light of these findings, the present study sought to investigate the potential involvement of HIF-1α in mediating the metabolic effects of 3T3-L1-EVs. As a first step, the specific HIF-1α inhibitor KC7F2 was used at 20 μM, a concentration previously shown to be non-toxic both in vitro and in vivo. It was found that the inhibition of HIF-1α activity, using KC7F2, reversed the effects of 3T3-L1A-EVs in increasing mitochondrial respiration in MCF-7 BC cells, which exhibited levels comparable to those observed in the control group (Fig. 7A-C). Data were confirmed by knocking down HIF-1α expression in MCF-7 BC cells (Fig. 8A-D). Specifically, HIF-1α silencing (Fig. 8A) counteracted 3T3-L1A-EV-mediated effect on basal (Fig. 8C) and maximal (Fig. 8D) respiration. The aforementioned data were further corroborated through an analysis of the ATP levels conducted under the same experimental conditions. Particularly, the specific blockade of HIF-1α activity (Fig. 7D and E) as well as its reduced expression (Fig. 8E and F) counteracted the ATP production and the mitochondrial activity observed in MCF-7 cells when exposed to 3T3-L1A-EVs, further supporting the potential involvement of HIF-1α in mediating the effects of 3T3-L1A-EVs on BC cell metabolism.
EVs isolated from serum of obese patients with BC promote mitochondrial metabolism and energy production in MCF-7 cells via HIF-1α
Finally, in order to reproduce the findings within the context of obesity, the present study used EVs that had been isolated from the serum of NW and OW/Ob patients with BC and characterized by TEM, NTA and immunoblotting as shown in Fig. S2D-F. It was found that EVs derived from OW/Ob patients increased the basal and maximal respiration of MCF-7 cells compared with the BC cells treated with NW-EVs (Fig. 9A-C). Accordingly, the OW/Ob-EVs enhanced the ATP production in BC cells (Fig. 9D). Of note, the HIF-1α inhibitor KC7F2 abrogated the up-regulatory effects mediated by OW/Ob-EVs on mitochondrial respiration and energy production (Fig. 9A-D). Furthermore, the enhanced effects of OW/Ob-EVs on ATP production in MCF-7 cells were blocked by a specific siHIF-1α (Fig. 9E).
All these data supported the role of HIF-1α as a potential mediator of the stimulatory effects of EVs on BC cell metabolism.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Intimate intercellular communication between breast cancer (BC) cells and other cells in the surrounding microenvironment exerts a significant influence on a number of key processes, including primary tumor growth, metastasis evolution and immune escape. In particular, the breast is a fat-rich organ and BC development and progression are strongly influenced by the intimate and highly vicious cycle between adipocytes, which act as endocrine cells, and tumor cells. The main methods of cell-to-cell communication are direct contacts involving adhesion molecules and indirect contacts through classical paracrine signaling mediated by secreted molecules. Beyond the secretion of various soluble factors (for example, leptin and adiponectin), adipocyte-derived EVs, a heterogeneous group of membrane-enclosed structures, have emerged as an essential part of the adipocyte secretome, acting as key mediators of intercellular communication and contributing to autocrine, paracrine and endocrine communication. Indeed, EVs are capable of transferring a multitude of biological molecules, including proteins, nucleic acids and lipids, which can subsequently alter the biology of the recipient cells. In this situation, it has been demonstrated that EVs derived from 3T3-L1 adipocytes, a widely used in vitro model for white adipocytes, sustain proliferation, migration and invasion and response to therapy in several cancer cell lines through multiple mechanisms. For instance, melanoma cell lines treated with adipocyte-derived EVs exhibit more aggressive features, including elongated morphology and actin-rich membrane profusion along with an increased cell migration in vitro and lung colonization in vivo. Furthermore, it has been also demonstrated that 3T3-L1-EV adipocytes promote lung cancer cell invasion in vitro and in vivo through an increased activity of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9). In another study, EVs derived from 3T3-L1 adipocytes were reported to: i) Promote the proliferation of prostate cancer cells, ii) sustain their migratory capabilities and iii) confer resistance to docetaxel. This is achieved through a mechanism involving the Akt/hypoxia-inducible factor 1 α (HIF-1α) axis, which is accompanied by enhanced glycolysis and ATP production. The involvement of the HIF-1α/von Hippel-Lindau axis in modulating the protumoral effects of adipocyte-derived EVs has been also reported in hepatocellular carcinoma. In line with this evidence, our research group also found that 3T3-L1 adipocyte-derived EVs support BC cell proliferation, growth, migration and invasion as well as their metastatic potential via the induction of HIF-1α levels and activity.
The present study employed proteomic analysis to gain deeper insights into the role of EVs in breast adiponcosis, providing novel evidence on the role of adipocyte-derived EVs in sustaining mitochondrial metabolism in BC cells through HIF-1α.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Data