PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Bile
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Human; Bile; Proteomics; Liver; Methods; Ageing; Biomarker

ABSTRACT:
Bile has gained increasing attention for its potential to reflect the overall health of the biliary system. Proteomic analysis of bile could deepen our understanding of the molecular pathophysiology of biliary disease and injury and provides a potential source of diagnostic biomarkers. With the emergence of normothermic machine perfusion (NMP) prior to liver transplantation, bile samples can be easily collected and analyzed. However, the unique composition of bile, including high concentrations of endogenous detergents and salts, can make application of proteomics challenging. In this study, we systematically evaluated a variety of available trypsin-digestion methods to optimize proteomics analysis of bile obtained from human NMP livers. Bile was collected from 12 human donor livers that were accepted for transplantation after NMP viability assessment. We performed tryptic digestion using 6 different methods: in-gel, in-solution, S-Trap, SMART, EasyPep, and filter-aided sample purification, with or without an additional precipitation step prior to digestion. Untargeted, data-independent acquisition proteomics was performed using an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled with a FAIMS device. The methods were judged for total protein IDs, variation, and specific protein characteristics to determine the most optimal method. A total of 4650 unique proteins were identified across all samples and all methods. Methods involving precipitation identified substantially more proteins (4500 vs 3815, respectively). In-gel crude was the exception, identifying a comparable number of proteins to precipitated in-gel digest. We found minimal differences in the mass, cellular component, or hydrophobicity of identified proteins between methods. Intra-method variability was notably diverse, with in-gel, in-solution, and EasyPep outperforming other methods with considerably less variation. Age-related biological comparisons revealed significant disparities in protein abundances between methods, but younger donors consistently showed upregulation of metabolic-related processes compared to older donors. Older donors showed upregulation of immune response and cell cycle-related processes. The digestion method used for proteomic analysis of bile can heavily influence the results obtained. A method of protein purification appears to be essential for sufficient quality mass spectrometry runs and subsequent data. Sample processing speed, cost, cleanliness, and reproducibility should be carefully considered when selecting a protein digestion method for this difficult sample type.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A comparative analysis of digestion methods for bile proteomics: the key to unlocking biliary biomarker potential in liver transplantation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein quantitation For initial protein quantitation, 100µl bile was centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 15 mins to remove debris. Protein concentrations were determined using a micro-BCA assay (Pierce™, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bile volumes containing 50µg protein were taken forward for digestion by each of the described methods.  Protein precipitation A methanol/chloroform protocol was used for protein precipitation. Volumes containing 50µg of protein were diluted to 200µl using 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Six-hundred microliters of methanol and 150µl of chloroform were added to the diluted sample and vortexed for 30 seconds, after which 450µl MilliQ water was added. Samples were then vortexed again for 30 seconds and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 1 min. The resulting aqueous phase was removed and discarded, and 450µl methanol added. Samples were vortexed and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 1 min and the supernatant discarded. The resulting protein pellets were air-dried and resuspended in 50µl 100mM ABC where applicable.  In-gel digestion Fifty micrograms of protein, from crude or precipitated sample, was combined with 6.25µl 4x Loading Buffer (Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom) and topped up to 25l using 100mM ABC. Samples were heated to 70oC for 10 minutes, cooled, added to a gel (4-12% Bis-Tris plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and run at 100V for 5 min. The gels were then stained for 1 hr using Coomassie Blue stain (InstantBlue, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom), and destained in MilliQ water overnight. The protein-containing gel bands were then cut from the gel and further destained/dehydrated using 300µl steps of 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 100mM ABC, 50% ACN in 100mM ABC, and 100% ACN before being air-dried. The proteins were reduced and alkylated using 10mM dithiothreitol at 57oC for 30 min, and 55mM IAA in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes, respectively. The gel pieces were then dehydrated using 300uL 100% ACN and dried. The proteins were then digested using sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Wisconsin, United States) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:100 and left to digest at 37oC overnight. The digested peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using 60uL 5% formic acid, 75% ACN, and taken forward for SPE clean-up.  In-solution digestion Volumes containing 50µg protein were diluted to 200µl using 100mM ABC. Reduction and alkylation of proteins were carried out as described in the in-gel methods. Proteins were then precipitated using the methanol/chloroform protocol, as described. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 50µl 8M urea by vortexing and sonication. The final urea concentration was diluted to < 1M with 250µl MilliQ water. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:100 and digested at 37oC overnight. The resulting peptides were then taken forward for SPE clean-up.  Filter aided sample purification digestion Amicon Ultra 0.5ml 30kDa molecular weight filters were used (Merk-Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Filters were equilibrated with 200ul 8M urea and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 20 minutes. Volumes containing 50µg protein were added to the filters. Samples were reduced by adding 100µl 20mM dithiothreitol in 8M urea for 30 min at room temperature, after which they were centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min. Samples were then alkylated using 100mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature, followed by the same centrifuge step. Buffer exchange was then performed using 2 x 100µl 8M urea, then 3 x 100uL 50mM ABC, with centrifuging at 14,000 x g for 10 min in between each step. Trypsin was then added at a trypsin-protein ratio of 1:100 and incubated at 37oC overnight. Filters were then centrifuged at 5000 x g for 1 min upside down to collect the peptides, followed by a wash of 100µl 0.5M NaCl. Finally, filters a second wash of 200µl MilliQ water centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min was performed to collect any residual peptides. The resulting solution containing peptides was acidified using 10µl 100% formic acid (FA) and taken forward for solid phase extraction (SPE) cleanup.  EasyPep, S-Trap and SMART digests were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Solid phase extraction (SPE) clean-up SPE columns (GracePure 1ml C-18-Aq column, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were conditioned twice with 1ml 100% ACN/0.1% FA and equilibrated twice with 0.1% FA. Samples were then mixed 1:1 with 0.1% FA and applied to the column. Bound peptides were then washed twice with 1ml 0.1% FA, and eluted with two rounds of 400µl 50 % ACN/0.1 % FA. Samples were then dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% FA for MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry Liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 quadrupole mass spectrometer equipped with a non-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), coupled with a front-end high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility (FAIMS) device (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), using a non-LC column (Acclaim PepMapC100 C18, 75µm x 50cm, 2µm, 100 Å, Dionex, buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile). Six microliters of sample were loaded into a trap column (µPrecolumn cartridge, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5µm, 100 Å, 300µm x 5mm, Dionex) using buffer A as a transport liquid. Peptides were separated on the nano-LC column using a linear gradient from 2-45% buffer B over 75 min at a flow rate of 300nL/min, followed by a column wash using 80% buffer B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using isolation windows of 12m/z with a precursor mass range of 300-1200. The orbitrap resolution was set to 120,000 and DIA scan resolution at 30,000. Two compensation voltages (-60 V, and -45 V) were used with the FAIMS device.  Data analysis and statistics MS raw data was searched using Spectronaut software (version 15, Biognosys) using library-free DIA analysis workflows. Oxidation and deamidation were set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. Data was searched against human protein sequences using the UPR_homoSapiens_FASTA file (20,401 entries). MS1 values were used for protein quantitation and normalized using global normalization. Quantitative values for identified protein groups were processed using Perseus software (v1.6.6.4). Protein IDs were filtered to include proteins present in at least 40% of samples within each method. Heatmaps were generated in R using log2 transformed values converted to z-score, with hierarchical clustering of proteins, and samples within method groups. For biological comparison, volcano plots were generated in Perseus using log2 transformed values with missing values replaced using imputation based on normal distribution of values. Parametric Students T-tests (assuming normal distribution of data) with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 to assess multiple comparisons. Biological pathway analysis was performed in CytoScape (version 3.9.1, National Resource for Network Biology) software using STRING protein databases (https://string-db.org/). Visualization of volcano plots were performed in GraphPad Prism 8 (San Diego, CA, USA) software. Receiver operator characteristic analysis was performed using SPSS 29 (IBM).