PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Dia mass spectrometry; Inhibitors; Human fibroblasts; Faims-orbitrap lumos

ABSTRACT:
Data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry was used to study the potent inhibitors for cancer derived fibroblast cell line, CT5-3hTERT. The fibroblast spheroids were treated with 21 different tumor inhibitors to compare their effect in proteome in comparison to treated with DMSO.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Study of Potent inhibitors for CT5-3hTERT fibroblast cell line

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
CT5-3hTERT fibroblast cells treated with Everolimus, Navitoclax, GSK2256098, Paclitaxel, Oxaliplatin, Luminespib, Trametinib, Imatinib, Sunitinib, Y27632, Nintedanib, Palbociclib, Pazopanib, Dabrafenib, Ricolinostat, Lenvatinib, Omipalisib, Uprosertib, Lapatinib, Foretinib, Tofacitinib in triplicate and DMSO (9 replicates). The cells were then decellularized and the protein extracts were reduced and alkylated. The proteins were then digested with Trypsin/Lys-C in S-trap microcolumn. The digested peptides were desalted and then injected into FAIMS embedded nano LC Orbitrap Lumos Fusion system. The peptides were separated with mobile phase buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and B (acetonitrile/water (95:5(v/v)), over a 120-minute gradient (5–21% B in 62 minutes, 21-36% B in 48 minutes, 36-100% in 5 minutes and held at 100% B for 5 minutes). FAIMS compensation voltages were set to be -50 V and -70 V. Data acquisition was performed with DIA mode, in which each cycle of full scan of 395-1005 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 was performed. DIA MS2 scans at a resolution of 30,000 were performed for all DIA scans with 30 variable windows overlapped by 1 m/z. DIA spectra of both FAIMS compensation voltages were acquired. Six gas phase fractionated DIA runs of overlapping isolation window of 4 m/z and a mass range of 100 m/z (400-500 m/z, 500-600 m/z, 600-700 m/z, 700-800 m/z, 800-900 m/z, and 900-1000 m/z) were prepared from the pool of the biological samples to prepare the spectral library.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed by Spectronaut software (version 16.2) using spectral library prepared from the gas phase fractionated DIA runs. The spectral library was generated with a FASTA database containing human reviewed sequences along with their isoforms of UniprotKB release of 2022_01. Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and M oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modification. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed and the false discovery rate was set at 1%. Precursors were filtered with q value and quantitation was done at MS2 level based on peak areas. Statistical analyses were done with Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) based on MS2 quantification data. Welch's T test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 0.05 was used to identify statistically significant proteins from the comparisons.

INTRODUCTION:
Dear Editor,
We conducted a comprehensive bioinformatic analysis combined with empirical experimental evaluation, highlighting the critical role of cancer‐associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in the poor outcomes of breast cancer (BC) patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC).
BC stands as the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women worldwide. NAC is the standard treatment for locally advanced BC, and response to NAC is associated with patient prognosis. Despite similar tumour histology, stages, and uniform NAC, treatment response among BC patients significantly varies. While numerous molecular biomarkers have been investigated to predict NAC response, these do not consider that cancer cells reside within a complex tumour microenvironment (TME) composed of non‐malignant cells that mediate cancer progression and NAC resistance. Given the complex interplay between stromal cells and cancer cells, we identified, explored and functionally validated stromal cell‐derived molecular signatures as indicators of NAC response (Figure 1A).
First, a chemo‐resistant stroma (CRS) signature was identified as a list of differentially higher expressed genes in laser capture micro‐dissected stromal cells from pre‐NAC biopsies derived from BC patients with residual disease (RD) compared to patients with pathological complete response (pCR) (Figure 1B). BC patients from four cohorts (Table S1) were stratified into high and low CRS signature groups. For all cohorts, RD patients were associated with high CRS signatures (Figure 1C). Next, we screened the CRS gene signature using the Lasso penalized Cox regression analysis and delineated an 11‐gene‐based CRS risk model (Figure S1A). Kaplan‐Meier analysis revealed that BC patients demonstrating a low CRS risk score exhibited a significantly higher distant relapse‐free survival (DRFS) rate (Figure 1D). The CRS risk score was identified as an independent risk factor through multivariate Cox regression analysis (Figure S1B) in the JAMA cohort. These findings were subsequently validated in the TCGA‐BRCA cohort (Figure 1E and Figure S1C). Taken together, these results demonstrate the robustness of the CRS signature in indicating BC patient survival and response to NAC.
To further confirm the role of the stromal part in NAC response, we performed a comprehensive transcriptomic analysis of pre‐treatment biopsies from BC patients in the JAMA cohort (Figure 2A and Figure S2A). However, principal component analysis did not differentiate pCR or RD patients (Figure 2B), as cancer cells are the main components within the tumour biopsies further argues the possibility that stromal cells rather than the cancer cells determine NAC response. Indeed, an increased stroma score, but not an immune score, and elevated epithelial‐mesenchymal transition (EMT), extracellular matrix (ECM), collagen fibril organization and CAF (the main source of ECM) signatures were identified in pre‐treatment biopsies from RD patients (Figure 2C,D and Figure S2B). In contrast, there was no enrichment of signatures associated with normal fibroblasts, endothelial cells or T cells in RD patients at baseline (Figure S2C), further highlighting the relevance of CAFs in impaired NAC response. In JAMA and TCGA‐BRCA cohorts, BC patients exhibiting a high CAF score were significantly correlated with an increased enrichment of the EMT signature (Figure 2E). EMT is a prominent process that plays a significant role in cancer cell plasticity and NAC resistance. Kaplan–Meier analysis revealed that BC patients with a high EMT score experienced shorter DRFS periods (Figure 2F). In addition, a strong positive correlation was observed between EMT signature and signatures for stroma, CAF, ECM as well as collagen formation (Figure 2G and Figure S2D). Collectively, these data strongly support the notion that within the stromal part particularly CAFs confer NAC resistance.
To elucidate the underlying mechanisms through which NAC modulates stromal functions and to assess the impact of these processes on cancer progression, we compared transcriptomic data of 20 paired pre‐ and post‐chemo BC biopsies. GSEA indicated that NAC induced signatures of EMT, ECM, collagen formation as well as CAF (Figure 3A and Figure S3A–C). Further analysis also revealed a higher stroma score and higher CAF abundance in post‐chemo BC samples. In contrast, NAC treatment had no effect on the infiltration of T cells, macrophages and endothelial cells (Figure 3B and Figure S3D). Paclitaxel (PTX), a microtubule‐stabilizing agent causing mitotic arrest, is a widely used component of NAC in BC patients. We next assessed PTX cytotoxicity against BC patient‐derived CAFs and BC cell lines cultured under three‐dimensional spheroid conditions. Corroborating with bioinformatic analysis, we observed that CAFs were highly resistant to PTX in contrast to cancer cells (Figure 3C). In line with microtubule activity in migratory and contractile CAF, we observed a drastic inhibition of contractility, migration, outgrowth, and invasion but not metabolic activity (ATP content) and cell death (Figure 3D and Figure S3E–I).
Proteomic analysis of CAF spheroids revealed a reduced presence of cell cycle‐associated proteins (Figure 4A) as well as an induction of senescence signature in PTX‐treated CAFs (Figure 4B). In accordance, senescence induction was also identified in post‐chemo tumour biopsies (Figure 4C). Flow cytometry demonstrated a G2/M arrest (Figure 4D) and immunoblot analysis revealed higher protein levels of senescence markers p16, p21 and cyclin D1 in CAFs following PTX treatment (Figure 4E). Increased β‐galactosidase activity further confirmed PTX‐induced senescence (Figure 4F). Senescent CAFs release a set of proinflammatory factors, growth factors and chemokines termed the senescence‐associated secretory phenotype (SASP) with tumor‐promoting and immunosuppressive functions. Our study also observed the induction of SASP signature in CAFs (Figure 4G) and tumour biopsies following chemotherapy (Figure 4H). RNA sequencing and Luminex data revealed high expression levels of SASP markers in CAFs after PTX treatment (Figure 4I,J). To further investigate the impact of senescent CAFs on tumour progression, we examined the growth of three‐dimensional spheroids of BC cells and chemotactic migration of immune cells treated with the conditioned medium from CAFs (CAF‐CM) or PTX‐treated CAFs (PTX‐CAF‐CM) (Figure 4K). Compared to the growth of BC cells treated with CAF‐CM, the growth of BC spheroids treated with PTX‐CAF‐CM was significantly increased (Figure 4L). Neutrophil or monocyte attraction was increased by CAF and remained so by PTX treatment of CAF (Figure 4M).
In conclusion, our study underscores the critical role of CAFs in impaired NAC response. NAC induces senescence in CAFs, which subsequently promotes tumour progression. Future animal experiments and patient studies should investigate NAC‐induced chemokine secretion and matrix contraction by CAFs and their reciprocal effects in the TME. Targeting CAFs and their senescent state may offer a promising strategy to overcome NAC resistance.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The proteomics data that support the findings of this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository at the European Bioinformatics Institute (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/) and are now accessible with the dataset identifier: PXD050005.