PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; biotinylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Abpp; Bioisosteres; Serine hydrolase

ABSTRACT:
Aromatic rings are common elements in pharmaceutically active compounds; however, their ready oxidation can present a liability with respect to a drug's metabolic stability. Replacing these aromatic rings in pharmaceutical compounds with non-aromatic isosteric motifs can enhance properties such as potency, metabolic stability, solubility, and lipophilicity. Since the binding pockets of most pharmaceutical targets are chiral, the stereochemical configuration of the isosteric replacements are expected to have an impact on the affinity of derived ligands for target receptors. A significant impediment to this approach is the lack of simple, and scalable catalytic enantioselective syntheses of candidate isosteres from readily available precursors. In this work, we present a heretofore unknown palladium-catalyzed reaction that converts hydrocarbon-derived precursors to chiral boron-containing nortricyclanes and we show that that shape of these nortricyclanes makes them plausible isosteres for meta disubstituted aromatic rings. With chiral catalysts, the Pd-catalyzed reaction can be accomplished in an enantioselective fashion and subsequent transformation of the boron group provides access to a broad array of structures. We also show that incorporation of nortricyclanes into pharmaceutical motifs can result in improved biophysical properties along with stereochemistry-dependent activity. We anticipate that these features, coupled with the simple, inexpensive synthesis of the functionalized nortricyclane scaffold will render this platform a useful foundation for assembly of new biologically active agents.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Catalytic Asymmetric Synthesis of meta Benzene Isosteres

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mouse brain membrane proteome concentration was quantified by DC Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad) and diluted to 0.5 mg/mL with HB. Lysates were treated with either DMSO or 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μM, 5 μM and 10 μM of (R,S)-33 or (S,R)-33 at room temperature for 1 hour prior to incubation with 10μM FP-Biotin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 2 hours. Triton™ X-100 (Thermo Scientific) was added to 1% and sample was rotated for 1 hour at 4°C. Excess FP-Biotin was removed using Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns (Thermo Scientific) and proteomes were buffer exchanged into PBS prior to boiling with 0.5% SDS for 8 minutes. Cooled samples were diluted into 5mL of PBS containing 100μL of washed Streptavidin-Agarose Resin (Thermo Scientific) and rotated overnight at 4°C. SDS solutions were resolubilized at room temperature for 2 hours and beads were washed with 1% SDS/100 mM TEAB (2 x 10mL), 6 M Urea/100 mM TEAB (2 x 10mL) and 100 mM TEAB (2 x 10mL). Enriched proteins were reduced by 10 mM Dithiothreitol (Invitrogen) at 65°C for 15 minutes and alkylated by Iodoacetamide (Thermo Scientific) at 37°C for 30 minutes. Beads were washed with 100 mM TEAB (3 x 1mL) and incubated overnight at 37°C with 2 μg of sequence-grade trypsin (Promega) in 200 μL of 10 mM CaCl2/100mM TEAB. The digested supernatant was retrieved and the beads were washed with 100mM TEAB (2 x 50 μL). The supernatant fractions were combined and dried in a SpeedVac chamber. Peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of 200 mM EPPS buffer, pH = 8.5 (Thermo Scientific) with 30 % acetonitrile and incubated with TMTsixplex (Thermo Scientific) isobaric tags (20 µg/µL) for 90 minutes at room temperature. Reactions were quenched with 5 µL of 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific) for 15 minutes. Samples were acidified with 5 µL of formic acid (Millipore Sigma) and all channels were combined and dried in a SpeedVac chamber. LC-MS/MS was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 240 Mass Spectrometer running Xcalibur v4.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and dried in a SpeedVac chamber. Pellets were resuspended in Buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and 5 µL were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 Loading Column (Thermo Scientific), followed by elution onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC Column (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated by a 2-hour gradient of 5 to 25% Buffer B (20% water, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in Buffer A at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/minute. The spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV. One full MS1 scan (120,000 resolution, 350-1,800 m/z, RF lens 65%, AGC target 300%, automatic maximum injection time, profile mode) was obtained every 2 s, with dynamic exclusion (repeat count 2, duration 10 s), isotopic exclusion (assigned) and apex detection (30% desired apex window) enabled. Varying numbers of MS2 scans (15,000 resolution, AGC target 75%, maximum injection time 100 ms, centroid mode) were obtained between each MS1 scan based on the highest precursor masses and filtered for monoisotopic peak determination, theoretical precursor isotopic envelope fit, intensity (5E4) and charge state (2-6). MS2 analysis included the isolation of precursor ions (isolation window 2 m/z) and HCD (collision energy 30%).

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS/MS data was analyzed in Thermo Proteome Discoverer v2.4 and searched against the Mus musculus proteome database (UniProtKB) using SequestHT and Percolator1. Trypsin was specified as the protease and maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm with a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Oxidation of methionine (+15.995) and acetylation (+42.011) and/or loss of methionine (-131.040) of the protein N-terminus were set as dynamic modifications. Cysteine alkylation (+57.021) and TMT6plex modification (+229.163) of lysine residues and peptide N-terminus were set as static modifications. The FDR was set to 1% for peptide identification. Protein abundance ratios of each channel versus the DMSO channel were calculated and normalized by respective channel median values. Data was collected as average of two technical replicates.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Although aromatic rings are common elements in pharmaceutically active compounds, the presence of these motifs brings several liabilities with respect to the developability of a drug<sup>1</sup>. Nonoptimal potency, metabolic stability, solubility and lipophilicity in pharmaceutical compounds can be improved by replacing aromatic rings with non-aromatic isosteric motifs<sup>2</sup>. Moreover, whereas aromatic rings are planar and lack three-dimensionality, the binding pockets of most pharmaceutical targets are chiral. Thus, the stereochemical configuration of the isosteric replacements may offer an added opportunity to improve the affinity of derived ligands for target receptors. A notable impediment to this approach is the lack of simple and scalable catalytic enantioselective syntheses of candidate isosteres from readily available precursors. Here we present a previously unknown palladium-catalysed reaction that converts hydrocarbon-derived precursors to chiral boron-containing nortricyclanes and we show that the shape of these nortricyclanes makes them plausible isosteres for meta disubstituted aromatic rings. With chiral catalysts, the Pd-catalysed reaction can be accomplished in an enantioselective fashion and subsequent transformation of the boron group provides access to a broad array of structures. We also show that the incorporation of nortricyclanes into pharmaceutical motifs can result in improved biophysical properties along with stereochemistry-dependent activity. We anticipate that these features, coupled with the simple, inexpensive synthesis of the functionalized nortricyclane scaffold, will render this platform a useful foundation for the assembly of new biologically active agents.