PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Ubiquitin proteasome system; Heat shock; S. cerevisiae; Ubiquitin conjugating enzymes; Tmt proteomics

ABSTRACT:
The Ubiquitin Proteasome System (UPS) governs numerous cellular processes by modulating protein stability and activity via the conjugation of the small molecule ubiquitin, either as a single chain or as linkages with distinct functions. Dysregulation of the UPS has been associated with many diseases, including neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental diseases, as well as cancer. Ubiquitin conjugating enzymes (E2s) are important players of the UPS which work together with ubiquitin ligases (E3s) to promote substrate ubiquitylation. In this study, we conduct a comparative proteome-wide abundance profiling of S. cerevisiae cells during exponential growth phase with and without heat shock treatment. We focus on cells with deletions of the two highly homologous E2s, UBC4 or UBC5, and use isobaric tag-based quantitative mass spectrometry to elucidate variations and similarities in their proteome profiles. Our analysis revealed that Ubc4 has a much stronger effect on the proteome compared to Ubc5, particularly in exponentially growing cells. In contrast, the effect of Ubc5 on the proteome only becomes evident after heat shock, and even then, it remains minor compared to Ubc4. Furthermore, we identified proteins increasing in absence of each enzyme, which may represent their candidate substrates, potentially contributing to a better understanding of their cellular role.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome profiling of exponentially growing and heat-shock treated UBC4 and UBC5 deletion strains of S. cerevisiae

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were digested using Lys-C (overnight at 24 °C) and trypsin (6 h at 37 °C). A total of 1 µg of each enzyme was used per 100 µg of protein. A final volume of 30% acetonitrile was added to each digest followed by the addition of specified tandem mass tag (TMTpro) labeling reagents28. A total of 50 µg of peptide for each sample was labeled with 120 µg of the appropriate TMTpro reagent as follows: wt triplicates 25°C: 126, 127n, and 127c; ubc4  triplicates 25°C: 128n, 128c, and 129n; ubc5   triplicates 25°C: 129, 130n, and 130c; wt triplicates heat shock: 131, 131c, and 132n; ubc4   triplicates heat shock: 132, 133n, and 133c; ubc5  triplicates heat shock: 134n, 134c, and 135c. Samples were incubated for one hour at room temperature. Before continuing sample processing, ~1 µg of peptide was collected from each sample, mixed, and desalted via StageTip to verify labeling efficiency (ensuring that it was > 97%)29. Hydroxylamine (final concentration of ~0.3%) was added to each sample to quench the labeling reaction. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 15 min. Then, samples were pooled 1:1 and desalted using a 50 mg Sep-Pak solid-phase extraction column. Fractionation was performed with a basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) HPLC. An Agilent 1260 pump (Lexington, MA, USA) with an Agilent 300 Extend C18 column (3.5 μm particles, 2.1 mm ID, and 250 mm in length) was used. Peptides were fractionated by applying a 50 min gradient that is linear from 5% to 35% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 and at a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. We collected 96 fractions that we concatenated and consolidated down to 24 superfractions from where we obtained two sets of 12 non-adjacent superfractions30. We acidified the superfractions with formic acid to a concentration of 1% followed by vacuum centrifugation. Each superfraction was desalted via StageTip, dried again by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid.

DATA PROCESSING:
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert, after which database searching included all S. cerevisiae entries from UniProt (the same database as used for RTS, above) and all protein sequences in that database in reverse order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and a product ion tolerance of 0.03 Da to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet database searching and linear discriminant analysis (LDA), while considering the following parameters: XCorr, ΔCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. TMT tags on lysines and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da) and n-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (+125.048 Da)   were set as static, whereas oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and filtering thereof was performed using LDA to assemble further the dataset to achieve a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Once completed, proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across matching PSMs. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted for the isotopic impurities of the TMT reagents as specified by the manufacturer. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and normalized such that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was the same, thereby correcting for equal protein loading (i.e., column normalization). Finally, each protein abundance measurement was represented as a percentage of the total, in that the summed S/N for that protein across all channels was 100, thus providing a relative abundance (RA) measurement.