PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Human; Lc-msms; Dengue

ABSTRACT:
In the present study, we performed a quantitative proteomic analysis of serum from 19 patients with dengue and 11 healthy people. The results revealed distinct proteomic landscapes between the two groups.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Serum proteomic  characterization of dengue patients

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Blood for serum collection was obtained from 19 patients with dengue and 11 healthy donors. serum samples were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cellular debris, and the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit (Beyotime, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For trypsin digestion, 50 µL serum sample was added to pre-washed magnetic beads (PTM-00F13303; Jingjie PTM BioLab (Hangzhou) Co., Inc.) and incubated on a constant temperature mixer at 1,200 rpm for 1 hour at 37℃. The beads were then washed three times with washing buffer. 70 μL of enzymatic hydrolysis buffer was added to the magnetic beads, followed by mixing and heating at 95℃ for 10 min. Subsequently, the samples were cooled to room temperature, and incubated with trypsin (Promega; final concentration: 20 ng/µL) at 37℃ overnight. The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column as specified by the manufacturer, dried under vacuum, and frozen until used for LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) and separated by EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase consisted of solvent A and solvent B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile in water). The peptides were separated using the following elution gradient: 0-16 min, 6%-20% B; 16-24 min, 20%-32% B; 24-27 min, 32%-80% B; 27-30 min, 80% B. The flow rate was kept constant at 500 nL/min. Mass spectrometry was conducted in an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The electrospray voltage applied was 2100 V. Precursors and fragments were analyzed using the Orbitrap detector. The full MS scan resolution was set to 30,000 for a scan range of 350-1050 m/z. The MS/MS scan was fixed first mass as 200 m/z at a resolution of 450,000. The data acquisition mode employs the data-independent acquisition (DIA) program. Following the initial scan, HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energies (NCE) of 25%, 30%, 35%. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set at 3E6 and the maximum injection time was set to Auto.

DATA PROCESSING:
The DIA data were processed using DIA-NN search engine (v.1.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20230103.fasta (20,389 entries) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 1 missing cleavages. N-terminal Met excision and carbamidomethylation of Cys were specified as fixed modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Dengue fever is a mosquito-borne viral disease caused by the dengue virus (DENV). It poses a public health threat globally and, while most people with dengue have mild symptoms or are asymptomatic, approximately 5% of affected individuals develop severe disease and need hospital care. However, knowledge of the molecular mechanisms underlying dengue infection and the interaction between the virus and its host remains limited. In the present study, we performed a quantitative proteomic and N-glycoproteomic analysis of serum from 19 patients with dengue and 11 healthy people. The results revealed distinct proteomic and N-glycoproteomic landscapes between the two groups. Notably, we report for the first time the changes in the serum N glycosylation pattern following dengue infection and provide abundant information on glycoproteins, glycosylation sites, and intact N-glycopeptides using recently developed site-specific glycoproteomic approaches. Furthermore, a series of key functional pathways in proteomic and N-glycoproteomic were identified. Collectively, our findings significantly improve understanding of host and DENV interactions and the general pathogenesis and pathology of DENV, laying a foundation for functional studies of glycosylation and glycan structures in dengue infection.