PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Trophoblast
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: Gln->pyro-Glu; Amidated; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation; Acetyl
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Secretion; Lc-ms; Trophoblast organoids; Solid phase extraction

ABSTRACT:
Characterisation of the secretome of placental organoids using Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry by performing solid phase extraction of the supernatants, followed by tryptic digestion.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Secretome of trophoblast organoids

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Organoid supernatants were acidified and loaded directly onto an Oasis Prime µ-elution 96 well SPE plate and slowly extracted on a positive pressure manifold. The wells were washed with 0.1% formic acid in water and 5% methanol in water with 1% acetic acid (v/v). The proteins were eluted from the cartridge using 60% methanol in water with 10% acetic acid into 96 well protein Lo bind plates. The eluant was evaporated under oxygen free nitrogen at 40 ºC, and reconstituted into 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in water with dithiothreitol. The plate was sealed and incubated at 60 ºC for 60 minutes before the addition of iodoacetamide, and left in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. The plate was removed to the light for 30 minutes prior to the addition of trypsin and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. Prior to nano LC-MS analysis, 1% formic acid in water was added to quench the reaction.   Protein digests were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer, using a 130 minute analysis. Data dependent analysis was performed over a scan range of 400 – 1600 m/z at a resolution of 75,000 before the top 10 ions of each spectrum were selected for MS/MS analysis. Existing ions selected for fragmentation were added to an exclusion list for 30 seconds.

DATA PROCESSING:
The nano LC/MS files obtained from the six different extracts were combined and searched using Peaks 8.5 software (BSI, Waterloo, Canada) against the human Swissprot database (Downloaded on 26-Oct-2017). A tryptic digest setting was used, and precursor and product ion tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. The search parameters included a fixed modification of a carboxyamidomethylation on cysteine residues and variable modifications such as methionine oxidation, N-terminal pyro-glutamate, N-terminal acetylation and C-terminal amidation. A false discovery rate (FDR) value of 1% was used to filter the results, with a minimum of 1 unique peptide also required.

METHODS:
Methods
Patient samples
All tissue samples used for this study were obtained with written informed consent from all participants in accordance with the guidelines in The Declaration of Helsinki 2000. Elective terminations of normal pregnancies were performed at Addenbrooke’s Hospital (6-9 weeks gestation) under ethical approval from the Cambridge Local Research Ethics Committee (04/Q0108/23). Human peripheral blood was collected from a healthy donor in a BD vacutainer following informed consent and in accordance with the ethical approval of the Human Biology Research Ethics Committee, University of Cambridge (HBREC.2016.03).
Derivation of trophoblast organoids from human placental tissue
To obtain trophoblast-enriched cell suspensions, villi from first trimester placental tissue were sequentially digested with 0.2% trypsin-250 (Pan Biotech P10-025100P)/0.02% EDTA (Sigma #E9884)/PBS then collagenase V at 1.0mg/ml (Sigma #C9263) in Hams F12/10% FBS. Both digests were pooled, washed in Advanced DMEM/F12 medium (Gibco #12634-010) and re-suspended in ~10x volume growth-factor-reduced Matrigel (Corning #356231) on ice. 25µL drops were plated per well into a 48-well culture plate (Costar #3548), set at 37°C for 15min and overlaid with 250µL Trophoblast Organoid Medium (TOM, Supplementary Table 1b). Cultures were maintained in 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator at 37°C. Medium was replaced every 2-3d. Small organoid clusters became visible by ~7d and were passaged when at least 50% had reached a diameter of 200-300µm (usually between 7-10d). Mechanical disruption was achieved with Eppendorf Explorer Plus automatic pipettes on a mix cycle of 99 rounds (x4-5), maximum speed. Organoids from the same sample were initiated and maintained in the absence of each individual component to test its importance. Frozen stocks of organoids were made in 70% TOM, 20% FBS and 10% DMSO freeze medium and stored in liquid nitrogen. A step-by-step protocol of the derivation and maintenance of human trophoblast organoid cultures can be found at Nature Protocol Exchange.
Generation of EVT from trophoblast organoids
Trophoblast organoids were passaged and plated into 35mm dishes or ibidi μ-dishes (Thermo Scientific #81156). Differentiation was achieved through a modification of the protocol used by Okae et al. After passaging, organoids were maintained in TOM for 3-4d and switched to EVT medium (EVTM: advanced DMEM/F12, 0.1mM 2-mercaptoethanol (Gibco #31350), 0.5% Penicillin-streptomycin, 0.3% BSA (Sigma #A8412), 1% ITS-X supplement (Gibco #51500-056), 100ng/mL NRG1 (Cell Signaling #5218SC), 7.5μM A83-01 (Tocris Biotechne #2939), 4% Knockout serum replacement (ThermoFisher #10828010). When organoids showed outgrowth of cells (typically 7-10d), the medium was changed to EVTM without NRG1 for a further 7-10d. For comparison, fresh placental villi were embedded into 300uL Matrigel in ibidi μ-dishes and grown under the same conditions.
Isolation of placental stromal cells
Placental villous stromal cells were isolated by digesting the tissue remaining after the initial trypsin/collagenase digests in 10-15mL collagenase V in Hams F12/10% FBS with gentle shaking at 37°C for 5-10min. The cell suspension was filtered through gauze, washed and pelleted. Cells were resuspended in Advanced DMEM/F12/10% FBS with additional L-Glutamine, non-essential amino acids (Gibco #11140-035) and primocin (Invivogen #ant-pm-1) and seeded into tissue culture flasks. They were cultured to 80-90% confluency and passaged once before use.
Peripheral blood monocytes (PBMC) isolation
PBMC were isolated from blood by Pancoll-based (Pan-Biotech #P04-60500) density gradient separation. PBMC viability was >95% by Trypan Blue exclusion. PBMC were resuspended in QIAzol lysis reagent (Qiagen #79306) for total RNA extraction following the supplier’s protocol.
Cell lines
Human choriocarcinoma cell lines, JEG-3 and JAR, were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) and cultured as previously described.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
Organoids were formalin-fixed and embedded as previously described. IHC on sections of organoids and first-trimester placentas was performed using A.Menarini heat-induced epitope retrieval buffers and Vectastain avidin-biotin-HRP reagents as previously described. Primary antibodies (Supplementary Table 3) were replaced with equivalent concentrations of isotype-matched mouse or rabbit IgG for controls. Images were captured with a Zeiss Axiovert Z1 microscope and Axiovision imaging software SE64 V4.8.
Immunofluorescence (IF) and confocal microscopy
Trophoblast organoids were grown in 4-5 20μL Matrigel drops in 35mm ibidi μ-dishes and EdU and/or antibody labelling was performed as previously described. EdU incubation was for 1h at 37°C in TOM containing 10μM EdU. For primary antibodies and secondary antibodies used see Supplementary Table 1d. Imaging was with the ZEISS 700 Confocal microscope and ZEN Microscope Software.
Mitotracker staining
Mitochondrial function was evaluated by Mitotracker Red-CMXRos (Thermofisher #M7512). Organoids were released from Matrigel with Cell Recovery Solution (Corning #354253) and incubated in 500nM of Mitotracker Red in TOM in suspension at 37°C for 30 mins. The organoids were washed in basal medium, resuspended and plated into a thin layer of Matrigel in ibidi μ-dishes for imaging on a ZEISS 700 Confocal microscope with ZEN Microscope Software.
Time-lapse microscopy
Trophoblast organoids or placental villous explants embedded in 300uL of Matrigel in 35mm ibidi μ-dishes were imaged in phase-contrast and across several z-stacks on a Zeiss Axiovert Z1 microscope with the multidimensional imaging function of the Axio Observer software Axiovision image software V4.8. The images were compiled into a single movie by using the extended focus wavelet function.
ELISA
Conditioned media were harvested from organoid cultures and centrifuged to remove debris and stored at -80°C until use. Human Chorionic Gonadotropin β (hCG-β) ELISA (Abcam #ab108638) was performed on 50μL supernate with 100μL sample buffer in duplicate alongside hCG-β standards following the manufacturer’s instructions. Concentration of hCG-β in the supernates was calculated from the line formula of the standard plots in Microsoft Office Excel. Supernatants were also tested with Clear&Simple Digital Pregnancy Test following manufacturer’s instructions. Image reproduced with the permission of SPD Swiss Precision Diagnostics GmbH (SPD). GDF-15 was measured by in-house electrochemiluminescence immunoassay on the MesoScale Discovery assay platform (MSD) using BioTechne DuoSet antibodies and standard (BioTechne #DY957). For further details see Supplementary Methods.
Flow cytometry
Organoids were removed from Matrigel with Cell Recovery Solution and dissociated with 0.2% trypsin 250 (Pan Biotech P10-025100P)/0.02% EDTA (Sigma #E9884) in PBS at 37°C for 5 min. Cells were washed in medium containing FBS and passed through a 40μm cell strainer (Falcon #2340). Cells were blocked with human IgG (Sigma #I4506) in DPBS (ThermoFisher Scientific #14190136)/1%FBS prior to labelling with W6/32-Alexa-488 anti-HLA-A,B,C antibody, HLA-G-PE, ITGA2-PE or isotype-matched controls (Supplementary Table 1d). LIVE/DEAD™ Fixable Far Red Dead Cell Stain (Life Technologies #L10119) was used for live/dead discrimination. Data were acquired using Cytek Development DxP8 (488/637/561). Data were analysed in FlowJo (Tree Star) and all compensation was applied digitally after acquisition.
In Situ Hybridization (ISH) Assays
ISH for LGR5 was performed on 4μm paraffin sections with RNAscope 2.0 High definition assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, tissue sections were baked at 60°C for 1h, dewaxed with xylene, cleared in 100% ethanol and air-dried prior to the standard protocol: 10min in Pretreat buffer 1, 15min in Pretreat buffer 2 and 30min at 37°C in Pretreat buffer 3 followed by incubation with LGR5 probe (#311021), positive control probe UBC (#310041) or negative control probe dapB (#310043) for 2h at 40°C. Signal was visualized with the amplification kit and DAB for 10min. Sections were dehydrated, mounted in DPX (Sigma #44581) and imaged on a Zeiss Axiovert Z1 microscope with Axiovision imaging software SE64 V4.8.
Electronic microscopy (EM)
Trophoblast organoids were directly fixed in 35mm dishes with 0.5% glutaraldehyde/0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) for 30min and reduced with osmium tetroxide as previously described. Ultrathin sections were examined in an FEI Tecnai G2 TEM at 80Kv. Images were acquired with MegaView III CCD and Soft Imaging Systems program. Samples from human placentas were fixed by immersion in 3% glutaraldehyde-0.3% hydrogen peroxide in 0.1mol/L 1,4-piperazine diethane sulfonic acid (PIPES) buffer (pH 7). After 2h at RT, tissue was washed for 30min in 0.1 mol/L PIPES buffer. Secondary fixation was by immersion in 1% osmium tetroxide in PIPES buffer for 1h at RT. After washing, specimens were dehydrated in graded ethanol and embedded in Araldite epoxy resin. Ultrathin sections (50nm) were cut on a Reichert-Jung Ultracut S (Reichert-Jung). Sections were counterstained with uranyl acetate, followed by lead citrate, before viewing in a Philips CM100 electron microscope (Philips Electronics).
DNA extraction and quantification
QIAamp DNA blood Mini kit (Qiagen #51104) was used to extract genomic DNA from patients’ blood for Short tandem repeat analysis, HLA tissue typing and Bisulphite sequencing. DNA was extracted from trophoblast organoids, decidual and placental tissues by digestion with ATL buffer (Qiagen #19076) and Proteinase K (Sigma #P4850), followed by purification steps with RNase A (Sigma #R6513) and Protein Precipitation Solution (Qiagen #158910). DNA was precipitated with isopropanol and washed with 70% ethanol. DNA quality and concentration were determined in a Nanodrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer.
Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) analysis
DNA from two independently derived trophoblast organoid samples at early and late passages was analysed with Agilent Sureprint G3 unrestricted CGH ISCA 8x60K array (Agilent #G4450A). DNA samples from late passage organoids were compared to early passage organoids (hybridization control). DNA was diluted to 50ng/uL and labelled using the Agilent kit following manufacturer’s instructions. Data analysis for segmentation and copy number calls was performed at a genome-wide resolution of 500kb by the default analysis method – CGH v2 from the Agilent CytoGenomics software Edition 2.5.8.11 (Build 37).
Short tandem repeat analysis and HLA typing
Microsatellite analysis was performed with the GenePrint® PowerPlex™16 System (Promega) involving fluorescent labelled multiplexed PCR amplification of 15 short tandem repeat (STR) loci and Amelogenin sex determining fragments. PCR fragment size resolution was achieved with capillary electrophoresis on a 3730XL DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) before analysis of the raw data and STR allele calling with GeneMapper Versions 4 and 5 (Life technologies) fragment analysis sizing and genotyping software. All typing was performed blind. The Promega PowerPlex 16 kit was designed for Forensic testing and has a sensitivity capable of detecting down to 5% contamination. It is used by for monitoring of post-haematopoietic stem cell transplant chimerism. The DNA for HLA genotyping was processed via the workflows of the EFI accredited Clinical Histocompatibility Laboratory. Low resolution typing of the HLA-A, -B and -C genes was achieved with LABType kits (One Lambda) which rely on reaction patterns observed when sequence specific DNA probes immobilised on fluorescent X-MAP polystyrene beads (Luminex) hybridise to biotin labelled multiplexed gene specific PCR amplicons. The hybrids were detected with a Liquichip 200 fluorimeter (QIAgen) and HLA allele assignment was from HLA Fusion software (One Lambda). Ultra High resolution typing of HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1, -DQB1 and -DPB1 was achieved with an ‘in house’ Third Generation Sequencing pipeline utilising Pacific Biosciences’ Single Molecule Real-Time DNA sequencing technology as previously described.
Bisulphite sequencing
Approximately 300ng of DNA was used for bisulphite conversion performed with the EpiTect Bisulfite Kit (Qiagen #59110), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The ELF5 promoter region was amplified as described previously. PCR products were cloned and sequenced, confirming representation of distinct alleles.
Global DNA methylation analysis
Genomic DNA bisulfite (BS) was performed with the CEGX TrueMethyl kit (Cambridge Epigenetix/NuGEN) and used for microarray-based DNA methylation analysis, performed at GenomeScan (GenomeScan B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands), on the HumanMethylation850 BeadChip (Illumina) and were scanned on the Illumina iScan system. The resulting iDAT files were imported and analysed by ChAMP (v2.9.10). Samples were processed filtering for a probe detection p-value <= 0.01, probes with a bead count <3 in at least 5% of samples, no CpG and known SNPs at probe starts, probes aligning to multiple locations, and QC using the on array control probes. Of the total probes on the array 755577 passed the filtering and QC steps. The BMIQ method was used to normalise the two probe types present on the array. Beta methylation values from the EPIC array range from 0 (unmethylated) to 1 (methylated) and are equivalent of percentage methylation. Genomic annotations were imported from FDb.InfiniumMethylation.hg19 and IlluminaHumanMethylationEPICmanifest. Genomic features in Fig. 2g comprise the following numbers of assayed CpGs: CpG Islands, 48799, 48799, 13576; Promoters, 151270, 151270, 88621; Gene Bodies, 280,284,280,284,117,138; LINE1, 48799, 48799, 13576. Boxplots comprise min: 1.5 x inter-quartile, lower: 1st quartile, middle: median, upper: 3rd quartile, max: 1.5 x inter-quartile range (Extended Data Figures 2G and 5e). Density/violin plots are scaled to area. LINE1 elements were downloaded as tables from UCSC Genome browser for hg1930. Maternal blood samples (normal) are taken from E-GEOD-66210.
RNA extraction, quantification and quality control
Total RNA was isolated using the miRNeasy isolation kit (Qiagen #217004) with on-column DNAse digestion (Qiagen #79254). Quantitation of RNA was performed with the Quant-iT™ RiboGreen™ RNA Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific #R11490) by measuring the intensity of fluorescence at 528nm with a Synergy HT Multi-Mode Microplate Reader (BioTek Instruments) according to manufacturer's instructions. RNA quality was assessed on the Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). RNA Integrity Number (RIN) of each tested sample was greater or equal to 8.
Reverse transcription and Real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)
The expression of ELF5, ERVW-1 and GCM1 was analysed with Taqman Gene expression assays (Applied Biosystems). 500ng-1μg of total RNA was reverse transcribed with Superscript VILO Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific #11754050) in the presence of random hexamers and RNAse inhibitor following supplier’s instructions. qRT-PCR was performed on 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) as previously described. Relative expression levels were normalised to the geometric mean of three housekeeping genes HPRT1, TOP1 and TBP and the 2-ΔCt method. The expression of C19MC miRNAs hsa-miR-517-5p, hsa-miR-517(a, b)-3p, hsa-miR-526b-3p, hsa-miR-525-3p and reference gene RNU48 were analysed by TaqMan miRNA assays (Applied Biosystems). 10ng of total RNA were reverse transcribed using miRNA specific stem-loop RT primers and TaqMan microRNA reverse transcription kit (Applied Biosystems #4366596) according to the supplier’s instructions. QRT-PCR assays were run with qPCRBIO Probe Mix Lo-ROX (PCR Biosystems) containing specific probes on an Eppendorf Mastercycler® RealPlex 2 instrument. Ct data were normalised to the RNU48 internal control by the 2-ΔCt method. All qPCR reactions included no-template controls and minus RT controls (–RT). For further details and for Taqman Assay IDs for each gene see Supplementary Methods.
Microarray expression profiling and data analysis
The microarray experiment was performed at Cambridge Genomic Services at University of Cambridge with a species specific Gene 2.1 ST Array Plate (Affymetrix) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 100ng of total RNA was amplified for each sample with inline PolyA spike-in control and the WT PLUS amplification kit (Affymetrix). By using the in line hybridization controls, we successfully amplified samples with the GeneChip WT terminal labelling kit (Affymetrix). Plate arrays were processed on the GeneTitan instrument (Affymetrix) with the GeneTitan Hybridization, Wash and Stain kit (Affymetrix). Samples were hybridized to the array, washed, stained and scanned. CEL files generated were loaded in R using the oligo package from Bioconductor. The raw data were then processed after quality controls using the Robust Multichip Analysis method. The limma package (3.34.8) was used to make the comparisons, and results were corrected for multiple testing using False Discovery Rate. Microarray probes without gene identifier (ensembl gene id) were filtered out. Initial QC included PCA and MDS plots. Finally the quality of the data was assessed, and the correlation of the samples in the groups compared. Heatmaps were generated with the R package 'pheatmap' (1.0.8), which uses the Euclidean method. For the gene heatmaps, the input is the normalized intensity matrix. GO terms enrichment was obtained with R package 'clusterProfiler' (3.6.0) with function `enrichGO`, and chord plots were generated with the R package 'GOplot' (1.0.2).
LC-MS analysis of trophoblast organoid supernatants
Trophoblast organoids (day 10 after passaging) were grown in trophoblast organoid medium and supernatants collected after overnight incubation. The supernatants (500µL) and an aliquot of growth media were acidified with 50µL of 1% formic acid in water (v/v) and loaded directly onto an Oasis Prime µ-elution 96 well SPE plate (Waters #186008052) and extracted as described previously. The eluant was evaporated under oxygen free nitrogen at 40ºC and reconstituted into 75µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate in water with 10mM dithiothreitol. Protein digests were prepared and analysed using an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) as described previously. The nano LC/MS files obtained from the six different extracts were combined and searched using Peaks 8.5 software (BSI) against the human Swissprot database (Downloaded on 26-Oct-2017). A tryptic digest setting was used and precursor and product ion tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. The search parameters included a fixed modification of a carboxyamidomethylation on cysteine residues and variable modifications such as methionine oxidation, N-terminal pyro-glutamate, N-terminal acetylation and C-terminal amidation. A false discovery rate (FDR) value of 1% was applied at the peptide and a minimum of 1 unique peptide also was required. For further details see Supplementary Methods.
Statistics and Reproducibility
All experiments reported in this study have been reproduced with similar results derived from independent samples (tissues and organoids) from multiple patients. The number of times the experiments were repeated with independently-derived trophoblast organoid cultures are reported in figure legends as (n=) and summarized in Supplementary Table 1c. Given the descriptive nature of the work and biological variation between human samples, the experimental data points for each patient sample are shown separately unless stated otherwise. Trophoblast organoid culture protocols were independently replicated by four scientists. Statistical analyses used to analyse microarray, methylation and LC-MS data are reported in Methods above.
Extended Data

INTRODUCTION:
To devise an organoid culture system suitable for trophoblast, we focussed on maternal and placental products that might signal to the stem/progenitor cells that reside in areas of Ki67+ VCT proliferation and/or at the base of the cytotrophoblast cell columns (CCC) that give rise to EVT (Fig.1a,b). We investigated signalling pathways between 6-8 weeks g.a when proliferation is high: WNT through β-catenin; TGFβ through SMAD2/3; MAPK through Erk1/2 and STAT3. Our findings led to empirical trials of agonists/antagonists, along with other agents, which resulted in a basal Trophoblast Organoid Medium (TOM) composed of EGF, FGF2, CHIR99021 (a WNT activator), A83-01 (a TGFβ/SMAD inhibitor) and Rspondin-1 (Extended Data Fig. 1a-d). To prepare isolates of trophoblast cells, first trimester placentas (6-9 weeks g.a) were enzymatically digested to enrich for cell clusters containing EPCAM+ cells; EPCAM marks proliferative trophoblast (Fig. 1c). Cell clusters were seeded into Matrigel drops and grown in TOM. Although some growth was seen, we also tested factors used in other organoid systems and/or present in the first trimester microenvironment (Extended Data Fig. 2a, Supplementary Table 1a). HGF, PGE2 and Y-27632 (a ROCK inhibitor) increase cell viability and growth and, when they are combined with TOM, there is rapid growth of cells within a week (Fig. 1d, Supplementary Table 1b). After the first passage, organoid structures appear and homogeneous trophoblast organoids are established within 2 passages (10-14 days) with an efficiency of 91% (20/22 patient samples). To confirm their fetal origin, we used microsatellite analysis and HLA typing (Extended Data Table 1). Derivation of the organoids in TOM in the absence of each factor reveals that EGF is the most important, with effects also seen with Y-27632, A83-01 and CHIR99021. We have now derived trophoblast organoids that are genetically stable after many passages (Extended Data Fig. 2b,c); three randomly selected cultures are still growing after a year (Supplementary Table 1c), are healthy and show active mitochondrial function (Extended Data Fig. 2d). Maternal epithelial cells are always detectable by flow cytometry in placental cell isolates. Nicotinamide enriches for cystic structures resembling glandular organoids at early stages of derivation (Extended Data Fig. 2a), and microsatellite analysis and HLA typing confirmed their maternal origin (Extended Data Table 2). By selecting the appropriate media, we can derive both decidual glandular and trophoblast organoid cultures from the same pregnancy (Extended Data Fig. 2e). This highlights the importance of verifying the maternal or fetal origin of any cultures derived from decidual or placental cell isolates.
The trophoblast identity of the organoids was verified on the basis of our previously defined criteria: they express GATA3, KRT7, EGFR, TFAP2A and TFAP2C; they lack expression of HLA class I molecules; they express ELF5 and its promoter is hypomethylated; and they express microRNAs from the C19MC miRNA complex at similar or higher levels to choriocarcinoma lines, JEG-3 and JAR (Fig. 2a-d; Extended Data Fig. 3a-f; Source data Files 1-2). To assess how well the trophoblast organoids recapitulate their tissue of origin in an unbiased approach, we performed a microarray analysis of established organoids and compared them to first-trimester placental villi (also containing stromal, Hofbauer and endothelial cells) and cultured villous stromal cells. To check for maternal cell contamination, decidual glandular organoids were included. The results were analysed by PCA and hierarchical clustering (Fig 2e,f, Extended Data Fig. 4a,b). PC1 shows trophoblast organoids cluster closely to the placenta with enrichment for trophoblast-specific genes, CGB3, GATA3 and PSG6, compared to the stromal cells and glandular organoids. PC2 highlights epithelial genes (CLDN3, TACSTD2 and KRT23), specific for trophoblast compared to other placental cells (Extended Data Fig. 4b). IHC confirms that KRT23 is a novel trophoblast-specific keratin placental villi and in trophoblast organoids (Extended Data Fig. 4c). Comparison of differentially expressed genes (fold change≥2, adjusted P value≤0.05) between placental villi, trophoblast organoids and stromal cells highlights other genes of interest, such as PGF, CCNE1, ERBB3 and FOLR1; translation of CCNE1 in trophoblast was validated by IHC (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Imprinted genes, PEG3 and PEG10 are also highly expressed in the trophoblast organoids (Extended Data Fig. 4d). Amongst transcription factors, beside known genes, GATA3 and TFAP2C, new genes emerged such as ELF3 (Extended Data Fig. 5a,b). Genome-wide methylation analysis revealed a high degree of correlation between trophoblast organoids and first-trimester placental villi across different genomic elements compared to blood and brain (Fig. 2g). The hypomethylation of ELF5 promoter was also confirmed (Extended Data Fig. 5c,d). Analysis of the promoter regions of genes with similar methylation patterns to Elf5 in mouse TS cells shows that ELF5, EZR, TINAGL1 and LASP1 are similarly hypomethylated in placental villi and trophoblast organoids (Extended Data Fig. 5e,f). Gene ontology analysis of DEGs, represented by Chord plot, shows terms describing metabolic processes and cell-cell organization converging on epithelial, developmental and hormonal pathways, FZD5 (WNT signalling), INSIG1 (insulin signalling), DHCR7 (cholesterol synthesis) and OCLN (polarity)(Extended Data Fig. 5g).
Trophoblast organoids grow as complex structures closely recapitulating the structure of placental villi in vivo where VCT stain for EPCAM and CDH1 (Fig. 3a,b). The basement membrane is on the outside in contact with Matrigel with syncytial masses lining the central cavity (Extended Data Fig. 6a). Similar to in vivo, VCT cells are Ki67+ and TP63+ (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 6b,c). Following incubation with EdU, ~30-40% of cells are proliferating when the organoids are small (100-200μm diameter), with a notable decrease as they enlarge and differentiate (Extended Data Fig. 6d). Expression of SCT markers (CD71, CD46) is found inside the organoids (Extended Data Fig. 6e). These characteristic features of SCT were confirmed by electron microscopy (EM): multinucleated with abundant secretory organelles and surface microvilli (Fig. 3c). Lacunae present within the syncytial areas resemble those found in vivo (Extended Data Fig. 6f,g). GCM1 drives fusion of VCT into SCT by upregulating ERVW-1 (SYNCYTIN-1). Using qRT-PCR, we detect high levels of expression of GCM1 and ERVW-1, comparable to those in the placenta (Fig. 3d; Source Data File 2). Thus, trophoblast organoids closely mimic the villous placenta both structurally and phenotypically. SCT secretes proteins and hormones into the maternal systemic circulation, inducing maternal adaptations to pregnancy. We explored the secretory activity of trophoblast organoids through an unbiased peptidomic analysis of the organoid medium and LC MS/MS technology (Fig. 4a). Among the most abundant peptides are placental-specific PSGs and INSL4, whose functions are unknown (Extended Data Table 3, Supplementary Table 2a-h). Aldose reductase, which converts glucose to sorbitol is also detected. High concentrations of sorbital are present in first trimester placentas. Hence, the organoids also mimic the villous placenta metabolically as well as endocrinologically. Peptides that induce physiological and metabolic adaptations during pregnancy, including hCG, KISS1 and CSH1 are all abundant as well as GDF15, implicated in hyperemesis gravidarum. GDF15 and hCG are detected by ELISA, showing that full-length and appropriately folded hormones are secreted by trophoblast organoids (Fig. 4b,c; Source Data Files 3-4). Indeed, the ‘pregnant’ secretome of the organoids is evident using an “over-the-counter” pregnancy test kit (Fig. 4d).
Human trophoblast also differentiates to EVT, a process crucial for proper placentation. EVT express HLA-G and invade decidual tissue to transform the spiral arteries. In TOM our trophoblast organoids show only sporadic HLA-G+ cells (Extended Data Fig. 7a). Recently, long-term, 2D monolayer cultures of human trophoblast cells derived from first-trimester placentas that can differentiate into SCT and EVT were described. By adapting their EVT differentiation protocol and culturing both our trophoblast organoids and primary villous explants in their EVT medium (EVTM), HLA-G+ cells appear that migrate out of the organoids, digest the Matrigel to form tracks, and eventually adhere to the plastic (Fig. 5a-e, Extended Data Fig. 7b, Supplementary Videos 1-6). In vivo EVT are generated at the base of CCCs where cells express ITGA2. We used flow cytometry to confirm that, after exposure of organoids to EVTM, HLA-G+ EVT appear and ITGA2+ cells disappear (Fig. 5f).
In summary, we describe the generation of human trophoblast organoids that grow as complex 3D structures with fusion of VCT to hCG-secreting SCT, anatomically and functionally closely resembling the villous placenta in vivo. In addition, we show differentiation to HLA-G+ EVT that vigorously invade and digest the Matrigel in 3D. Following the submission of our paper, there is a report describing the generation of trophoblast organoids from pooled patient samples; however these cannot be cultured long-term and have not been fully characterised. Our findings complement those of Okae et al. and mean that there are now two culture systems (2D and 3D) for human trophoblast. Our 3D model has the advantage of organising into complex structures generating both SCT and EVT. The retention of the normal villous structure will allow analysis of morphogenetic events. We anticipate that these two different models will provide valuable tools across a range of disciplines. They can be used to study maternal-fetal transmission of xenobiotics, drugs and pathogens, and the proteins and hormones derived from the SCT. Analysis of CCC formation and EVT differentiation in vitro will allow investigation of the decidual microenvironment on trophoblast function, such as the effect of glandular histotrophic nutrition and the influence of the distinctive uterine natural killer (NK) cells. Major unexplained disorders of pregnancy such as pre-eclampsia, stillbirth and fetal growth restriction have their origins in aberrant placental development in the first trimester. Trophoblast organoids can be used to study maternal-fetal interactions following implantation, and the maternal physiological, metabolic and hormonal changes occurring during pregnancy.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Data availability. Microarray data for Figure 2, Extended Data Figures 4 and 5 have been deposited in the ArrayExpress database at EMBL-EBI under accession number E-MTAB-6683 (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-6683). Illumina EPIC Methylation array data for Figure 2 and Extended Data Figure 5 have been deposited in the ArrayExpress database at EMBL-EBI under accession number E-MTAB-7204. (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-7204). Code used to analyse microarray data and EPIC array samples is available at https://github.com/CTR-BFX/2018-Turco-Moffett. The mass spectrometry proteomics data for Extended Data Table 3 and Supplementary Table 2 have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) with the dataset identifier PXD009118 and 10.6019/PXD009118. All source data for graphs are in Supplementary Table 3. All other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
Author Contributions M.Y.T. and L.G. designed and carried out all the core experiments and analysed the data; R.K. performed LCS-MS analysis; R.S.H. and M.P. performed microarray and DNA methylation analysis; A.McW. and S.G.E.M. performed and analysed the STR and HLA typing; M.Ho. performed electron microscopy and confocal analysis; R.F. and H.S. assisted with IHC and ELISA experiments; L.E. performed qPCR experiments; A.S, F.G, F.R, M.He. and S.O. provided intellectual input to the study; M.He. performed the ELF5 methylation experiment; G.J.B. and A.M. assisted in analysis and interpretation of results and jointly supervised the project. M.Y.T, G.J.B. and A.M. wrote the manuscript.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.