PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: 

ABSTRACT:
The chromosomal passenger complex (CPC; Borealin-Survivin-INCENP-Aurora B kinase) ensures accurate chromosome segregation by orchestrating sister chromatid cohesion, error-correction of kinetochore-microtubule attachments and spindle assembly checkpoint. Correct spatiotemporal regulation of CPC localization is critical for its function. Phosphorylations of Histone H3 Thr3 and Histone H2A Thr120 and modification-independent nucleosome interactions involving Survivin and Borealin contribute to CPC centromere enrichment. However, mechanistic basis for how various nucleosome binding elements collectively contribute to CPC centromere enrichment and whether CPC has any non-catalytic role at centromere remain open questions. Combining a high-resolution cryoEM structure of CPC-bound H3Thr3ph nucleosome with atomic force microscopy and biochemical and cellular assays, we demonstrate that CPC employs multipartite interactions, which facilitate its engagement at nucleosome acidic patch and DNA entry-exit site. Perturbing the CPC-nucleosome interaction compromises protection against MNase digestion in vitro, as well as the centromere association of CPC and centromeric chromatin stability in cells. Our work suggests a non-catalytic role of CPC in maintaining centromeric chromatin features critical for kinetochore function.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Nucleosome interaction of the CPC secures centromeric chromatin integrity and chromosome segregation fidelity

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Crosslinking experiments for the CPCI1-190SB-H3T3ph NCP complex were performed using the 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC) chemical crosslinker in the presence of N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide (Thermo Fisher Scientific). EDC is a zero-length chemical crosslinker that covalently links primary amines of lysine and the protein N-terminus, and to a lesser extent hydroxyl groups of serine, threonine and tyrosine, with carboxyl groups of aspartate or glutamate. 3 μg of NCP was crosslinked with 2.5 molar excess of CPCI1-190SB using either 30 or 60 μg of EDC and either 66 or 132 μg of N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide in 20 mM Hepes, pH 8, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 2 mM DTT for 2 hours at room temperature. The cross-linking reaction was quenched by the addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl, and crosslinking products were briefly resolved using 4–12 % Bis-Tris NuPAGE (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Bands were visualized by short Instant Blue staining (Thermo Fisher), excised, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at room temperature, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature, and digested overnight at 37 °C using 13 ng/μl trypsin (Promega). Digested peptides were loaded onto C18-Stage-tips (Rappsilber et al, 2007).  Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed as previously described (Abad et al, 2022) using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a “high-high” acquisition strategy. Peptide mixtures were injected for each mass spectrometric acquisition and separated on a 75 µm × 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted into an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and run at a column temperature of 50 °C. Mobile phase A consisted of water and 0.1 % vol/vol formic acid, while mobile phase B consisted of 80 % vol/vol acetonitrile and 0.1 % vol/vol formic acid. Peptides were loaded at a flow-rate of 0.3 μl/min and eluted at 0.2 μl/min using a linear gradient going from 2% mobile phase B to 40% mobile phase B over 159 (or 129) min, followed by a linear increase from 40 to 95% mobile phase B in 11 min. The eluted peptides were then loaded into the mass spectrometer, and MS data was acquired in the data-dependent mode with the top-speed option. For each 3 sec acquisition cycle, the mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The ions with a precursor charge state between 3+ and 8+ were isolated and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with single repeat count and 60 sec exclusion duration. For the UV cross-linked samples, UV crosslinking uses ultraviolet light (UV 254 nm) to form zero-length covalent links between nucleic acids and protein. 3 g of H3T3ph NCPs reconstituted with IR700-labelled Widom 601 147bp DNA were incubated with 8 times molar excess of CPCI1-190SB for 1 h at 4 C and UV crosslinked, without the use of any chemical crosslinker, using a Stratalinker UV 1800 crosslinker (Stratagene) with a 254 nM UV light bulb and a dose of 1 J/cm2. Samples were then loaded onto a 4-12 % Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel and subjected to MS analysis. In gel digestion was performed as described before (Abad etal. 2019). Following digestion, 10% of each sample was spun onto the stage tips as described above, and the rest 90% of each sample was used to enrich for phospho-groups using Zr-IMAC beads (Resyn Biosciences). LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) on a Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode, coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm (2 µm particle size) EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated constantly at 55oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 120 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (160 min).  We performed MS analysis in a Data Dependent Acquisition mode. MS1 scans were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1600), with an ion target set to “Standard” and maximum injection time of 50ms. MS2 was performed in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution and isolation window (m/z) of 1.6. We used HCD fragmentation with stepped collision energy of 24, 26, 28. The normalized AGC target was set to 5.0 e4 and the cycle time to 3 sec. The only ions with charges 2-6 were subjected to fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 20s.

DATA PROCESSING:
The mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using ProteoWizard (v3.0.20338; Kessner et al, 2008), and cross-linked peptides were matched to spectra using Xi software (v1.7.6.3; Mendes et al., 2018; https://github.com/Rappsilber-Laboratory/XiSearch) with in-search assignment of monoisotopic peaks (Lenz et al, 2018). The search parameters used were MS accuracy, 3 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 10 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; cross-linker, EDC; max missed cleavages, 4; missing mono-isotopic peaks, 2; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation on cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation on methionine; and fragments b- and y-type ions (HCD) or b-, c-, y-, and z-type ions (EThcD) with loss of H2O, NH3, and CH3SOH. 1% on link level false discovery rate was estimated based on the number of decoy identification using XiFDR (Fischer & Rappsilber, 2017).  For the UV cross-linked samples, The OpenMS NuXL App software platform (Welm et al 2025) was used to map protein-DNA interactions against our in-house CPC protein complex. The “DNA-UV Extended” was set as a suitable preset. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set at 6 AA and we allowed 2 missed cleavages. For the precursor and fragment mass tolerance we used the default values (6 and 20 ppm respectively). The peptide FDR was set to 1% and we only used crosslinked peptides with XL FDR of 0.01.