PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Duodenal mucosa
diseases: Duodenum disease
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Microbiota; Iga; Tract; Disease; Rna; Proteomics; Gut; Microbiome; Duodenum; Sequencing; Gastrointestinal; Celiac; Cvid; Primary; Immunodeficiency

ABSTRACT:
A substantial proportion of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) patients has duodenal inflammation of largely unknown etiology. However, because of its histologic similarities with celiac disease, gluten sensitivity has been proposed as a potential mechanism. We aimed to elucidate the role of the duodenal microenvironment in the pathogenesis of duodenal inflammation in CVID by investigating the transcriptional, proteomic, and microbial signatures of duodenal biopsy samples in CVID.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Duodenal inflammation in common variable immunodeficiency has altered transcriptional response to viruses

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The objective of the study was to compare regulation of RNA, protein levels, and the bacterial microbiome in duodenal biopsy samples from patients with CVID (with and without GI inflammation), untreated celiac disease (histologically similar duodenal inflammation as CVID patients), and healthy controls. Extended Methods are available in this article’s Online Repository at www.jacionline.org. The duodenal biopsy samples from the CVID patients were subgrouped according to the presence of increased IEL (CVID_IEL), or CVID patients with no inflammation (normal) (CVID_N), as previously described.5 If the comparison were made for CVID patients as a whole (CVID_IEL + CVID_N), we used the prefix CVID_all. CVID subgroups were classified as “infection only” or “complications,” as previously defined.17 CVID enteropathy was defined as persistent diarrhoea after exclusion of GI infection.11 Here we use “gut microbiota” to refer to the bacteria in the gut. Total RNA and protein were isolated from snap-frozen pieces of duodenal biopsy samples using DNA, RNA, and protein AllPrep kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions with a few modifications (see the Methods in the Online Repository).

DATA PROCESSING:
Precipitated protein pellets, obtained using the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), were subjected to enzymatic digestion; the resulting peptides were analyzed on a liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry platform consisting of an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer operating in FullMS-ddMS2 mode (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Mass). The proteins were quantified by processing mass spectrometry (MS) data using MaxQuant

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Background</h4>A substantial proportion of common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) patients has duodenal inflammation of largely unknown etiology. However, because of its histologic similarities with celiac disease, gluten sensitivity has been proposed as a potential mechanism.<h4>Objective</h4>We aimed to elucidate the role of the duodenal microenvironment in the pathogenesis of duodenal inflammation in CVID by investigating the transcriptional, proteomic, and microbial signatures of duodenal biopsy samples in CVID.<h4>Methods</h4>DNA, total RNA, and protein were isolated from snap-frozen pieces of duodenal biopsy samples from CVID (with and without duodenal inflammation), healthy controls, and patients with celiac disease (untreated). RNA sequencing, mass spectrometry-based proteomics, and 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing (bacteria) were then performed.<h4>Results</h4>CVID separated from controls in regulation of transcriptional response to lipopolysaccharide and cellular immune responses. These differences were independent of mucosal inflammation. Instead, CVID patients with duodenal inflammation displayed alterations in transcription of genes involved in response to viral infections. Four proteins were differently regulated between CVID patients and healthy controls-DBNL, TRMT11, GCHFR, and IGHA2-independent of duodenal inflammation. Despite similar histology, there were major differences in CVID with duodenal inflammation and celiac disease both at the RNA and protein level. No significant difference was observed in the bacterial gut microbial signature between CVID, celiac, and healthy controls.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Our findings suggest the existence of altered functions of the duodenal epithelium, particularly in response to lipopolysaccharide and viruses. The latter finding was related to duodenal inflammation, suggesting that viruses, not gluten sensitivity, could be related to duodenal inflammation in CVID.