PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Stem cell
diseases: Lysosomal storage disease
instruments: Orbitrap Ascend
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Pd; In; Ida; Lysosome dysfunction; Neurodegeneration; Tmtpro; Projection proteomics

ABSTRACT:
This experiment describes the quantitative proteomic profiling of whole-cell, soma, and neuronal projection fractions from day 35 induced neurons (iN) derived from control and ASAH1 knockout human embryonic stem cells. Soma and projection compartments were physically separated using Transwell culture inserts, and triplicate biological replicates were processed using TMTpro 18-plex labeling and high-resolution Orbitrap mass spectrometry with FAIMS. Data were searched against the human proteome with stringent FDR control and reporter ion quantification, enabling compartment-resolved analysis of proteome alterations associated with ASAH1 deficiency.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomics analysis of whole-cell, soma and neuronal projection fractions from day 35 iNeurons in Control and ASAH1-/-

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Stem-cell culture and neuronal differentiation Detailed methods for maintenance and differentiation of stem cells can be found at: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.br85m9y6, dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.br9cm92w, dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.br9em93e, dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bsacnaaw. Briefly, human ES cells (H9, WiCell Institute) were cultured in E8 medium on Geltrex-coated tissue culture plates with daily medium change. Cells were passaged every 4-5 days with 0.5 mM EDTA in 1× DPBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  For conversion of human stem cells to iNeurons, cells were expanded and plated at 2x104/cm2 on Geltrex-coated tissue plates in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1x N2, 1x NEAA (Thermo Fisher Scientific), human Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF, 10 ng/ml, PeproTech), human Neurotrophin-3 (NT-3, 10 ng/ml, PeproTech), mouse laminin (0.2 μg/ml, Cultrex), Y-27632 (10 μM, PeproTech) and Doxycycline (2 μg/ml, Alfa Aesar) on Day 0. On Day 1, Y-27632 was withdrawn. On Day 2, medium was replaced with Neurobasal medium supplemented with 1x B27 and 1x Glutamax (Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing BDNF, NT-3 and 1 μg/ml Doxycycline. Starting on Day 4, half of the medium was replaced every other day thereafter. On Day 7, the cells were treated with 0.5µM EDTA + PBS and plated on Geltrex-coated tissue plates. Following day 12 of differentiation 50% ND2 media was changed every other day. Cells were replated at day 16 into triple-coated dishes (Geltrex + poly-L-orthinine + laminin). After day 26, 50% of media was changed very 4 days.  For human ES cell conversion to induced dopaminergic neurons (iDA neurons), were differentiated as described {Sheta, 2022 #49}. Cells were seeded on Geltrex-coated plates at DIV-2 and expanded in standard culture medium. On Day 0 (DIV 0), medium was replaced with DMEM/F12-based D0/1 induction medium supplemented containing N2, B27, NEAA, BDNF, GDNF, mouse laminin, and doxycycline (2 µg/ml) to induce NGN2 expression. On Day 1, the D0/1 induction medium (+dox) was refreshed. On Day 2 (DIV 2), cells were washed with PBS and switched to iDA differentiation medium supplemented with 2 µM Ara-C to inhibit proliferating cells. Media was changed daily from DIV 2 to DIV 4. From DIV 5 to DIV 8, half of the medium was replaced daily with fresh iDA differentiation medium. On Day 9, cells were transitioned to midbrain maturation medium containing doxycycline. From DIV 10 onward, half of the maturation medium was replaced every other day until terminal differentiation (e.g., DIV 26). Cells were replated at day 16 into triple-coated dishes (Geltrex + poly-L-ornithine+ laminin). After day 26, 50% of media was changed every 4 days.  Cell culture for neuronal soma and projection fractions To generate samples for soma and neuronal projection proteome, H9-NGN2 stem cells were differentiated as described above but seeded on day 4 onto Transwell insets (Corning, two insets per replicate). Membranes were coated on both sides with Geltrex before using for the experiment. Media was changed in both compartments. Media changes were performed on both the bottom and top part of the 6 well inset. On the day 35, media was aspirated and the projections at the bottom of the membrane (== neuronal projections) cut off with a clean razor and collected in sterile 1xPBS + protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), before colleting the top fraction on the membrane (== soma). Samples were pelleted at 4°C for 5 min at 5000g, supernatant aspirated and resuspended in 8M Urea lysis buffer (+ protease inhibitor cocktail) for subsequent standard sample preparation for TMTpro.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data Analysis   Data processing. Raw mass spectra were converted to mzXML, monoisotopic peaks reassigned using Monocle and searched using Comet against all canonical isoforms found in the Human reference proteome database (UniProt Swiss-Prot 2019-01; https://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/previous_major_releases/release-2019_01/)) as well as against sequences from commonly found contaminant proteins and reverse sequences of proteins as decoys, for target-decoy competition. For searches, a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance for ion trap MS/MS as well as trypsin endopeptidase specificity on C-terminal with 2 max. missed cleavages was set. Static modifications were set for carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) and TMTpro labels on lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (+304.207 Da); variable modification was set for oxidization of methionine residues (+15.995 Da). Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered at 2% false discovery rate (FDR) using linear discriminant analysis (Picked FDR method, based on XCorr, DeltaCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, precursor mass accuracy, fraction of matched product ions, charge state, and number of modifications per peptide (additionally restricting PSM Xcorr >1 and peptide length>6, and after a 2% protein FDR target filtering PSM reporter ion intensities were quantified. Quantification was performed using a 0.003-Da window around the theoretical TMT-reporter m/z, and filtered on precursor isolation specificity of > 0.5 in the MS1 isolation window and the output was filtered using summed SNR across all TMT channels > 200. MSstatsTMT was performed on peptides with >200 summed SNR across TMT channels. For each protein, the filtered peptide–spectrum match TMTpro raw intensities were summed and log2 normalized to create protein quantification values (weighted average) and normalized to total TMT channel intensity across all quantified PSMs (adjusted to median total TMT intensity for the TMT channels). Log2 normalized summed protein reporter intensities were compared using a Student’s t-test and p-values were corrected for multiple hypotheses using the Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment. Subcellular and functional annotations were based on previous published list of high confidence annotations (, “high” & “very high” confidence, additional manual entries from, AmiGO Pathway online tool and mitochondrial annotation was based on MitoCarta 3.0). GO-enrichment was performed with ShinyGO or topGO.