PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Frozen embryo transfer; Mode of conception; Unassisted conception; Corpus luteum; In vitro fertilization; Proteome

ABSTRACT:
Observational data suggest that women conceiving without a corpus luteum are at higher risk of developing preeclampsia. While the underlying mechanisms remain unclear, the absence of corpus luteum-derived secretory products may be a contributing factor. This study investigates whether the plasma proteome differs between women who conceive with or without a corpus luteum and examines the relationship with mode of conception. Plasma samples from 12 participants were collected at three time points: first trimester, third trimester, and postpartum. The cohort included women who conceived unassisted (UC) after infertility, via artificial cycle frozen embryo transfer (AC FET), or natural cycle frozen embryo transfer (NC FET). 36 plasma protein samples were analyzed using mass spectrometry-based proteomics to compare the proteome of women who conceived with and without a corpus luteum, across different conception methods and pregnancy stages. In total, 528 proteins were quantified. No differentially expressed plasma proteins were identified between women with and without a corpus luteum. However, 15 proteins showed differential expression between UC and FET at all time points, with Bonferroni-corrected p<9.47 × 10E-5 and FC≥|2|. Several altered proteins, including PAPPA and ANG, were linked to preeclampsia. SERPINA7 was differentially detected when comparing time points within the unassisted conception method. No significant differences were detected between AC FET and NC FET. This pilot study revealed a unique proteomic signature associated with mode of conception. The findings suggest biologically plausible candidate proteins for further testing. Validation in larger cohorts or with alternative proteome analysis technologies is needed

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Exploring the Plasma Proteome Linked to Corpus Luteum Presence and Conception Mode Across Pregnancy Stages and Postpartum

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Plasma samples from 12 participants were collected at three time points: first trimester, third trimester, and postpartum. The cohort included women who conceived unassisted (UC) after infertility, via artificial cycle frozen embryo transfer (AC FET), or natural cycle frozen embryo transfer (NC FET). Plasma proteins were extracted using the proteominer kit (BioRad) and fractionated by alkaline reversed phase chromatography intoi 7 fractions. Additionally total plasma was triptically digested in solution and data were combined with the proteominer data

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw data were collected with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer running in DDA modus. Data were searched with the MaxQuant software against human entries of uniprot database and proteins were stated identified by an FDR< 0.01 on protein and peptide level. Bioinformatiques were done using Perseus software and intensities were given as logarithm to the basis of 2. If necessary missing intensity values were imputed (downshift 1.8, width 0.3).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Aims</h4>Iron deficiency (ID) is a frequent comorbidity in heart failure (HF) and contributes to exercise intolerance. Tissue iron levels are maintained by cellular iron uptake, sequestration, and release, processes that are tightly controlled by iron regulatory proteins (IRP). Our aim was to explore the role of IRP activity in skeletal muscle function and exercise capacity during HF.<h4>Methods and results</h4>We observed that skeletal muscle ID is associated with IRP1 and 2 inactivation 12 weeks after transverse aortic constriction (TAC) in mice with left ventricular (LV) dysfunction and cachexia. To understand the functional implications of IRP inactivation in skeletal muscle, we generated skeletal muscle-specific Irp1/2 knock-out mice (SkM-Irp1/2-KO). These mice developed muscle ID, along with lower transferrin receptor 1 (TFR1) levels and decreased non-haem iron content, within 5 weeks after birth. SkM-Irp1/2-KO mice exhibited shorter running distances and slower velocities during treadmill exercise. Transcriptomic analysis revealed up-regulation of gene clusters associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress, atrophy, mitochondrial dysfunction, and inflammation. Moreover, enhanced glycolysis, increased 18F-deoxyglucose uptake in quadriceps, and faster plasma glucose clearance were detected in SkM-Irp1/2-KO vs. control mice. In contrast, SkM-Irp1/2-KO mice had markedly reduced complex I and II expression, a change that confirmed defects in oxidative phosphorylation.<h4>Conclusion</h4>HF leads to IRP1/2 inactivation, ID, and metabolic dysfunction in skeletal muscle in mice. IRP1/2 inactivation in skeletal muscle causes ID, impairs oxidative energy production, and promotes exercise intolerance by reducing the capacity for effective energy utilization.