PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Conventional rapid freezing; mitochondria; motility; acrosome; dna damage; ultrastructural changes

ABSTRACT:
Vitrification is not considered as ideal method for cryopreservation of human spermatozoa due to the presence of high concentrations of penetrating cryoprotectants in the vitrification medium. Several studies in the literature suggest that the outcome of semen cryopreservation is superior when cryopreserved using conventional rapid freezing protocol compared to vitrification. The present study was aimed at assessing the functional and proteomic changes in the human spermatozoa cryopreserved in vitrification medium without penetrating cryoprotectant. Leftover ejaculates (n = 71) from men visiting the andrology laboratory for routine semen analysis were used. The liquefied semen samples were cryopreserved using rapid freezing and vitrification for a minimum of seven days. Post-thaw motility, mitochondrial function, DNA integrity, and acrosome intactness of spermatozoa were similar between the cryoprotectant-free vitrification and rapid freezing methods. The head morphology of spermatozoa cryopreserved by the vitrification method was better preserved compared to rapid freezing method. Proteomic analysis led to the identification of a total of 4378 proteins in spermatozoa. However, differential proteomic profile observed in spermatozoa cryopreserved with vitrification and conventional rapid freezing methods compared to spermatozoa from the ejaculate indicates the possible differences in the functional competence of the spermatozoa cryopreserved using these two protocols. Even though vitrification of spermatozoa in medium without penetrating cryoprotectant holds promise as an attractive option owing to the simplicity and rapidity of the protocol, further studies are necessary to understand the safety of the protocol and pregnancy outcome upon using the vitrified-thawed spermatozoa for assisted conception and assisted reproductive technology.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cryopreservation of human spermatozoa using penetrating cryoprotectant-free vitrification medium exhibits altered proteomic profile compared to conventional rapid freezing method

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The study cryopreserved liquefied semen samples using rapid freezing and vitrification method. The efficiency of two methods were investigated by mitochondrial membrane potential, Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging, Acrosome integrity, Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) dUTP Nick End Labelling (TUNEL) assay, Proteomic analysis. For proteomic analysis, proteins were extracted using lysis buffer and trypsinized using trypsin-LysC protease. The data were acquired in Data independent acquisition (DIA) mode for 120min. The samples were resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA) and loaded onto the Acclaim PepMap™ 100 trap column (75 µm X 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 3 µm, 100Å) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides were separated using PepMap TM RSLC C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, 50 µm × 15 cm) analytical column. The gradients used for peptide elution was based on their hydrophobicity and eluted by passing mobile phase A (0.1% FA) and B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) in a gradient. The peptides eluted from the column were ionized in positive ion mode at EASY-Spray™ Source with Spray Voltage: 2.1 kV and Ion Transfer Tube Temp: 275°C. Under a Full MS scan, peptide precursors ranging between 350 – 1500 m/z were acquired in Orbitrap with a resolution of 120000. The automatic gain control (AGC) and maximum injection time (Max. IT) were set to 1e6 and 20 ms. Quadrupole-isolated precursors were fragmented in the higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) technique with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 32±3%. Finally, the fragment ions were acquired in Orbitrap at a resolution of 30000 with ‘Auto Normal’ scan range mode. AGC and Max IT were set to 1e6 and 60 ms, respectively. All the samples were acquired in technical triplicates.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw files were searched against the FASTA sequence obtained from the Human Uniprot database using DIA-NN (v 1.8.1) in library-free mode. The protease enzyme Trypsin/P was selected with missed cleavage 1. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a static modification. Oxidation at methionine and Acetylation (N-terminus) were set as dynamic modifications. Peptide length, precursor charge range, precursor m/z range, fragment ion m/z range, mass accuracy was kept as default settings with false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% were considered as true positives. Protein inference was set as isoform IDs.