PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Bronchoalveolar lavage
diseases: Adult respiratory distress syndrome
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: iTRAQ8plex-116 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; L-cysteine methyl disulfide
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: iTRAQ
keywords: Balf; Hsct; Itraq; Orbitrap; 2dlc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
The goal of this study was to apply protein expression profiling tools in cases with lung injury following HSCT or cellular therapy infusion to identify the proteins and biological processes that differentiate IPS from infectious lung injury in HSCT recipients.  We performed comprehensive label-based quantitative protein profiling of BALF in patients undergoing HSCT

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome Profiling in Lung Injury Following Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
BALF samples containing at least 1.2 mg of proteins was processed for LC-MS/MS.  BALF was concentrated and desalted using Amicon 3-MWCO filters. Hemoglobin depletion was performed with Hemoglobind (BioTech Support Group LLC, Monmouth Junction, NJ) per the manufacturer's instructions.  Subsequent processing was similar to our prior study with immunoaffinity depletion of high abundance proteins to reduce the dynamic range and appropriate buffer exchanges for labeling with iTRAQ reagent . The enriched BALF was digested with trypsin-gold (Promega cat#V5280), dried and suspended in 0.1- 0.2% formic acid (pH < 3) and MCX cation exchange (Oasis MCX Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA, Cat no 186000254) performed to remove SDS. Proteins were eluted and labeled with eight-plex iTRAQ reagent per the manufacturer's (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) instructions as described previously. To compare protein abundance across different LC-MS/MS experiment, we used the same-pooled mastermix as a global internal standard. In each LC-MS/MS experiment, two iTRAQ reporter ion channels were labeled with the mastermix to assure the accuracy of fold change measurements while the remaining six channels contained study samples. To characterize 30 samples in the study, we performed five separate iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. Each iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixture, was purified with an MCX Oasis cartridge before off-line peptide separation in the first dimension and if needed C18 stage tipping. Peptides were separated offline into 15 separate peptide-containing fractions collected in 2-minute intervals on a C18 Gemini column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) at pH 10. Peptide fractions were concentrated, purified by the Stage Tip procedure  with Empore SDB-RPS extraction disks [mixed mode strong cation exchange and reversed phase], 3M (St. Paul MN), and separated in the 2nd dimension by C18 reversed phase capillary LC with a nano LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) online with MS. Data-dependent acquisition  was performed on an Orbitrap Velos system with HCD (higher-energy collision induced dissociation) activation for peptide tandem MS.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files obtained directly from the Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer were imported into GalaxyP ( https://usegalaxyp.org/ for public instance) for further processing (as described in z.umn.edu/ppingp). Within GalaxyP, all raw files together (using a multifile format that has been recently changed to dataset collection) were converted to mzml format using msconvert and then into ProteinPilot compatible Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files with preselected iTRAQ reporter ions. The MGF files were searched against the target-decoy version of Human UniProt database along with contaminant protein sequences (84,838 target sequences in total; July 2014) using ProteinPilot version 4.5.  Following search parameters were used: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labeled); Cys-alkylation: MMTS; Instrument: Orbi MS, Orbi MS/MS; run quant; bias correction on; search focus on biological modifications and amino-acid substitutions; thorough search and with a detected protein threshold (Unused Protscore (Conf)): 10%. The ProteinPilot searches and subsequent generation of Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) –FDR reports and protein and peptide level summaries were generated within Galaxy-P.   The results of multiple iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were aligned to compare protein-level quantitative data using Protein Alignment Template vs. 2.00p (AB Sciex) [30]. The Protein Alignment Template provides the overlap of proteins across multiple iTRAQ LC MS/MS experiments by matching proteins in a ‘reference master list’ to the ‘test list’ of proteins identified in each individual iTRAQ LC-MS/MS run.  For this alignment, we created a reference master list by performing a database search using .RAW files from two iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments i.e. iTRAQ experiment 1 and 5. To ensure that the proteins in this list are of high ID quality, we used a local FDR ≤ 5% as a threshold for the reference protein list. As per the recommendation of the Protein Alignment Template, for assembling of feature table with quantitative values, the threshold of ≤ 5% global FDR was used for ‘test list’ consisting of individual sets for the five-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. The Protein Alignment Template resulted in aligning of the ratios, p-values and error factors of the proteins across replicate experiments by using accession numbers of isoforms within protein summary and UniProt database.

METHODS:
METHODS
Study population
The University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board (IRB) Human Subjects Committee approved this study. Subjects were recruited from the Adult Blood and Marrow Transplant unit at the University of Minnesota Medical Center from November 2009 to June 2013. We included subjects within 180 days of HSCT who underwent a clinically indicated bronchoscopy for whom excess BALF was available. This period represents a high risk period for lung injury and has been used in a prior interventional study of IPS. There was no exclusion based on underlying hematological disease, donor source, the degree of HLA match and conditioning regimen. Demographic and transplant characteristics of the study population are presented in Table 1.
Amongst the study subjects, 2 underwent autologous HSCT, 23 allogeneic HSCT, and three patients were enrolled in a clinical trial of haploidentical natural-killer cell infusion for refractory acute myeloid leukemia. Twelve patients underwent myeloablative conditioning, and 16 underwent reduced intensity conditioning before HSCT. Graft sources included bone marrow (1), peripheral blood stem cells (6), umbilical cord blood (18) and natural killer cell (3). All BALF samples were collected from clinically indicated bronchoscopies performed using a standard protocol with excess, cell-free supernatant used for these studies. The diagnosis of IPS or infectious lung injury was made using the criteria established by the American Thoracic Society (Table 2). The patients had evidence of widespread alveolar injury, abnormal respiratory physiology and no evidence of pulmonary edema or volume overload or acute kidney injury as the primary cause of respiratory dysfunction. A diagnosis of IPS requires the absence of bacterial, viral, mycobacterial or fungal infection assessed by cultures, cytology or PCR-based studies. A diagnosis of infectious lung injury was made based on evidence of a pathogenic organism. In this group, two subjects had isolation of fungal organisms only, three had viral organisms only, six had bacterial organisms only and the rest of the subjects had a polymicrobial infection (isolation of bacteria with either fungal and/ or viral organisms). This study was conceived and the protein profiling completed prior to a recent publication where advanced genetic methodologies demonstrate viral pathogens in IPS.
A global internal standard was used to compare relative protein abundance across multiple isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification- two dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (iTRAQ 2DLC-MS/MS) experiments. This consisted of pooled BALF from 27 cases (‘mastermix”) with respiratory failure without previous HSCT and who did not meet the criterion for acute respiratory distress syndrome (except in one case with ARDS).
Sample preparation
Cell and debris free BALF supernatant was stored at −80°C within 60 minutes of collection. BALF samples containing at least 1.2 mg of proteins were processed for LC-MS/MS from individual patients employing a protocol previously published with minor modifications. BALF was concentrated and desalted using Amicon 3-MWCO filters. Hemoglobin depletion was performed with Hemoglobind (BioTech Support Group LLC, Monmouth Junction, NJ) per the manufacturer's instructions. Subsequent processing was similar to our prior study with immunoaffinity depletion of high abundance proteins to reduce the dynamic range and appropriate buffer exchanges for labeling with iTRAQ reagent.
iTRAQ labeling and 2D LC-MS/MS
After depletion the remaining medium and low abundant BALF proteins were digested with trypsin-gold (Promega cat#V5280), dried and suspended in 0.1- 0.2% formic acid (pH < 3) and MCX cation exchange (Oasis MCX Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA, Cat no 186000254) performed to remove SDS. Proteins were eluted and labeled with eight-plex iTRAQ reagent per the manufacturer's (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) instructions as described previously. The relative protein abundance was determined with reference to the pooled “mastermix” across all iTRAQ LC-MS/MS runs. In each LC-MS/MS experiment, two iTRAQ reporter ion channels were labeled with the mastermix to assure the accuracy of fold change measurements while the remaining six channels contained study samples. Thus, to characterize 30 samples in this study, we performed five separate iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. The labeling strategy for the 30 BALF samples studied is outlined in Supplemental Table S1. To prevent reporter ion signal (channel) bias the mastermix, IPS, and infectious lung injury samples were randomly placed in different iTRAQ reporter ion channels in each experiment.
Each iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixture was purified with an MCX cartridge before off-line peptide separation in the first dimension and if needed C18 stage tipping. Peptides were separated offline into 15 different peptide-containing fractions collected in 2-minute intervals on a C18 Gemini column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) at pH 10. Peptide fractions were concentrated, purified by the Stage Tip procedure with Empore SDB-RPS extraction disks [mixed mode strong cation exchange and reversed phase], 3M (St. Paul MN), and separated in the 2nd dimension by C18 reversed phase capillary LC with a nano LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) online with MS. Data-dependent acquisition was performed on an Orbitrap Velos system with HCD (higher-energy collision induced dissociation) activation for peptide tandem MS. LC and MS experimental details were previously reported, with the exception that the activation time was 20 msec.
Database search for protein identification
.RAW files obtained directly from the Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer were imported into GalaxyP ( https://usegalaxyp.org/ for public instance) for further processing (as described in emz.umn.edu/ppingp). Within GalaxyP, all .RAW files together (using a multifile format that has been recently changed to dataset collection) were converted to mzml format using msconvert and then into ProteinPilot compatible Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files with preselected iTRAQ reporter ions. The MGF files were searched against the target-decoy version of Human UniProt database along with contaminant protein sequences (84,838 target sequences in total; July 2014) using ProteinPilot version 4.5. Following search parameters were used: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labeled); Cys-alkylation: MMTS; Instrument: Orbi MS, Orbi MS/MS; run quant; bias correction on; search focus on biological modifications and amino-acid substitutions; thorough search and with a detected protein threshold (Unused Protscore (Conf)): 10%. The ProteinPilot searches and subsequent generation of Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) –FDR reports and protein and peptide level summaries were generated within Galaxy-P as previously described. The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD002437
The results of multiple iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were aligned to compare protein-level quantitative data using Protein Alignment Template vs. 2.00p (AB Sciex). The Protein Alignment Template provides the overlap of proteins across multiple iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments by matching proteins in a ‘reference master list’ to the ‘test list’ of proteins identified in each iTRAQ LC-MS/MS run. For this alignment, we created a master reference list by performing a database search using .RAW files from two iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments i.e. iTRAQ experiment 1 and 5. To ensure that the proteins in this list are of high ID quality, we used a local FDR ≤ 5% as a threshold for the master reference protein list. As per the recommendation of the Protein Alignment Template, for assembling of feature table with quantitative values, the threshold of ≤ 5% global FDR was used for ‘test list’ consisting of individual sets of the five-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. The Protein Alignment Template resulted in aligning of the ratios, p-values and error factors of the proteins across replicate experiments by using accession numbers of isoforms within protein summary and UniProt database.
Statistical analysis
Identification of differentially expressed proteins between IPS and infectious lung injury
We performed inverse variance weighted ratio test to account for the peptide level variance in fold changes measured for each protein across multiple iTRAQ runs. An inverse variance weighted t-test was performed to identify the proteins that were differentially expressed between two groups (IPS vs. infection). This model allows for comparison of averaged protein ratios across the five-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS runs. However, to avoid overfitting, we did not compare the protein ratios in the patients with repeat BALF sampling, as they were not analyzed on the same iTRAQ LC-MS/MS run. We controlled for multiple comparisons by using FDR as done previously. An R script employed for this statistical analysis is included in the supplementary material as R script.
Computational Analysis
To gain insight into the biological significance of the differentially expressed proteins, we used the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) as previously reported. DAVID generates an enrichment score for a group of genes indicating annotation term member associations in a given experiment. We used the ‘highest stringency’ Functional Annotation Clustering algorithm and focused on clusters with an enrichment score ≥ 1.3 because it is equivalent to a non-log scale p-value of 0.05 (carried out on 02/11/2016). To confirm the findings observed in DAVID we also performed functional analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA® QIAGEN, Redwood City www.quiagen.com/ingenuty Build 366632M, Version 26127183, carried out on 2/12/2016). We focused on the protein subsets represented in canonical pathways, upstream regulators and ‘molecular and cellular functions’. In IPA, the significance of the association between the differentially expressed proteins and the canonical pathway was measured in 2 ways: 1) a ratio of the number of BALF proteins that mapped to the pathway divided by the total number of genes assigned to that canonical pathway as it provides information about the depth of association; 2) a Benjamini and Hochberg corrected p-value (obtained using the right-tailed Fisher Exact Test) determining the probability that the association between the BALF proteins and the signaling canonical pathway/ biological function was explained by chance alone. All pathways with an FDR ≤ 0.05 are reported (equivalent to –log (B-H )p-value > 1.3). Canonical pathways over-represented in allogeneic HSCT were compared to all HSCT (allogeneic and autologous) recipients utilizing IPA comparison analysis algorithm.
Identifying the universe of BALF proteins
The Protein Alignment Template uses a reference master list, which introduces a certain degree of arbitrariness into the result. Thus, to match corresponding proteins across runs, we also implemented our own approach that seeks to overcome this limitation. This method uses the ProteinPilot output files that characterize each protein regarding the peptides that support its identification and matches proteins across runs when they share peptides. FDR filtering, as described previously, was performed before analysis to eliminate those proteins with less reliable identification. More specifically, our approach creates a graph, where each protein from any run is a node in the graph. Links are established between two nodes (proteins) for those nodes that share at least one peptide. We eliminated proteins that have links to protein within the same run or more than two proteins within another run. This resulted in the elimination of a small number of proteins (~8). Each connected component of the graph was interpreted as representing a single protein and was used to align the ratios and P-values of the proteins across replicate experiments.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Characteristics of study participants
In this study, we characterized BALF from HSCT subjects collected between November 2009 and June 2013. Twelve samples were classified as IPS and 18 BALF samples were classified as infectious lung injury. Two cases of IPS met the criterion for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage suggesting vascular injury and the remaining patients in the IPS groups had findings consistent with injury to the pulmonary parenchyma. The median time from transplantation to BALF sample collection did not differ between IPS (median 33 days, range 15-138 days) and infectious lung injury (median 51 days, range 8-179 days). The indication and type of transplantation are shown in Table 1 and the subject characteristics are shown in Table 3. Between the two groups, there was no difference in the age, time after HSCT when BALF samples were collected, the total BALF leukocyte count and the percent of BALF neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes. Six cases had a diagnosis of GVHD at the time of BALF collection (IPS=1, infectious lung injury =5) and were on corticosteroids with prednisone equivalent dose ranging from 25-112.5mg/day.
Protein identified by database searching
Most of the BALF samples in HSCT recipients appeared blood tinged; therefore for the first iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiment we tested whether removal of hemoglobin (in addition to high abundance proteins) would improve the depth of coverage. Hemoglobin removal improved protein identification to 845 proteins at 1% global FDR compared to 496 proteins with high abundance protein depletion alone. Subsequent iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were performed with hemoglobin removal followed by high abundance protein depletion.
Table 4 shows the ProteinPilot PSPEP FDR summary with the number of spectra, peptides and the proteins identified at ≤ 1% global FDR for the five-iTRAQ experiments. The total numbers of proteins identified in each of the five different iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were 845, 735, 532, 615 and 594 respectively. The ProteinPilot summary report of the proteins identified is included in the supplemental information Table S2. A total of 1125 unique proteins were identified in the five separate experiments (Table S3) of which 368 proteins were present in all five LC-MS/MS experiments.
Proteins differentially expressed in IPS
The 793 proteins identified in the master reference list at ≤ 5% local FDR were aligned to the proteins from individual iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiment (Table S4, Reference list alighed to sets tab). Of these 793 proteins, quantitative information was present to perform inverse variance weighted t-test on 509 proteins and 111 proteins were differentially expressed when all patients (autologous and allogeneic HSCT) with IPS were compared to infectious lung injury, controlling for an FDR ≤ 5% (Table S5, FDR BMT tab). We manually removed the high abundance proteins that should have been eliminated by the immune-depletion column along with misidentified or contaminant proteins from the list of 111 proteins resulting in 96 differentially expressed proteins (Table S5, 5% FDR (96) tab). Proteins representing the greatest difference in abundance between IPS and infectious lung injury are shown in Table 5.
In this study, two subjects had autologous HSCT one each in the infection and IPS groups. Since lung injury in autologous HSCT recipients is felt to be different than that in allogeneic HSCT, we analyzed our data after removing the two autologous HSCT cases. In the allogeneic HSCT recipients, we identified 127 differentially expressed proteins controlling for an FDR ≤ 5%. Eighty-five proteins differentially expressed in the allogeneic HSCT overlapped with the differentially expressed proteins identified in the analysis performed on all HSCT recipients (allogeneic and autologous).
Biological processes represented by differentially expressed proteins
To gain insight into biological processes that differ in IPS and infection, we performed Functional Annotation Clustering analysis on the differentially expressed proteins employing ‘highest stringency’ algorithm in DAVID. Fifteen biological modules (functional annotation clusters with an enrichment score > 1.3) were identified (Table S6). Our analysis revealed proteins that mapped to processes involved in inflammation mediated by lymphocytes, complement activation and B cell-mediated adaptive immune response (clusters 1, 5 and 14). Other functional modules that were identified included those involved in blood coagulation/wound healing (cluster 3), cell migration (cluster 6,11), and apoptosis (cluster 4,15). There were modules involved in cholesterol / triglyceride metabolism (cluster 7, 12), lipid / cholesterol transport (cluster 8, 9) and oxidative stress / cellular ion homeostasis (cluster 2,10). We also identified one module involved in regulation of endocytosis (cluster 13).
To understand the relative impact of changes in protein levels in the context of well-characterized pathways and to independently test the validity of the findings observed using DAVID, we performed IPA core analysis; focussing mainly on molecular and cellular functions, canonical pathways and the upstream regulators. Several of the GO terms that were over- represented by the differentially expressed proteins in DAVID were also identified by IPA core analysis. The top five molecular and cellular functions represented by the differentially expressed proteins included cellular movement, cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, cell death and survival, free radical scavenging and lipid metabolism.
Controlling for an FDR ≤ 5% (equivalent to –log (B-H p-value) > 1.3), we identified 17 IPA canonical pathways that were represented by differentially expressed proteins (Table 6). These included processes identified by GO enrichment analysis such as acute phase response signaling (APRS), complement system, coagulation system, intrinsic and extrinsic prothrombin activation, production of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species in macrophages, granulocyte adhesion and diapedesis (leukocyte migration) and glutathione redox reactions. Additionally, pathways in the IPA knowledge base that were affected included clathrin-mediated endocytotic signaling, IL-12 signaling and production in macrophages. Additionally, we performed IPA core analysis on the differentially expressed proteins identified in allogeneic HSCT. Though there were differences in the level of significance of enrichment (Table S7), the canonical pathways overrepresented in allogeneic HSCT patients overlapped with those identified in all HSCT recipients (Figure 1).
Upstream regulator analysis in IPA demonstrated that nitrofurantoin, PD98059 (2-(2-amino-3-methoxyphenyl)-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one, an ERK /MAPK regulator) lipopolysaccharide (LPS), FOXA2 (forkhead box A2) and tretinoin were the top five upstream regulators of the differentially expressed proteins between IPS and infectious lung injury. TNF was also identified as an upstream regulator of twenty-five of the differentially expressed proteins by this analysis.

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) is a potentially curative treatment for otherwise fatal hematologic and lymphoid malignancies. Pulmonary complications have been reported in 40% to 60% of HSCT recipients, and may contribute to death in over one-third of these cases. The advent of non-myeloablative and reduced intensity conditioning regimens have decreased the duration of neutropenia and lowered the incidence of infectious complications though the mortality from these complications remains high. Idiopathic Pneumonia Syndrome (IPS) is a non-infectious lung injury found in HSCT recipients. In 2011, the American Thoracic Society (ATS) updated the definition of IPS to include widespread alveolar injury in the absence of infection and the absence of cardiac, renal or iatrogenic etiology. Historically, the cumulative incidence of IPS has been reported to be 3-15% in the first 120 days after HSCT. In a more recent study, the cumulative incidence of IPS has been shown to be lower following nonmyeloablative conditioning (2.2%) versus myeloablative conditioning (8.4%). Once established however it was associated with a high mortality.
IPS is less common than infectious lung injury but has a poorer prognosis with a mortality rate of 60-80%. IPS occurs in up to 15% of allogeneic HSCT recipients after myeloablative conditioning. Although it is less frequent with autologous HSCT, the mortality of IPS remains high at approximately 80%. The median time to development of IPS has been reported to be 19 days after allogeneic (range 4-106 days) and 63 days after autologous HSCT (range 7-336); the period when the risk of infectious complications is also high. Escalated immunosuppression with high dose steroids or TNF blockade are current treatments for IPS. As these agents may worsen infectious lung injury, it is critical to differentiate infection from IPS.
The goal of this study was to apply state-of-the-art protein expression profiling tools in cases of lung injury following HSCT or cellular therapy infusion to identify the proteins and biological processes that differentiate IPS from infectious lung injury. We performed comprehensive label-based quantitative protein profiling of BALF in patients undergoing HSCT. Our hypothesis was that subsets of proteins expressed in the BALF represent the biological processes responsible for lung injury and recovery. To identify these processes we performed Gene Ontology enrichment analysis and pathway analysis on proteins that showed differences in abundance in IPS compared to infectious lung injury.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.