PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Adipocyte; Fat cell
diseases: Abdominal aortic aneurysm
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Mus musculus; Supernatant; Adipocytes; Lc-msms

ABSTRACT:
Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a life-threatening vascular disease without effective medical therapies. Emerging evidences have suggested a crosstalk between adipose tissue and vascular cells and brown adipose tissue is beneficial for cardiovascular health. Nevertheless, whether brown remodeling of white adipose tissue would protect against AAA remains unclear. Here we showed that patients with AAA had a decreased browning level of adipose tissue and induction of adipose tissue browning significantly reduced AAA incidence and attenuated AAA development in mice. Using LC-MS/MS and proteomic analysis, we further identified Follistatin-like 1 (FSTL1) as a novel vessel-protective adipokine secreted by browning adipocytes. Mechanistically, FSTL1 inhibited VSMC apoptosis through DIP2A/AKT signaling. Furthermore, we demonstrated that adipocyte-specific deficiency of FSTL1 abrogated the protective effect of browning induction. Moreover, supplementation of FSTL1 either systemically or patched into hydrogel placing around abdominal aorta markedly limited aortic dilation and AAA progression.  Our data suggest a protective role of adipose tissue browning and a novel batokine FSTL1 in the development of AAA, which may represent a novel intervention strategy for AAA.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The supernatant of the culture medium of adipocytes LC-MSMS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The supernatant of the culture medium of adipocytes was collected and concentrated into dry powder under vacuum at -80° C. 1 mg of the lyophilized powder was weighed and redissolved by adding 100 μL of 50 mmol/L NH4HCO3 solution, and the protein was precipitated by acetone overnight. Acetone and ethanol were used alternately to clean the protein precipitation. After centrifugation, the precipitation was freeze-dried and redissolved in urea. The protein was reduced by dithiothreitol for 60 minutes and alkylated by iodoacetamide for 45 minutes. After incubation with trypsin for 16 h, the reaction was terminated by trifluoroacetic acid solution. The peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile aqueous solution (containing 0.1% formic acid), 80% acetonitrile aqueous solution (containing 0.1% formic acid) and 100% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid), and concentrated in a vacuum concentrator. The peptide concentration was tested using PierceTM Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay（Invitrogen), followed by LC⁃MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Label Free quantitative method was used to analyze the peptides from the cell culture media. The liquid phase was Easy1200 liquid system, packed with integrated C18 Tip chromatographic analysis column (75 μm ×150 mm, 11.9 μm, Guangzhou Kefu Technology). Suitable mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid/water solution; Mobile phase B: 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile/aqueous solution, flow rate of 300 nL/min, gradient elution for 90 min, elution ratio is as follows: 0~2 min, 4%~8% B phase; 2~72 min, 8%-28% B phase; 72-82 min, 28%-38% B phase; 82-85 min, 38%-100% B phase; 85~90 min, 100% B phase. The Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (PD) software is used for qualitative statistical analysis of the original mass spectrum data. The software search parameters are set to: The maximum missing site was 3, the mass deviation of parent ion was ±10 ppm, searched using the UniProt protein database (UniProt⁃mouse⁃filtered⁃reviewed. fasta).