PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Radiation; Fibronectin; Therapy; Human; Ecm

ABSTRACT:
During radiotherapy, X-rays can deliver significant doses of ionising radiation to both cancerous and surrounding healthy tissues, often leading to undesirable side effects that compromise patient outcomes. While the cellular effects of such therapeutic x-ray exposures are well studied, the impact on extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, which are critical to tissue integrity, remains poorly understood. This study characterises the response of breast proteins, including the major ECM components collagen I and fibronectin, to therapeutic X-rays doses of 50Gy (as employed in breast radiotherapy) and 100Gy, using a combination of gel electrophoresis, biochemical assays, and mass spectrometry-based peptide location fingerprinting (PLF) analysis. In purified protein solutions, X-ray exposure led to fragmentation of constituent α chains of collagen I, and in fibronectin localised structural modifications (as detected by LC-MS/MS peptide location fingerprinting [PLF]) which increased its binding affinity for collagen I. In complex environments, such as newly synthesised fibroblast-derived ECM (fECM) and mature ex vivo breast tissue, therapeutic x-rays induced proteolytic changes in, not just collagen I and fibronectin, but also key basement membrane proteins, including collagen IV, laminin, nidogen-1, and perlecan. Intracellular proteins associated with gene expression (RPS3, MeCP2), cytoskeleton (moesin, plectin), and the endoplasmic reticulum (calnexin) were also found to be structurally compromised. These structural changes may impair the ECM integrity and alter cell-ECM interactions, with potential implications for tissue stiffening, fibrosis, and impaired wound healing in irradiated tissues.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
X-Ray Exposure Induces Structural Changes in Human Breast Proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human purified plasma fibronectin were purchased from Abcam (ab80021, Abcam, Cambridge, UK). 10μg of purified commercial protein was diluted to 500μL in 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.5, prior to reduction with 5mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylation with 15mM Iodoacetamide (IAM). Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% (v/v), followed by protein precipitation with binding buffer (100mM TEAB, 90% Methanol, pH 7.1) at a ratio of 6:1 (buffer:sample) (v/v). Proteins were then concentrated by an S-trap column which was washed with binding buffer before addition of 20μL trypsin at ration of 1:10 trpsin:sample in 50mM TEAB. Trypsin digestion was at 37°C for 16-24 hours. Digested peptide suspensions were sequentially eluted with 50mM TEAB, 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) and finally 0.1% (v/v) FA in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile to a final 5% (v/v) acetonitrile concentration. Samples were desalted and washed with 0.1% formic acid using Oligo R3 beads added to 96-well Corning FiltrEX desalt filter plates. Next, peptides were eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and dried with Heto speed vacuum concentrator centrifuge (ThermoFisher, UK) without heating for 90 minutes. Vacuum-dried peptide samples were then stored at 4°C and re-suspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v)FA prior to LC-MS/MS. The separation was performed on a Thermo RSLC system consisting of a NCP3200RS nano pump, WPS3000TPS autosampler and TCC3000RS column oven configured with buffer A as 0.1% formic acid in water and buffer B as 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. An injection volume of 2 ul was loaded into the end of a 5 ul loop and reversed flushed on to the analytical column (Waters nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 Column, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm) kept at 35 C at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 8 min with an initial pulse of 500 nl/min for 0.3 min to rapidly re-pressurise the column. The injection valve was set to load before a separation consisting of a multistage gradient of 1% B to 6% B over 2 minutes, 6% B to 18% B over 44 minutes, 18% B to 29% B over 7 minutes and 29% B to 65% B over 1 minute before washing for 4 minutes at 65% B and dropping down to 2% B in 1 minute. The complete method time was 75 minutes.The analytical column was connected to a Thermo Exploris 480 mass spectrometry system via a Thermo nanospray Flex Ion source via a 20 um ID fused silica capillary.

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher, UK) was used for protein identification with a pre-optimised workflow. Spectrum search were conducted using SEQUEST within Proteome Discoverer. The SwissProt database (retrieved from UniProtKB, release 2022_01) was used to search for fully tryptic peptides, with Homo sapiens specified as the taxonomy. Search parameters include a pre-cursor ion tolerance of 10ppm, and an MS/MS fragment ion tolerance of 0.2Da. Fixed modifications considered included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, while variable modifications considered were the oxidation of lysine, methionine, proline, and arginine. A maximum of two missed cleavages and peptide charge states of +1, +2, and +3 were considered. The peptide false discovery rate was controlled at 1%. Identified peptides lacking pre-cursor ion (MS1) intensity quantification were excluded. Only peptides uniquely mapped to a single protein were included in the analysis. The analysed peptide data were normalised abundances, which were used for MS1 intensity quantification mapping in PLF analysis. Protein abundances were compared using total peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) as a proxy.