PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Top-down proteomics
keywords: Proteogenomics genomics variants proteomics

ABSTRACT:
We describe a method for identifying peptides that result from missense changes and identify peptides among 2 human brains that would have otherwise not been detected. Next, we use this data to estimate of allele-specific protein abundance in human brain for an average per individual, and to estimate apolipoprotein E allele specific abundance in human brain across individuals. Finally, we estimate the heritability of allele-specific protein abundance.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Allele-Specific Protein Abundance in Human Brain

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We obtained 2 pieces of human cortical tissue (broadman area 9) provided by the Emory Brain Bank. Each tissue was homogenized as described previously (ref). Briefly, each tissue chunk comprised mostly of grey matter was individually weighed (approximately 0.1 g) and homogenized (dounce homogenizer) in 500uL of urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8), including both Protease Inhibitors (Roche) and the HALT (Pierce) phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, 0.6% (v/v). Samples were sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific ) 5 times for 5 s with 15 s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids and then centrifuged at 22,800 r.c.f at 4°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and then samples were frozen at -80°C. Protein samples (1 mg) were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 30 minutes, followed by 5 mM iodoacetimide (IAA) at 37°C for 30 minutes. Samples were first digested with 1:200 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (LysC; Wako) at 37°C for 4 hours and then diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. For LysC digestion alone, samples were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 0.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase. ERLIC fractionation was performed as previously described with slight modifications [refs]. Briefly, trypsin or LysC derived peptides from 1 mg of protein were dissolved in 100 uL of 80% (v/v) mobile phase A (10 mM NH4Ac, 85% ACN/1% acetic acid), injected completely with an auto-sampler and fractionated using a PolyWAX LP anion-exchange column (200 × 3.2 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD) on a Agilent 1100 HPLC system monitored at 280 nm. Forty fractions were collected with a 66 min gradient of 100% mobile phase A (85% ACN/0.1% acetic acid) for 3 min, 0%–20% mobile phase B (30% ACN/0.1% FA) for 50 min, 20%–100% B for 5 min, followed by 8 min at 100% B at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. The forty fractions were pooled into 20 fractions by combining in the following manner (1, 40); (2, 39); (3, 38) and so on. All pooled peptide fractions were dried to completion under vacuum by a Savant speedvac (ThermoFisher Scientific) Each peptide fractions (LysC or tryspin) was re-suspended in 25 ul of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile) and 1ul (~2ug) from each fraction was loaded on to a 20 cm 1.9 μm (internal diameter) C18 (Dr. Maisch, High Performance LC GmbH, Germany) self-packed column (New Objective) by a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) and monitored on an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was performed over a 120-minute gradient at a rate of 325 nl/min with buffer B ranging from 5% to 90% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid and water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic and 80% acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect one full mass spectrometry (MS) scan followed by 20 data dependent MS/MS scans.  The MS scans were collected at a resolution of 60,000 (300-1800 m/z range, 1,000,000 AGC, 100 ms maximum ion time) and the MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 50 ms maximum ion time). Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced peaks for 30 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS.

DATA PROCESSING:
We developed the ProtGen software that creates the personal protein database. This software requires a list of variant sites; a list of user specified transcripts and reads a specially prepared database that enumerates the codon and reference amino acid for all transcripts at each site in the genome; and, a protease that will be used to digest the proteins in silico. It then determines all variant sites that change amino acid residues in each transcript, and permutes the variants in the transcript. Transcripts with variants are only retained if an in silico protease digestion generates novel peptides not previously generated in either the reference protein dataset or the growing variant transcript database. Transcripts that contain variant proteins are concatenated to the reference protein database to create a complete personalized protein database. MS/MS data obtained were searched against personal protein databases and the standard Uniprot database using SEQUEST algorithm with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 platform (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The parameters used for data analysis included trypsin or LysC alone as the protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.000) was specified as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N termini and cyclization of N-terminal glutamine and were included as variable modifications. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. The mass error was set to 10 p.p.m. for precursor ions and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and the results used to estimate values using the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer suite. Peptides were considered identified at a q value <0.01.

METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Tissue Homogenization and Digestion
We obtained fresh-frozen post-mortem human brain (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; broadman area 9) from two cases from the Emory Brain Bank. Each tissue sample was processed as described with slight modification. Briefly, each tissue was individually weighed (approximately 0.1 g) and homogenized (Dounce homogenizer) in 500 μL of urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.8), including both protease inhibitors (Roche) and the HALT (Pierce) phosphatase inhibitor cocktail, 0.6% (v/v). Samples were sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) 5 times for 5 sec with 15 sec intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids, and then centrifuged at 22,800 rcf at 4°C for 5 min. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method, and then samples were frozen at -80°C. Protein samples (1 mg) were treated with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37°C for 30 min, followed by 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at 37°C for 30 min. Samples were first digested with 1:200 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (LysC; Wako) at 37°C for 4 h, and then diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 1.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. For LysC digestion alone, samples were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3 to a final concentration of 0.6 M urea and digested overnight with 1:50 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (LysC). All peptides were desalted on C18 Sep-Pak (Waters Corporation) and lyophilized to dryness.
Electrostatic Repulsion-Hydrophilic Interaction Chromatography (ERLIC)
ERLIC fractionation was performed as previously described with slight modifications. We used the concatenated ERLIC pooled strategy as it was shown that the number of unique peptides identified in concatenated ERLIC is significantly higher than pooling adjacent fractions using the same LC-MS/MS gradient. Briefly, trypsin or LysC-derived peptides generated from 1 mg of protein were dissolved in 100 μL of 80% (v/v) loading buffer (10 mM NH4Ac, 85% ACN/1% acetic acid), injected completely with an auto-sampler, and fractionated using a PolyWAX LP anion-exchange column (200 × 3.2 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å; PolyLC, Columbia, MD) on an Agilent 1100 HPLC system monitored at 280 nm. Forty fractions were collected with a 66-min gradient of 100% mobile phase A (90% ACN/0.1% acetic acid) for 3 min, 0%–20% mobile phase B (30% ACN/0.1% FA) for 50 min, 20%–100% B for 5 min, followed by 8 min at 100% B at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. The 40 fractions were pooled into 20 fractions by combining in the following manner, (1, 40); (2, 39); (3, 38), and so on.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
An equal volume of each of the 20 ERLIC peptide fractions (LysC or trypsin) was re-suspended in loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile), and peptide eluents were separated on a self-packed C18 (1.9 um Dr. Maisch, Germany) fused silica column (25 cm × 75 μM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) by a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific) and monitored on an Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Elution was performed over a 120-min gradient at a rate of 300 nl/min with buffer B ranging from 1% to 90% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to sequence at top speed with a cycle time of 5 sec. For samples digested with both LysC and trypsin, the MS scans were collected at a resolution of 60,000 (300–1800 m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time). For samples digested with only LysC, the MS scans were collected with the same resolution and ion time but with a mz range of 350–1500 and an AGC of 500,000. All HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (0.7 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 20,000 AGC target, 35 ms maximum ion time) in the Orbitrap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced peaks for 20 sec within a 10-ppm isolation window. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS/MS. All raw mass spectrometry files and matched peptides will be made public on Synapse, https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn6126101.
Whole-Exome Sequencing
We extracted genomic DNA from fresh-frozen brain tissue using a Gentra PureGene kit (Qiagen, Germany) per the manufacturer’s protocol. Whole-exome sequencing was performed using the SeqCap EZ Exome v2 Human Exome Capture Kit (Roche, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with 100-bp paired-end sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument to an average read depth of 100X. Raw sequencing reads were mapped to the whole human genome (GRCh38) using the PEMapper and variant sites were identified using PECaller with a theta of 0.001 and probability to call a variant site of 95% within the approximately 32 million bases that constitute the consensus coding domain.
Personalized Protein Database Construction
The GenPro software is an open-source application developed to generate PPDs. A complete description of the software is available at https://github.com/wingolab-org/GenPro where it may be downloaded. Briefly, prior to creating PPDs a binary database for the organism of interest must be created. This database contains knowledge of transcripts (i.e., translation start, translation stop, and exon boundaries) and genomic sequence. GenPro can create a binary database for the following organisms: Homo sapiens, M. musculus, D. melanogaster, C. elegans, or S. cerevisiae. The software generates the reference proteome through in silico in-frame translation of each transcript in the binary database (Supplementary Figure 1). To generate a PPD for a given sample, the software reads variants from either a VCF- or SNP-formatted file, and creates all novel proteins for each missense SNV on a per sample basis. Each variant protein is then digested in silico with a user-specified protease and only if the variant protein results in one or more novel peptides (i.e., peptides not present in the reference proteome) is the variant protein added to the PPD. The user may impose a maximum or minimum length requirement on the peptides to consider (e.g., default minimum and maximum peptide length of 6 and 40). A final PPD consists of all full-length translated proteins (reference and variant) are written to a single FASTA file that may be used as input for Proteome Discoverer 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The FASTA header encodes information about whether the transcript is reference or variant, and for variant proteins, it encodes the location(s) and amino acid substitution of the variant(s).
For this study, we used the human genome (GRCh38) and UCSC knownGene transcripts (http://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTrackUi?db=hg38&g=knownGene, accessed: 4/15/2014), which aimed to be a complete set of well-described genes and incorporates data from RefSeq, GenBank, the Consensus Coding Domain Project, and comparative genomics. We use trypsin and LysC protease-specific settings to construct the PPDs with a minimum and maximum peptide length of 6 and 40, respectively. The upper length requirement was chosen to limit database size and because under the same experimental conditions we observed that only approximately 1% of all peptides sequenced are longer than 40 amino acids (data not shown).
Database Searching
MS/MS data obtained were searched against personal protein databases, which are described in results 3.1, and the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) containing both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL human reference protein sequences (90,411 target sequences downloaded April 21, 2015) using the SEQUEST algorithm through the Proteome Discoverer 2.0 platform (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Searching parameters against a target-decoy database included mass tolerance of precursor ions (±10 ppm), 0.05 Da mass tolerance for product ions, fully tryptic or LysC restriction, dynamic modifications for oxidized Met (+15.9949 Da), deaminated Asn and Gln (+0.98480 Da), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.03670 Da), static modification for carbamidomethyl Cys (+57.0215 Da), 4 maximal modification sites, and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Only b and y ions were considered for scoring, and the embedded Percolator algorithm was used to filter the peptide spectral matches (PSMs) to achieve a false-discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. Peptide and protein grouping were followed per Proteome Discoverer’s algorithm while applying a strict maximum parsimony principle. For variant-containing peptide identification, we applied the following filters on identified PSMs: amino acid changes that could be due to either spontaneous N/Q-deamination (+0.98 Da) or leucine (L)-to-isoleucine (I) coding changes were not considered.
Validation of Variant Peptides with Synthetic Standards and Label-free Quantification of Allele-Specific Abundance
Custom Peptide Synthesis (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used to validate variant peptides harboring single amino acid substitutions in PLEC, HSPA12A, GAA, TJP1, APOA4, and MINK1. All peptides were mixed together at equal weight (1 μg total) and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a targeted (data-independent acquisition) method on a high-resolution Q-Exactive Orbitrap. Each cycle consisted of one MS1 scan for each precursor collected at a resolution of 70,000 followed by 10 MS/MS (2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 50,000 AGC target, 50-ms maximum ion time) at 17,500 resolution targeting predefined precursor ion masses (m/z) derived from the matched variants peptides from human brain. MS/MS HCD spectra for targeted synthetic variant peptides were searched by SEQUEST against the personalized protein database (target-decoy) to confirm identification using the same search and peptide filtering parameters as described above. Estimates of the relative abundance of SAAV and reference peptides in human brain were determined from the chromatographic peak area calculation in Proteome Discover (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) of the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) corresponding to the variant and reference peptides with the same charge state (m/z). The stoichiometry or allele-specific abundance was quantified as a ratio of the chromatographic peak area of the variant peptide to the reference peptides. A peptide precursor mass tolerance of ±4 ppm for extracted ion chromatograms and a minimum signal-to-noise threshold of 1.0 was used as default parameters in Proteome Discoverer. The log2 ratios of the peak area for the reference and variant were plotted versus the average of the log2 intensities (i.e., as an MA plot). For the plot, we calculated a sliding window standard deviation (SD) and plot ± the 2-fold change lines in red using R (v3.2.3, 2015-12-10). All statistical testing was performed using built-in functions implemented in the same version of R.
Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) for Absolute Quantification of Allelic Abundance
Since the above XIC-based approach assumes similar ionization efficiency of SAAVs and reference peptides, we quantified allele-specific expression by PRM analysis. This was performed using a Q-Exactive-Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific), operated under Xcalibur software 3.0.63, equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to a nano-Acquity system (Waters). Tryptic peptides were loaded and elute off a self-packed 1.9 um C18 analytical column (New Objective, 35 cm × 75 μm inner diameter; 360 μm outer diameter). Elution was performed over a 250-min gradient at a rate of 210 nl/min with buffer B ranging from 1% to 80% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid with 5% DMSO in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic with 5% DMSO in 80% acetonitrile). The Q-Exactive-Plus MS was operated with the PRM mode using an inclusion list, consisting of m/z of targeted peptides shown in Supplementary Figure 2, a normalized collision energy of 30 was employed for fragmentation. Typical MS conditions included: spray voltage, 2.6kV; heated capillary temperature, 350°C; isolation windows 1.6 m/z with an offset 0.5 m/z; the resolution set to 17,500 at m/z 200; automatic gain control (AGC) target at 2×105. The heavy isotope labeled peptides were purchased from ThermoFisher Scientific (AQUA-Basic). The dynamic range was determined from lower end and upper end of calibration curve of synthesized peptides, which were spiked into tryptic digests of human brain. Heavy stable isotope labelled peptides were spiked into digested human brain samples (1μg/μl) in 100 fmol concentration. The linear range quantitation of heavy isotope labelled peptides is shown in Supplementary Figure 3.
Before importing Thermo raw files into Skyline software (Version 3.6), a spectral library of heavy stable isotope labelled peptides was built. Heavy peptides were mixed in 100 fmol concentration and then analyzed by Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer with the same normalized collision energy as PRM analysis described above. The raw file was processed by Maxquant (Version 1.5.7.4), using a human whole proteome sequence FASTA file was downloaded from UniProt (UP000005640, date: 2016-02-16), with variant protein sequences concatenated to the file. The MS/MS spectrum of each heavy peptide is shown in Supplementary Figure 2. For each peptide, the six strongest product ions were selected in Skyline. The Skyline software settings included: Precursor mass analyzer, Centroided; MS1 mass accuracy of 20 ppm; Product mass analyzer, Centroided; MS/MS Mass accuracy of 20 ppm; Retention time filtering, include all matching scans. All product ion peak areas were calculated by Skyline, and endogenous peptides quantification was based on the normalized peak areas of at least 4 product ions.

RESULTS:
Results
In Silico Characterization of Personal Protein Database Generated from DNA Sequencing
Whole-exome sequencing was performed on genomic DNA extracted from fresh-frozen brain from two female donors who died at 50 and 76 years old, respectively. Each sample has >31.5 million bases with >8x coverage, which is more than sufficient to allow base calling, and the mean depths of coverage for the cases were 228X and 135X, respectively. On average, the cases had 28,351 single nucleotide variants (SNVs), including 6,700 intronic, 10,731 replacements (i.e., sites that change the primary coding sequence), and 10,409 silent SNVs. Both cases had ~1:1 silent-to-replacement sites and a transition-to-transversion ratio of ~2.3 for the human whole exome, indicating good quality sequencing. A PPD was constructed using GenPro for each sample (Figure 1) using the variant base calls. Each PPD is a complete list of all full-length reference and variant proteins for the sample.
To understand the influence variant proteins in the PPDs had on the proteotypic peptide search space, we performed an in silico analysis of PPDs. Each PPDs had approximately 10,000 and 6,000 novel tryptic and LysC peptides, respectively (Figure 2A), which is approximately 1% more theoretical fully tryptic peptides than the reference (i.e., KnownGene track). Next, we compared the PPDs to UniProtKB, which contains both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL protein sequences (Supplementary Table S1). We chose UniProtKB because it is one of the most popular reference protein databases used for bottom-up proteomics and its size and tryptic search space has been described. Although UniProtKB is slightly larger than custom PPDs, with approximately 2% more fully tryptic peptides, they share about 91–95% peptides. Approximately, 5–9% of peptides were found to be unique to each database. Differences in the databases are not surprising since Swiss-Prot contains a greater number of alternative predicted proteoforms and because TrEMBL includes protein that are generated from translations of EMBL (European Molecular Biology Laboratory) nucleotide sequence entries. Together this increases the total number of protein entries of the UniProtKB. Although our findings for tryptic search space and average peptide lengths for reference peptides in the PPDs are comparable to UniProtKB (Supplementary Table S2), the theoretical variant peptides (6–40 residues in length) in the PPDs are significantly longer than reference peptides (independent sample t-test; p-value <0.01), which is a consequence of how GenPro databases are constructed. Namely, for a protein with a SAAV peptide to be included in the PPD, the SAAV peptide must be unique among all reference and variant peptides. Unique peptides also tend to be longer since the probability of a peptide being unique is proportional to length.
Comparing MS/MS Search Results from PPDs to the Human UniProtKB Reference Database
We generated a comprehensive number of human brain tryptic peptides following proteolytic digestion using two separate proteases (i.e., Trypsin and LysC) followed by fractionation utilizing ERLIC (Supplementary Figure 4). In total, we analyzed the resulting 40 fractions per case by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer collecting precursor peptide ions (MS scans) at high resolution (120,000 FWHM) and fragment ions measurement generated by HCD at high resolution (17,500 FWHM). Table 1 shows the overall protein groups, proteins, total peptides, and peptide spectral matches (PSMs) identified for the UniProtKB and case-specific PPD searches, respectively. We had a similar number of target and decoy matches for the PPD and UniProtKB (Supplementary Table S3), indicating the same FDR for all searches of approximately 0.7%. Overall, for both trypsin and LysC digests, PPDs and UniProtKB performed similarly for the number of peptides and PSMs that were matched. We found slightly fewer protein groups, and dramatically fewer total proteins were identified in the PPDs, which reflects redundant proteoforms in UniProtKB compared to KnownGene. For the Emory brain bank case E05-90, we matched 1,324 and 859 variant PSMs for trypsin and LysC, respectively, which map to 553 and 426 unique peptides and 389 and 299 unique genes (Figure 2A). As expected, in a single individual, there was significant overlap between peptides identified by trypsin and LysC with 43–53% of peptides identified in both experiments (Figure 2B). A total of 977 unique variant peptides were identified across the two individual cases, of which 40–52% were identified in both samples (Figure 2C). Table 2 shows the overall protein groups, proteins, total peptides, and PSMs for the unique peptide matches. We found 4% of all gene products had evidence for a variant peptide per case. These variant peptides reflect approximately 0.5% of all peptides identified for either protease (LysC or trypsin) and represent approximately 5–7% of the theoretical variant peptides in the PPD. By comparison we found evidence for approximately 17% of all possible theoretical reference peptides.
Next, we asked whether SAAV peptides alter the biochemical properties of peptides compared to reference peptides. This was done by assessing whether SAAV peptides are present in different ERLIC fractions than their reference counterparts. Variants that introduce/replace an ionizable or hydrophobic amino acid would be hypothesized to influence ERLIC elution times, which resolves peptides by hydrophilic interaction and electrostatic repulsion. Our findings show that reference and variant peptide variant that differed by just a single amino acid showed a strong correlation in the average ERLIC elution position (R = 68%) (Supplementary Figure 5) indicating that most SAAV peptides do not dramatically alter the biochemical properties of the peptide.
We found that SAAV peptides may come from SNVs that are common or rare in the general population. We find that 35% of SAAV peptides come from SNVs with minor allele frequencies (MAF) from dbSNP below 5%, and 65% of SAAVs having MAF above 5% (Supplementary Figure 6). The distribution of XCorr values for reference and variant PSMs identified in the 2 cases (Figure 3) revealed that the average XCorr values for SAAV PSMs were not significantly different from those observed for reference PSMs (independent sample t-test; p-value 0.41–0.87) (Table S3). Of note, searches using the UniProtKB identified an average of 20 variant peptides per case (compared to the GRCh38 reference genome), demonstrating that some entries within the UniProtKB contain variants, which is not apparent to the end user.
Confirmation of Variant Peptides in Human Brain and Estimation of Allele-Specific Abundance by Label-Free Quantification
We confirmed single amino acid coding changes using synthetic peptides. The MS/MS spectra of six synthetic peptides were identical or very similar to those of SAAV peptides detected in human brain. Notably, rare and novel SAAV peptide sequences were also matched with high confidence. Figure 4 shows a representative example of a rare (MAF approximately 1%) missense variant that was identified at the peptide level in HSPA12A. This missense variant encodes an E365G (rs61753067) coding change. We identified the reference and variant peptides (IFGE365DFIEQFK, and IFGG365DFIEQFK, respectively) by LC-MS/MS. An E-to-G substitution results in a loss of 72 Da on the corresponding y-fragment ions, which was observed by MS/MS. The chemically synthesized IFGG365DFIEQFK peptide was used confirm unambiguous MS/MS spectrum assignment of the variant peptide identified in brain. MS/MS spectra of additional selected synthetic SAAV peptides were also identical or very similar to those of SAAV peptides detected in human brain (Supplementary Figures 7 and 8). These data demonstrate we can confidently identify replacement SAAVs in human brain.
For diploid organisms, genes are generally expressed from both chromosomes in roughly equal proportion; however, this is not invariably the case. Allele-specific expression influences both traits and disease, but systematic investigations of it are generally restricted to mRNA. To extend this to proteins, we identified 477 SAAV and reference peptide pairs. Among those we estimated allele-specific abundance for the 429 SAAV and reference peptide pairs with identical charge states graphed those as an MA plot (Figure 5A). We found that allele-specific abundance for reference to variant peptides did not significantly differ from the expected ratio of 1:1 for each either sample or when considering all pairs from both samples together (t-test, p-value 0.26–0.45). Collectively, the median ratio was 0.92 with 215 and 214 observations above and below the median, respectively. To control for biochemical differences that might have influenced these findings, we removed peptide pairs that changed a Met, Asn, or Gln to avoid the influence of common post-translational modifications on estimates of abundance and found comparable allelic balance (Supplementary Figure 9) which showed the same results. Interestingly, we found that approximately 22% (95/429) of the SAAV and reference pairs showed where one allele was expressed greater than 4-fold higher compared to the other. Of those, 40% (57/95) were showed higher SAAV peptide and 60% (38/95) showed higher reference peptide.
Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) for Absolute Quantification of Allele-Specific Protein Abundance in Human Brain
We found SAAV and reference peptide pairs were generally in similar ERLIC fractions, suggesting that the biochemical properties did not dramatically differ between these peptide pairs. However, one drawback of shotgun approaches is variable peptide ionization and potential under-sampling of the peptide chromatographic peak in the MS1 scan, which together may increase the variance of our label-free quantitative measurements. Thus, we sought to confirm a subset of these SAAV to reference peptide ratios by parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). This targeted mass spectrometry approach permits the parallel detection of all target product ions in one high resolution mass analysis in the Orbitrap. Like selective reaction monitoring, PRM has the sensitivity that the data dependent proteomics approach lacks, and also offers the ability to determine absolute abundance when employing known quantities of isotopically labeled peptide standards. We chose three SAAV and reference peptide pairs (six peptides total) for PRM utilizing heavy isotope internal standards, (Figure 5B).
For more accurate absolute quantification of peptide levels we analyzed the total brain proteome using a single-shot LC PRM analysis without prior off-line fractionation. The MS/MS spectra and linear range quantitation of heavy isotope labelled peptides are shown in Supplementary Figures 2 and 3, respectively. Product ion pattern and chromatogram overlay for both the targeted endogenous brain derived (light) and heavy isotope labeled standards for Lysosomal alpha-glucosidase (GAA), Heat shock 70 kDa protein 12A (HSPA12A), and protein AHNAK nucleoprotein 2 (AHNAK2) are shown in Figure 6. The absolute levels in femtomole (fmol) of reference and variant peptide pairs were determined in both samples from the standard curve (Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure 3). Variant peptides from GAA and HSPA12A were specific for E05-90 and, as expected, were only identified and quantified in this sample, but the reference peptide was identified in both samples (Figure 6 and 7). For GAA, 4.39±0.66 fmol of reference and 4.36±0.41 fmol variant peptide were measured in E05-90, which disagrees with the label-free approach in the ERLIC fractions that suggested a ratio above 1:2 (Figure 5B). By contrast, HSPA12A had nearly identical levels of the reference (2.24 ±0.20 fmol) and variant (2.28 ±0.14 fmol) consistent with the label-free peptide intensities (Figure 7, middle panel). Interestingly, the inter-sample level of the HSPA12A reference peptide (IFGEDFIEQFK) varied between each case, which may be due to biological or tissue sampling differences. Finally, the SAAV peptide for AHNAK2 was shared by both cases (Figure 7). In E05-90, a higher level of reference (2.23 ±0.10 fmol) compared to variant (1.03 ±0.05 fmol) was consistent with >2-fold less SAAV:reference peptide, which agrees with the label-free approach (Figure 5B). In case OS02-252, the reference peptide (0.62 ±0.05 fmol) was slightly less abundant than the variant (0.99 ±0.07 fmol) giving a ratio of 1.4 variant to reference that is consistent with the label-free finding suggesting a ratio of below a 2-fold difference (Figure 5B). We note that case E05-90, which showed imbalance of the variant:reference peptide ratio also had two SNVs in and around AHNAK2 that were not shared with OS02-252. Both were coding SNVs, rs12890949 (L2145V) and rs78014542 (S5185A), 3′ to the shared SNV, rs61996045 (P1562L). These SNVs might explain differences in allele-specific protein abundance across the two individuals. In sum, the label-free and targeted PRM approaches support the hypothesis that most alleles are equally expressed in human brain.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Gene expression is an important contributor to phenotypic traits and disease. Much of the variation in gene expression is attributable to genetic variants, mostly single nucleotide variants (SNVs). Although protein abundance has become increasingly recognized as an important trait under genetic control, the majority of the focus of gene expression is on mRNA abundance, typically measured by gene microarrays or RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). SNVs adjacent to genes of interest are often correlated with differences in either RNA or protein abundance, known as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) or protein quantitative trait loci (pQTL), respectively. Recent evidence suggests eQTLs and pQTLs are heritable, common throughout the genome, and enriched for SNVs that associate with human disease. Both eQTLs/pQTLs are statistical associations between transcript RNA or protein abundance and nearby SNVs are influenced by cis- and trans- regulatory mechanisms. By contrast, allele-specific expression reflects the extent each allele is expressed in a diploid organism and directly assesses the effect of cis-regulatory variants. The natural expectation is that each allele will be equally expressed, yet up to 30% of expressed genes show allele-specific differences in RNA expression. Allele-specific expression studies have generally focused on mRNA expression and inquiries have yielded insights into traits and disease. An important, yet technically challenging question that remains largely unaddressed is whether allele-specific differences are observed at the protein-level. Allele-specific protein expression could be used to understanding the influence of regulatory or missense SNVs on protein expression and is particularly relevant for neurodegenerative diseases since pathological aggregation is considered a hallmark of most of those diseases.
Advances in liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) now allow detection of thousands of expressed proteins at unprecedented depth from disease-relevant tissues. However, unlike DNA and RNA, which are directly sequenced, the sequence of peptides in bottom-up proteomics is inferred by matching MS/MS spectra against the theoretical spectra of all potential candidate peptides represented in a protein database. All individuals carry missense SNVs that will generate novel variant proteins or proteoforms that are not present in standard protein databases. Without incorporating knowledge of missense SNVs into protein databases prior to LC-MS/MS data analysis, the identification of single amino acid variant (SAAV) peptides is difficult. To overcome this limitation, customized protein sequence databases that integrate genomic or transcriptomic information are being used to identify SAAV peptides.
One proteogenomic approach for detecting novel coding regions and variant peptides includes using databases generated from 6-frame translation of the reference genome from known or predicted transcripts. Although 6-frame translation has the advantage of being independent of any a priori annotation, the approach has major drawbacks because it is computationally expensive and introduces an artificial six-fold increase in the protein database size, which can result in a bias in peptide identification and a substantially inflated false-discovery rate (FDR) since most peptides generated in silico are likely not present in vivo. Other approaches include creation of protein databases that incorporate knowledge of known SNVs and other genomic variants from public repositories (e.g., dbSNP) or even cancer-specific SNPs, such as CanVarPro (human cancer proteome variation) or The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), to construct databases. The main drawback to these approaches is the reduced sensitivity of peptide identification since most of the individual samples being analyzed are not expected to contain most coding variants present in these databases, particularly SAAV peptides that result from rare SNVs. Conversely, a SAAV peptide that results from an SNV not in these public databases would be missed. More recently, the advent of next-generation sequencing has enabled creation of sample-specific databases. One common approach uses RNA-seq data to generate customized cell- or tissue-specific protein databases derived from translation of annotated transcripts. The advantages of this approach are the inclusion of SNVs, alternative transcripts (e.g., splice junction peptides), and alternative start sites that are more likely to be present in the sample. However, the main drawback is that it requires abundant and high-quality RNA to make SNV calling from RNA-seq even moderately reliable. Furthermore, tissue-specific protein databases generated from RNA-seq will not incorporate proteins that are produced in one organ (e.g., liver) and transported to another (e.g., brain). For example, in the brain we have shown that peripheral proteins often found in plasma are commonly deposited in the brain and associated with neurodegenerative disease. Genomic sequencing, e.g. whole-exome sequencing (WES) or whole genome sequencing (WGS), can be used instead of RNA-seq to construct protein databases and may be the only option for human postmortem tissues with poor quality RNA but intact protein.
The goal of this study was to determine the feasibility of measuring allele-specific protein abundance in post-mortem human tissue, and to determine the relative abundance of SAAV and reference peptide pairs. To do this, we first developed an open-source software, GenPro, to create personalized protein databases (PPDs) using variant calls from next-generation genomic sequencing data (e.g., WES, WGS, or RNA-seq). As proof of principle, we then used GenPro to generate PPDs from WES from two individuals. We show these databases do not appreciably differ from standard reference databases (i.e., UniProtKB), aside from variant peptides they introduce. Next, we tested whether we could identify predicted SAAV peptides in postmortem human brain from the same two individuals. To achieve this goal, we deeply profiled the brain proteomes to enhance our probability of detecting sufficient number of SAAV peptides. We employed off-line fractionation with electrostatic repulsion-hydrophilic interaction chromatography (ERLIC) and liquid-chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion. We found an average of approximately 117,000 unique peptides mapping to approximately 9,300 protein groups for each sample. Of these, 977 unique variant peptides were identified across the two samples. Label-free quantification was used to estimate allelic balance of reference and SAAV peptide pairs, i.e. pairs that differ by a single amino acid. On average, reference:SAAV peptides were equally abundant in human brain. We confirmed these findings with measures of the absolute levels of select reference:SAAV peptide pairs using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). This highlights the utility of our discovery-validation pipeline to estimate allele-specific protein balance, which supports a hypothesis that most alleles are equally expressed at in human brain.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
           Supporting Information         
Software available at https://github.com/wingolab-org/GenPro
The following files are available free of charge at ACS website http://pubs.acs.org:
           Author Contributions         
T.S.W. and N.T.S. designed the study. T.S.W. designed and wrote GenPro and performed experiments. D.M.D., M.Z., and E.B.D. performed experiments. All authors contributed to the analysis and interpretation of the data. T.S.W. and N.T.S. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

SDRF SUMMARY:
Total runs: 4
organism: homo sapiens
organism part: dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
disease: normal
developmental stage: adult
instrument: Q Exactive
cleavage agent details: Trypsin
modification parameters: "NT=deamidated;AC=UNIMOD:7;TA=N,Q;MT=Variable"; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation; Phospho
label: label free sample
precursor mass tolerance: 10ppm
fragment mass tolerance: 0.5Da