PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Hepatocyte
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Liver proteome; Heparg cells; Muli-omics; Okadaic acid; Phosphoproteome

ABSTRACT:
Okadaic acid (OA) is a marine biotoxin that can induce diarrheic shellfish poisoning upon consumption. It can accumulate in filter-feeding shellfish, thereby reaching the human food chain. In addition to inducing severe gastrointestinal symptoms, OA can pass the intestinal barrier into the bloodstream, thereby reaching the liver. However, the effects of OA on the liver have not been much in the focus of research so far. Therefore, this study now focuses on elucidating changes in the proteome of HepaRG cells induced by OA. Furthermore, as a potent phosphatase inhibitor, we expected changes in the phosphoproteome of the cells. Therefore, we further investigated the phosphoproteome of the HepaRG cells after OA exposure. Results revealed changes in enzyme activity regulation, cytoskeleton organization and energy metabolism.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A multi-omics approach to elucidate okadaic acid-induced changes in human HepaRG hepatocarcinoma cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For proteome analysis, cells harvested from three independent replicates were processed individually, while samples for phosphopeptide analysis were generated by pooling cells harvested from three independent replicates before lysis. Samples were then prepared according to the instruction manual of the iST sample preparation kit from PreOmics (Planegg/Martinsried, Germany), with the following change:  After lysis, the protein concentration was determined against a bovine serum albumin standard curve using the Bio-Rad protein assay according to the instruction manual (Bio-Rad Laboratories GmbH, Feldkirchen, Germany). Only 100 µg protein was then used for further preparation with the iST sample preparation kit. The resulting peptide solution was diluted 1:20 in 5% acetonitrile (v/v) containing 0.1% formic acid (v/v). For phosphopeptide sample preparation, samples were further processed using the High-SelectTM TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and then reconstituted in 100 µl 5% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. For LC-MS, 3 µl of the peptide solutions or 20 µl of the phosphopeptide solutions were injected to an UltiMate 3000 RLSCnano system coupled on-line to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer via Nanospray Flex Ion Source, operated using Xcalibur 4.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nano viper column (0.75*20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a flow of 5 µL/min with 3% aq. acetonitrile containing 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (45 °C, 5 min). Peptides were then separated on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nano viper column (0.75*500 mm, Thermo Scientific , Bremen, Germany) with a flow of 0.3 µL/min (45 °C) and using linear gradients (starting with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, the content of 80% aq. acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid was increased from 5 to 35% in 90 min and then from 35% to 50% in 5 min). Eluates were evaporated and ionized using a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Analysis was performed using Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were then processed using the ProteomeDiscoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany; version 2.4.1.15) against the human reference proteome accessed at UniProt (UP000005640; date 17/09/2021) using SEQUEST HT as search engine with a maximum missed cleavage of 2, and a precursor mass and a fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Dynamic modifications included oxidation, carbamidomethyl, acetyl and phosphorylation. The precursor Ion quantifier node was used to quantify precursor ions based on the area under the peak. The validation was based on the q-value. False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide and protein identification were set to 1% strict and 5% relaxed. For phosphopeptide analysis, the node PTM RS node was additionally used.

METHODS:
Experimental procedures
Chemicals
OA (purity ≥ 98%) was purchased from Enzo Life Sciences GmbH (Loerrach, Germany). All other standard chemicals and materials were either purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Taufkirchen, Germany) or Roth (Karlsruhe, Germany) in the highest available purity.
Cell cultivation
HepaRG cells were purchased from Biopredic International (Saint-Grégoire, France). They were seeded in 6-well plates (2 × 105 cells/well) and incubated in William’s E medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 5 μg/mL insulin (medium and both supplements from PAN-Biotech GmbH, Aidenbach, Germany), 50 μM hydrocortisone hemisuccinate (Sigma Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin (Capricorn Scientific, Ebsdorfergrund, Germany) for 14 days at 37 °C. Afterwards, 1% DMSO was added to the medium for 2 days to start differentiation. Then, DMSO content was increased to 1.7% for another 12 days, after which the cells were further cultivated in serum-free medium [SFM; William’s E medium without phenol red (PAN-Biotech GmbH, Aidenbach, Germany), supplemented with 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin, 2.5 μM hydrocortisone hemisuccinate, 10 ng/mL human hepatocyte growth factor (Biomol GmbH, Hamburg, Germany), 2 ng/mL mouse epidermal growth factor (Sigma Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany), and 0.5% DMSO], as adapted from Klein et al. (Klein et al.) for two more days. Afterwards, the cells were incubated with 33 or 100 nM OA for up to 24 h. OA concentrations were chosen as previously described (Wuerger et al.; Wuerger et al.). Cells were then harvested in ice-cold PBS and centrifuged (5 min, 2000 × g, 4 °C), and the cell pellets were frozen at -80 °C until use.
RNA preparation and sequencing
For transcriptomics analysis, the cells were washed with ice-cold PBS. Afterwards, they were lysed using ice-cold RLT buffer (RNeasy Mini Kit, Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany) containing 1% β-mercaptoethanol (Merck Schuchardt OHG, Hohenbrunn, Germany). The RNA was then extracted according to the instructions of the Rneasy Mini Kit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany). Concentration and integrity of RNA were evaluated according to the manufacturer’s protocol using the Agilent RNA 6000 Nano LabChip kit in the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA). All RNA integrity numbers (RIN) were above 9.3. Next-generation sequencing was then carried out by Eurofins (Eurofins Scientific, Luxembourg, Luxembourg) using the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform, 2 × 150 bp. Demultiplexing of sequencing reads was accomplished using Illumina bcl2fastq (version 2.20). Depths of ~ 66 million paired-end 150 bp reads were generated for each sample (see Supplemental Table 1 for details). The raw RNA sequencing data are available from GEO under accession number GSE252563. Reads were classified as ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and removed by RiboDetector version 0.2.7 (Deng et al.). Quality and adapter trimming was done by fastp version 0.20.0 (Chen et al.). Reads were aligned to the human genome (hg38, UCSC) using STAR version 2.7.8a (Dobin et al.) and quantified per gene ID by RSEM version 1.3.3 (Li and Dewey).
Shotgun LC–MS
For proteome analysis, proteins were prepared using the iST sample preparation kit (PreOmics, Planegg/Martinsried, Germany) according to the instruction manual, with one change: after lysis, the protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad protein assay according to the instruction manual (Bio-Rad Laboratories GmbH, Feldkirchen, Germany) against a bovine serum albumin standard curve. Based on the protein concentration, only 100 µg of protein was used for sample preparation. The resulting peptide solution was diluted 1:20 with 5% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. For phosphoproteome analysis, cells harvested from three independent replicates were pooled prior to iST preparation and further purified using the High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting peptides were reconstituted in 100 µl 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid.
LC–MS analysis was performed using 3 µl of the peptides or 20 µl of the phosphopeptides on an UltiMate 3000 RLSCnano, that was coupled on-line to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer via Nanospray Flex Ion Source, which was operated using Xcalibur 4.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were trapped using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nano viper column (0.75*20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with a flow of 5 µl/min with 3% aq. acetonitrile containing 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (45 °C, 5 min) and then separated using linear gradients (starting with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, the content of 80% aq. acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid was increased from 5 to 35% in 90 min and then from 35 to 50% in 5 min) on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nano viper column (0.75*500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany; 0.3 µl/min, 45 °C). After separation, the eluates were evaporated and ionized using a stainless-steel emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Analysis was performed using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. To maximize identification outcome, samples were injected once and a brief database search using SEQUEST HT was performed. Based on these results, a time-dependent (± 1 min) exclusion list, which was extended to z = 2, 3, 4, was generated. Afterwards, each sample was analyzed in triplicates.
Raw data were analyzed using the ProteomeDiscoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany; version 2.4.1.15). Human reference protein accessed at UniProt (UP000005640; date 17/09/2021) was used for identification using SEQUEST HT as search engine with a maximum missed cleavage of 2, and a precursor mass and a fragment mass tolerance of 10 ppm. B- and y-ions were both weighted at 1. Oxidation, carbamidomethyl, acetylation, and phosphorylation were selected as dynamic modifications. Precursor ions were quantified using the Precursor Ion quantifier node based on the area under the peak. The validation was based on the q-value. False discovery rates (FDR) for peptide and protein identification were set to 1% strict and 5% relaxed. For phosphopeptide identification, the PTM RS node was additionally used. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides were used for further analysis. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al.) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD048968.
DigiWest®
HepaRG cells were seeded into 25 cm2 flasks and treated as described above. Afterwards, cells were pelleted and frozen in liquid nitrogen until further use. DigiWest® was performed as described before (Treindl et al.). Three independent replicates were pooled prior to the measurements. The original dataset consisting of 182 entries was filtered by removing redundant entries and those below the limit of quantification resulting in 132 unique analytes.
Experimental design and statistical rationale
In this study, we aimed to integrate RNA sequencing, shotgun proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and a targeted DigiWest to gain a comprehensive picture of OA-induced changes in human HepaRG cells. To account for variability, each analysis initially used three biological replicates. Due to sample constraints, however, the biological replicates were pooled prior to the phosphoproteome and DigiWest analyses. This pooling was necessary to meet the sensitivity and depth required for these methods. Despite this limitation, we attempted to mitigate the impact by ensuring comprehensive coverage and reproducibility in our RNA sequencing and proteomic analyses using individual replicates. Samples were collected after 0.5, 4, 12, and 24 h. To account for technical variability, three technical replicates were created in the shotgun and phosphoproteome analyses. The detailed statistical rationale for each analysis is described below in the section “Bioinformatic analysis and statistics”.
Bioinformatic analysis and statistics
After removing genes with low expression (sum of reads across all samples below ten), the retained 22,122 genes were analyzed in R version 4.3.2 (R Core Team) using package DESeq2 version 1.42.0 (Love et al.) using default settings for estimation of size factors and dispersion. Negative Binomial GLM fitting and Wald statistics were applied to test for differential gene expression between each treatment and control conditions, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) was used to control for multiple testing (Benjamini and Hochberg). Only genes with an adjusted p value < 0.1 and |log2FC|> 1 were identified as DEGs and included in the further analyses. Variance stabilizing transformation was applied prior to probabilistic PCA (ppca) on centered data by the R-package pcaMethods version 1.94.0 (Stacklies et al.).
Shotgun proteomics and phosphoproteomics data were filtered for common contaminants like human keratin and proteins with very high NA count were removed, so that 3028 unique proteins and 674 unique peptides were retained, respectively. Phosphoproteomics data were filtered for peptides with a phosphorylation as modification (288 unique entries) and log2FC was calculated relative to the negative control per timepoint. To calculate the actual change of phosphorylation upon OA treatment (in contrast to changed abundances), phosphopeptides were matched to peptides in the Shotgun proteomics dataset and the ratio of both log2FC values was calculated. Statistical significance of Shotgun proteomic changes was determined by Student’s t tests and FDR for multiple testing control (cutoffs: adjusted p value < 0.05 and |log2FC|> 0.5). However, the DigiWest and phosphoproteomic data included only one sample per condition (three biological replicates pooled). Thus, statistical significance could not be estimated and |log2FC|> 1 was set as cutoff to define relevant changes.
OmniPathR R-package version 3.10.1 (Türei et al.) was used to collect protein–protein and kinase interactions for selected proteins of interest (POI) and phosphatases, followed by building a network with the shortest path via intermediate regulators using the R-package igraph version 1.6.0 (Csardi and Nepusz). POI for actin cytoskeleton organization were selected based on the Gene Ontology (GO) terms “actin filament binding” (GO:0051015), “actin filament organization” (GO:0007015), “actin cytoskeleton” (GO:0015629), and “actin cytoskeleton organization” (GO:0030036).
Kinase-substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) was performed using the KSEA App (https://casecpb.shinyapps.io/ksea/) using PhosphoSitePlus and NetworKIN (NetworKIN score cutoff = 1) as the kinase-substrate dataset. Log2FC ratios of phosphopeptides served as input and Z-Scores were used as output for further visualization (Casado; Wiredja et al.). Cytoscape version 3.10.1 was used to create a signaling network including selected protein kinases based on the apps OmniPath version 2.3, PathLinker version 1.4.3 and Omics Visualizer version 1.3.1 where Z-Scores from KSEA and log2FC values are overlayed to nodes.
GO term enrichment analysis was performed using R-package clusterProfiler version 4.10.0 (Wu et al.), specifically the “compareCluster” function to compare multiple conditions and visualized by dot-plots of the top enriched terms. Heatmaps were created with the R-package ComplexHeatmap version 2.18.0 (Gu et al.) using default settings if not mentioned otherwise. K-means clustering was performed by the R-package stats for various omics data as input with manually chosen number of centers. For pathway analysis, transcriptomic data were analyzed through the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; QIAGEN Inc., https://digitalinsights.qiagen.com/products-overview/discovery-insights-portfolio/analysis-and-visualization/qiagen-ipa/; IPA Winter Release December 2023).

RESULTS:
Results
Transcriptomics
To detect gene expression changes upon okadaic acid (OA) treatment for 24 h in HepaRG cells, we performed RNA sequencing and differential gene expression (DGE) analysis. As described in the Materials and methods section, raw counts were filtered resulting in 22,122 genes expressed above the threshold. After normalization and transformation of processed counts data, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was used to visualize and reduce the complexity of the dataset. Figure 1A shows the PCA scores plot for all twelve samples analyzed by RNAseq. PC1 and PC2 representing most of the variance clearly separate the samples treated with an increasing concentration of OA from the negative control. This is also reflected by the number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that peaks at 4200 down- and 3586 up-regulated upon treatment with 100 nM OA (Fig. 1C). We found that 184 and 513 genes were significantly down- and up-regulated in common between all concentrations of OA treatment, respectively (Supplemental Fig. 1). Overall, there were 8181 genes that were significantly changed in their expression in at least one condition which reflects 36.9% of the studied genes (Supplemental Table S5).
In our study, GO term enrichment analysis was performed to identify significant biological processes affected by different concentrations of OA. In summary of the dot-plot in Fig. 2, the analysis highlighted that genes up-regulated at 33 nM were predominantly associated with cell cycle regulation and DNA replication. At higher concentrations (100 nM) also GO terms related to reactive oxygen species (ROS) and apoptosis signaling pathways were associated (Fig. 2). Down-regulated genes were consistently enriched for fatty acid and xenobiotic metabolism for both OA concentrations. The underlying CAR signaling pathway is depicted for OA 33 nM treatment based on top “canonical pathways” results from Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) in Fig. 3 with key regulators, such as RXRA, NCOA, and CAR (NR1I3) itself showing decreased gene expression. CAR-regulated targets, including CYPs, UGTs, and transporters (e.g., SLCO1B1, ABCC3), are also down-regulated leading to an inactivation of the downstream xenobiotic metabolism.
Shotgun proteomics
In addition to RNA sequencing, we also carried out Shotgun Proteomics analysis to identify proteins that were affected by OA (33 and 100 nM) in their expression. As the transcriptomic analysis focused exclusively on the changes in signaling pathways after 24 h, we wanted to include the relevant protein changes at earlier time points (0.5 and 4 h) as well. After processing and filtering the dataset as described in the Materials and methods section, 3028 unique proteins were detected and quantified. The PCA scores plot for all 27 samples analyzed by Shotgun Proteomics, depicted in Fig. 1B, clusters the samples along PC1 and PC2 based on factors of concentration and time. The samples of each time point are separated by the increasing OA concentration, as the samples of 100 nM are more distant from the negative control than those of 33 nM. The treatment effects on the proteome for 0.5 and 4 h seem to be more similar to each other as the samples are clustering together, while those for 24 h treatment were separated.
Subsequently, each OA treatment was compared to the negative control of the respective time point using Student’s t test, and significant protein changes were considered for adjusted p values < 0.05 and |log2FC|> 0.5. In general, the percentage of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) was 31.3% (947 proteins changed in at least one condition), which is quite similar to the mRNA level even if the absolute numbers are lower.
In agreement with the PCA scores plot, the concentration-dependent effect on the number of DEPs is also indicated in Fig. 1D as already observed for DEGs (Fig. 1C). When comparing the DEGs identified by RNAseq with deregulated proteins, we found an overlap of 71 and 173 molecules for treatment with 33 and 100 nM OA, respectively (Fig. 1E–F). For instance, SERPINB2, ITGA2, and SLC1A5 were commonly up-regulated, while CYP2E1, FABP1, and ADH1B were down-regulated at OA both levels. Interestingly, the extent of up- or down-regulation seemed to be higher at the transcriptomic than at the proteomic level which is apparent from the heatmaps in Supplemental Fig. 2. Indeed, correlation analysis of log2FC values (100 nM OA) of both omics levels results in a correlation coefficient of 0.79 and a slope of 2.38 for linear model of transcriptomics in dependence of proteomics. Also, for 33 nM OA, a factor > 2 was derived for this significant relationship, as summarized in Supplemental Fig. 3. Besides this set of commonly regulated molecules, each level showed specifically deregulated genes or proteins that were not identified by the other method.
Next, we analyzed the overlaps between sets of DEPs and visualized them in Venn diagrams. For both OA concentrations, they indicate rather distinct proteomic changes at the early stage (0.5 and 4 h) and late stage (24 h) as there are many specific proteins at each condition and few common DEPs (Supplemental Fig. 4).
To get a better understanding of the biological pathways affected by OA treatment over time, we performed kmeans clustering analysis to group all 947 DEPs into eight clusters. The boxplots in Fig. 4 show the different concentration- and time-dependent proteomic changes and the enriched GO terms associated with each cluster are summarized in Supplemental Table 2. Cluster 2 contains 100 proteins, such as CYP2E1, ABCC3, and FABP1, that are mainly down-regulated after 24 h and enriched for GO terms related to xenobiotic and lipid metabolism (Supplemental Fig. 5A). However, cluster 4 reflects an early proteomic response including 155 down-regulated proteins that are associated with ribosome biogenesis and translation, e.g., RRP8, RPL28, and EIF5B. Multiple clusters indicate different patterns of up-regulated proteins, as clusters 1 and 7 are reaching the maximum expression after 24 h, while clusters 3, 5, and 6 are showing early proteomic changes upon OA treatment. Clusters 3, 5, and 6 are mainly enriched for biological processes like RNA splicing and fatty acid metabolism; on the other hand, proteins in cluster 1 and 7 are associated with apoptosis and mRNA stabilization, respectively. Moreover, proteins involved in actin filament organization appear in cluster 6 (early up-regulation, e.g., CTNNA2, PAK1, and SPTBN4) and 7 (late up-regulation, e.g., MARCKS, STMN1, and ZYX), as summarized in Supplemental Fig. 5B.
Phosphoproteomics
As a potent phosphatase inhibitor of mainly PP1 and PP2A, effects of OA on the phosphorylation status of the cells were expected. To investigate the signaling events associated with OA treatment and subsequent PP1 and PP2A inhibition, we performed LC–MS-based profiling of enriched phosphopeptides. In total, we detected 288 unique phosphopeptides that were used as input for a PCA plot that shows a clear separation of samples according to concentration and duration of the OA treatment (Supplemental Fig. 6A). To distinguish changed phosphoprotein abundances from altered phosphorylation status, we performed a pairwise normalization of enriched phosphopeptides relative to their counterparts in the non-enriched shotgun proteomics dataset. From the total number of 288 phosphopeptides, 72 could be matched to peptides from the shotgun data which resulted in log2FC ratios.
Strikingly, OA treatment results in a global increase in phosphorylation status as indicated by the shift of log2FC ratios to the positive values in Fig. 5. This effect is even more pronounced for treatment with 100 nM OA compared to 30 nM with median values of 0.631 and 0.490, respectively (see Supplemental Table 3 for details). This observation is also reflected by a higher number of phosphopeptides with increased log2FC ratios than decreased values (Supplemental Fig. 7A) peaking after 4 h of OA treatment.
To get a better understanding of the patterns in the phosphoproteome data, we analyzed the 72 matched phosphopeptides by kmeans clustering (Fig. 6). The five resulting groups reflect similarly reacting phosphopeptides upon OA treatment, such as cluster 1 containing 24 molecules (e.g., ADD3, PLEC, and SPTBN1) that accumulated phosphorylations after 0.5 h and 4 h, but this effect reversed after 24 h. Cluster 2 is also showing an increased phosphorylation status but not immediately, rather after 4 or 24 h with proteins like MTDH, NDRG2, and EIF4B. The biggest increase was observed for FKBP5 and USP5 in cluster 4. Across the entire dataset, there is a striking overrepresentation of proteins associated to actin filament organization, microtubule, and cadherin binding, highlighting a broad impact of OA treatment beyond the specific clusters identified.
Based on GO term annotation related to actin cytoskeleton, a subset of genes was selected for a more detailed inspection. Especially, after 4 h and 24 h, OA treatments lead to a pronounced increase of phosphorylation for PALLD, PLEC, AFDN, MARCKS, AHNAK, and SEPTIN9 (Fig. 7A). To get a better understanding of the signaling network around the proteins of interest existing knowledge for protein–protein interactions (PPIs) and kinase–substrate relationships from OmniPath utilized. The derived network in Fig. 7B shows the interactions between the primary OA targets PP1 and PP2A, selected proteins of interest (POI) and kinases as intermediate regulators. Among the most connected kinases in the network, we identified MAPK1 (ERK2), MAPK3 (ERK1), AKT1, CDK1, CDK2, GSK3B, TP53, PRKCA, and PRKCB as potential key regulators for POI that are associated with downstream effects in the actin cytoskeleton organization. Then, we explored phosphopeptides related to microtubule and cadherin binding that partially overlapped with POI for actin binding. Additionally, we recognized NDRG1 and DYNC1I2 as phosphorylated POI for microtubule organization and CTNND1 and PPL for cadherin binding/focal adhesion (Supplemental Fig. 8).
DigiWest (targeted proteins)
In a targeted approach, we used the targeted DigiWest method to complement the previous untargeted (phospho)-proteomic methods, covering 132 analytes that correspond to 97 unique proteins (some with different modifications). Fig. 8B illustrates that the majority of those proteins (63%) could exclusively be detected by DigiWest. Similar to the phosphoproteome data, samples cluster according to OA concentration and treatment duration in the PCA scores plot (Supplemental Fig. 6B). This is also exemplified by the rising number of down- or up-regulated analytes (|log2FC|> 1) with increasing OA concentration and over time (Supplemental Fig. 7B). However, we observed an early regulation at the proteome level already 0.5 h after OA treatment, which is in agreement with the Shotgun Proteomics data (Fig. 1D).
Kmeans clustering was applied to group similarly behaving analytes into groups as summarized by boxplots in Fig. 8A. Cluster 2 and 5 show strong accumulation upon OA treatment of 12 and 24 h, especially for 100 nM. Among them are the phosphorylated proteins RPS6, JUN and RB (cluster 2) as well as MAPK/CDK substrates, GSK3A/B, and FOXO3 (cluster 5). In contrast, cluster 4 reflects a moderate down-regulation of 25 analytes after longer OA 100 nM treatment, such as CYP2B6, MDM2, PTEN, NFκB2, and DVL3. Early down-regulation of PAK1/2, FOXO1, and AKT1 is depicted in cluster 1 and 3, while cluster 6 shows the opposite; namely early up-regulation of PIK3R1, ERK2, HSP27, and RICTOR (Supplemental Fig. 9).
A comparison of proteins detected by Shotgun Proteomics and DigiWest yielded an overlap of 31 analytes that was explored in more detail by a heatmap (Supplemental Fig. 10). As expected, the similarity between DigiWest and Shotgun Proteomics was higher to each other than to RNAseq log2FC values. The protein RPS6 was detected in the DigiWest in the form of different phosphorylated variants and showed a clear up-regulation, while the corresponding gene was slightly down-regulated. In contrast, the bottom of the heatmap depicts a group of down-regulated proteins (e.g., DEPTOR3, MAPK3/ERK1, IDH, and RAD23B), for which transcriptomic and proteomic data are in good agreement. Remarkably, this heatmap features many genes/proteins related to the NF-κB signaling pathway, such as NFKB2, EIF4E, EIF2S1, CREB1, PDK1, and PAK2, as well multiple MAP kinases. All of them are significantly up-regulated at the transcriptomic level, while the proteomic level is not giving such a clear picture. NFKB2, EIF4E (S209), and CREB1 (S133) are increased after 24 h and MAPK1/ERK2 (T202/Y204) is increased already after 0.5 h. However, the (phospho-)protein levels of the other molecules are unchanged upon treatment or in some cases decreased after 0.5 h, e.g., PAK1/2 (S144/S141) and EIF2S1 (S51).
Integrative phosphorylation analysis
To identify which kinases might be responsible for downstream phosphorylation changes, we applied Kinase-Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA). The top overrepresented kinases were PAK1, CAMK2A, AURKB, and CDK1 based on the Z-Score (Supplemental Table 4). Subsequently, Shotgun Proteomics and DigiWest data were matched to KSEA results and summarized in a heatmap (Fig. 9A) of log2FC values and corresponding Z-Scores. Most strikingly, PAK1 (S144/S141) accumulated over time as measured by DigiWest, which is reflected by an increasing Z-Score. In contrast, KSEA revealed decreased activity of MAPK3 (ERK1), which is in line with the down-regulation upon OA treatment according to DigiWest and Shotgun Proteomics. Furthermore, DigiWest data point to a slight decrease of GSK3A and GSK3B protein levels, while the phosphorylated forms of those kinases (GSK3A-S21, GSK3B-S9) accumulated over time, especially at 100 nM OA. KSEA hints to an early inhibition of GSK3A and GSK3B but slight activation after 24 h.
RNAseq results were integrated with Z-Scores of KSEA in a knowledge-based signaling network for OA 100 nM treatment (Fig. 9B). Overall, this network includes many kinases involved in MAPK, Wnt, or NF-κB signaling, such as MAPK1, MAPK8, PRKCA, PRKCG, CNSK1A1, GSK3A, GSK3B, IKBKB, and CHUK (= IKKA) as well as cytoskeleton organization similar to the network in Fig. 7B. MAPK3 (= ERK1) and PRKG2 were down-regulated at the transcriptomic level and KSEA also points to an inactivation, while PRKCD and CHUK (= IKKA) were up-regulated and KSEA hints to the same direction. However, there are a number of kinases, such as CK1, PAK1, and MARK1, for which gene expression and predicted kinase activity are somewhat contradictory, probably due to other regulatory mechanisms which are opposing the correlation between mRNA and protein levels.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Harmful algae blooms are an event of an explosive growth of phytoplanktonic algae, thereby discoloring the water. These algae produce so-called marine biotoxins. Due to climate change and human industrial waste, these harmful algae blooms occur more often in the recent years (Van Dolah). The marine biotoxins can enter the human food chain by accumulating in filter-feeding shellfish, thereby posing a threat to human health. The most prevalent marine biotoxin in European waters is okadaic acid (OA), which is produced by dinoflagellates of the genus Dinophysis and Prorocentrum (EFSA). They mainly produce the toxin to gain a competitive advantage against zooplankton (Gong et al.).
OA is the main causative agent for diarrheic shellfish poisoning (DSP), which leads to severe gastrointestinal symptoms like stomach pain, vomiting, or diarrhea. OA is very lipophilic, thereby able to accumulate in the fatty tissue of filter-feeding shellfish (EFSA). Its structure was first published by Tachibana et al. in 1981, after it had been isolated from the marine-sponge Halichondria okadai (Tachibana et al.). In 1988, the inhibitory potential of OA on protein phosphatases, mainly protein phosphatases 1 and 2 (PP1 and PP2A), was published (Bialojan and Takai). OA was shown to be cytotoxic (Fessard et al.; Le Hégarat et al.; Ferron et al.) in vitro. Furthermore, it potently exerts embryotoxicity in vitro (Ehlers et al.; Ariu et al.), and although there has not been an evaluation in humans so far, it was able to pass the placental barrier in mice (Matias and Creppy). OA also shows tumor promoting properties (Suganuma et al.; Suganuma et al.; Fujiki and Suganuma; Messner et al., Jiménez-Cárcamo et al.) and has also been associated with several cases of colorectal cancer in epidemiological studies (Cordier et al.; Lopez-Rodas et al.; Manerio et al.). Because of the clear consumer risks, the European union implemented a limit of 160 µg OA equivalents per kg shellfish (EFSA). However, this was based on the acute toxic effects and did not take into account long-term effects of lower doses, especially in organs other than the intestine.
OA is actively transported from the intestine into the bloodstream (Ehlers et al.). It is furthermore able to disrupt tight junction proteins, which may further contribute to an uptake of OA into the bloodstream (Dietrich et al.; Huang et al.). There is also evidence that OA is distributed throughout the body, with a particularly long retention time in the liver (Matias et al.; Ito et al.; Louzao et al.). OA can also enter the enterohepatic circulation (Matias and Creppy). With all this evidence, it is imperative to study the effects of OA on the liver.
It was recently shown that OA is able to strongly down-regulate cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes at the RNA and protein levels in HepaRG cells. Furthermore, several other proteins of xenobiotic metabolism were also affected (Wuerger et al.). The effect on the CYP enzymes seems to be dependent on an activation of nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) and a subsequent activation of the Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) (JAK/STAT) signaling pathway through the release of several proinflammatory cytokines (Wuerger et al.). However, as OA is a potent phosphatase inhibitor, we expect additional, more global effects of OA on signaling in liver. In a recent proteomics study, we were able to find effects of OA on energy homeostasis, inflammation, and signal transduction in HepaRG cells (Wuerger et al.). However, this study was limited with respect to its scope and methodology. In this study, we used differentiated HepaRG cells and incubated them with non-toxic OA concentrations for different time periods. The human hepatocarcinoma cell line HepaRG can be differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells using DMSO. Differentiated HepaRG cells express liver-specific enzymes at similar levels to primary human hepatocytes (Kanebratt and Andersson, Tascher et al.). Therefore, they are a fitting in vitro model for our study.
Using these cells, we here provide a more advanced and comprehensive characterization of the liver proteome after OA, exposure using an integrative multi-omics approach, encompassing RNA sequencing, shotgun proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and targeted DigiWest analysis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
The raw RNA sequencing data are available from GEO under accession number GSE252563. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the identifier PXD048968. Further data are contained within the Supplementary Material or are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Declarations