PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Cell invasion; Axl; Hepatocellular carcinoma.; Gas6

ABSTRACT:
We investigated which signaling pathways downstream of Gas6/Axl promote the invasive phenotype of liver cancer cells. Thus, we performed phospho-proteomic analysis of MR hepatocytes and those expressing Axl (MR-Axl) in the presence and absence of Gas6. Protein-clustering based on the pattern of phosphorylation across the conditions and samples revealed four clusters: phospho-sites that are upregulated dependent on Axl expression (cluster 1) or Gas6 expression (cluster 2) and phospho-sites that are downregulated dependent on Axl expression (cluster 3) or Gas6 expression (cluster 4). Functional enrichment analysis showed enrichment of protein sets associated with cellular polarity and motility depending on changes in Axl expression and Gas6 activation. Furthermore, we analyzed phospho-proteomic data to estimate the activity of kinases based on kinase-substrate interactions using PhosR. Kinase perturbation analysis indicated mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) as the one with the highest upregulated activity in Gas6-stimulated MR-Axl cells compared to Gas6-stimulated MR cells. Accordingly, we analyzed substrates of mTOR and found that phosphorylation of Akt1 (Ser473) was upregulated in cluster 1 and highly increased in Gas6-stimulated MR-Axl, suggesting that Akt is regulated by Axl.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Gas6/Axl signaling activates Akt in liver cancer cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
To identify Gas6/Axl regulated phosphorylated events, MR and MR-A cells were stimulated with Gas6 (500 ng/ml) or vehicle (PBS). Cells were washed 3 times with PBS and collected in 1.5 ml tubes, centrifuged and snap frozen. The cell pellets were subjected to further analysis at the Mass Spectrometry Facility of the Max Perutz Labs in Vienna. Cell pellets were resuspended in Lysis buffer (8 M urea (VWR), 50 mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, 5 mM sodium butyrate (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 ng/ml NAM (Sigma Aldrich), 10 ng/ml trichostatin A (TSA) (Sigma Aldrich), 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (+EDTA) (Roche), 250 U/replicate benzonase (Merck, 1.01695.0001)), lysed using a Bioruptor sonication device (Diagenode) (settings: 30 sec sonication (power level H, 30 sec cooling, 5 cycles), centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C and precipitated with 4x volumes of cold (-20°C) 100% acetone (overnight, 4°C). Protein pellets were washed with cold (-20°C) 80% acetone, air dried for 5 min, dissolved in 8 M urea, 50 mM ABC (Sigma Aldrich, 09830-500G), reduced with 10 mM DTT (Roche, 10197777001) for 45 min at RT, and subsequently carbamidomethylated with 20 mM IAA (Sigma Aldrich, I6125-5G) for 30 min at RT in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT for 10 min. The urea concentration was reduced to 4 M using 50 mM ABC. Samples were pre-digested for 90 min at 37°C with Lys-C (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, 125-02543) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 and subsequently reduced to 1 M Urea using 50 mM ABC and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spec Grade, Promega, V5280) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50. Digests were stopped by acidification with TFA (Thermo Scientific, 28903) (0.5% final concentration) and desalted on a 50 mg tC18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters, WAT054960). Peptide concentrations were determined and adjusted according to UV chromatogram peaks obtained with an UltiMate 3000 Dual LC nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a monolithic C18 column (Phenomenex). Desalted samples were concentrated in a SpeedVac concentrator (Eppendorf) and subsequently lyophilized overnight. Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 50 μl 100 mM TEAB (Sigma). 450 μg of each TMT pro reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were dissolved in 30 μl of 100% anhydrous acetonitrile and 30 μl was added to the 20µl/300µg peptide/TEAB mixes. Labels used: 126C: Ras1; 127C: Ras2; 127N: Axl wt1; 128N: Axl wt2; 129C: Ras3; 129N: Axl wt3; 130C: Ras1+Gas6; 130N: Axl wt1+Gas6; 131C Axl wt2+Gas6; 131N: Axl wt2+Gas6; 132C: Ras3+Gas6; 132N: Axl wt3+Gas6; 133C Axl wt2+Gas6 +Axl decoy; 133N: Axl wt1+Gas6 +Axl decoy; 134N: Axl wt3+Gas6 +Axl decoy. Samples were labeled for 60 min at RT. 0.1 μl of each sample were pooled, mixed with 10 μl 0.1% TFA, and analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) to check labeling efficiency. For quenching, 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine was added and the reaction was incubated for 25 min at RT. Samples were pooled and subsequently desalted with Sep-Pak tC-18 cartridges (Waters). Desalted samples were dried for 30 min in a SpeedVac vacuum centrifuge and subsequently lyophilized overnight.   10%TFA was used to adjust the pH of the mix to less than 7 before neutral pH fractionation was performed using a 60 min gradient of 4.5 to 45% ACN (VWR, 83639.320) in 10 mM ammonium formate (1ml formic acid (Merck, 1.11670.1000), 3ml ammonia (13N) (1.05432.1000) in 300ml H2O, pH = 7 - 8, dilute 1:10) on an UltiMate 3000 Dual LC nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 (130 Å, 3.5 μm, 4.6 mm x 250 mm) column (Waters) (flow rate of 1.0 ml / min). Fractions were collected and subsequently pooled in a non-contiguous manner into 8 pools, and lyophilized overnight. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using TiO2. An aliquot (peptide: TiO2 resin = 1:6) of TiO2 (Titansphere TiO, GL Sciences, 5020-75000) was washed twice with 50% methanol (Fisher chemical, A456-212) and twice with glycolic acid solution (1 M glycolic acid (Sigma Aldrich, 124737-25G), 70% ACN (VWR, 83639.320), 3% TFA (Thermo Scientific, 28903)). Lyophilized peptides were dissolved in glycolic acid solution, mixed with the TiO2 resin, and incubated rotating at RT for 30 min. Samples were loaded onto Mobicol columns (MoBiTec, M1003, M2110) and shortly centrifuged in a table centrifuge to remove unphosphorylated peptides. Phosphorylated peptides will bind to the TiO2 resin. The resin was washed twice with glycolic acid solution, twice with 200 µl 70%, ACN 3%, TFA and twice with 1% ACN, 0,1% TFA. Phosphorylated peptides were eluted twice using 150 µl 300 mM ammonium hydroxide (VWR, 1.05432.1000), eluates were united and immediately acidified with conc. TFA to a pH of 2,5. Samples were desalted using a standard C18 (Empore, 2215-C18) StageTip protocol, dried using a SpeedVac (Eppendorf) and dissolved in 20 ml 2% ACN, 0,1% TFA.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw files were split according to CVs (-40V, -55V, -70V) using FreeStyle 1.7 software (Thermo Scientific). All raw MS data were commonly analyzed using MaxQuant software version 2.1.0.0, with TMT16 isobaric label as MS2 reporter ions using default parameters with the following modifications. Proteome and phosphorylome raw data were included in the same search but in separate parameter groups. They were searched against the Uniprot mouse proteome database (release 2022.02) and a database of common laboratory contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”, the minimal peptide length was set to 7 and the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2 for proteome and phosphorylome data. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification. “Acetyl (Protein N-term)”, “Oxidation (M)”, “Deamidation(NQ)” were set as variable modifications. A maximum of 5 variable modifications per peptide was allowed. For search groups containing phosphorylome files “Phospho (STY)” were, respectively, set as additional variable modification. All data filtered at 1% PSM+protein+site FDR; reverse hits were removed. The identification and quantification information of peptides, sites, and proteins was obtained from the MaxQuant “Phospho (STY) Sites”, “ModificationSpecificPeptides”, and “ProteinGroups” tables.  Data were analyzed in R (4.2.0) using custom scripts. The analysis procedure covered: correction for isotopic impurities of labels, normalization, and statistical between-group comparisons using LIMMA. To account for differences of protein abundance on phosphorylation-site level, site intensities were normalized to protein intensities before group comparisons with LIMMA.

METHODS:
4. Material and Methods
4.1. Cell Culture
Hepatocytes were isolated from livers of p19ARF−/−/Axl−/− mice after perfusion as described. Notably, p19ARF deficiency allows for the immortalization of murine hepatocytes without losing genetic stability. The cells were further virally transduced with a vector expressing oncogenic H-Ras to generate neoplastic MR cells lacking p19ARF and Axl. To investigate the role of Axl, MR cells were transduced with a vector (pWPI; Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA) expressing wild-type Axl and GFP to generate MR-Axl cells. MR and MR-Axl cells were cultured on collagen-coated dishes. MR, MR-Axl, Huh7 and Huh7-Axl were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% FCS (Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA, USA) and 100 U/mL Penicillin/Streptomycin (Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Hep3B-GFP and Hep3B-Axl were cultured in EMEM (Life Technologies; Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% FCS and 100 U/mL Penicillin/Streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2. The Huh7 and Hep3B cell lines were purchased from ATCC. The identity of the cell lines was confirmed by a short tandem repeat analysis. All the cells were routinely screened for the absence of mycoplasma.
4.2. Patient Samples
Patients were enrolled at the General Hospital of Vienna/Medical University of Vienna and the hospital Klinik Landstrasse (Austria). The inclusion criteria encompassed patients aged between 18 and 90 years undergoing surgical resection for primary or secondary liver malignancies, with prerequisites to adhere to the study protocol and signing an informed consent. Based on the guidelines of the European Association for the Study of the Liver, HCC was diagnosed by histology or dynamic imaging, such as computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging. In accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki from 1964 including the current revisions, this study was approved by the ethics committee of the Medical University of Vienna (1186/2018). All patients signed an informed consent form prior to inclusion in this study. For the Kaplan–Meier analysis, the patients were separated into “high” and “low” CD45+ CD8+, CD45+ Granzyme B+, Axl+ CD45+ and Axl+ CD31- αSMA- CD45- tumor infiltration.
4.3. In Silico Analysis
The gene expression data from normal adjacent liver and primary HCC tissue were retrieved from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Liver Cancer cohort (LIHC), which was downloaded from the open-source Xenabrowser. The Pearson correlation co-efficient was determined using GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The Kaplan–Meier plots of the HCC patients based on mRNA expression were generated using the Kaplan–Meier Plotter “ on 5 May 2022)”.
4.4. Proliferation Kinetics
In total, 2.5 × 104 of each of the MR and MR-Axl cells were seeded in triplicate into 12-well plates to perform cumulative proliferation kinetics as described. The MR and MR-Axl cells were treated either with the Gas6 (500 ng/mL), Axl decoy (50 µg/mL), combination or vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline, PBS). In total, 2 × 104 cells of the Hep3B-GFP and Hep3B-Axl cells were seeded in triplicate into 12-well plates. The cell numbers were determined every second to third day for 7 days using the CASY cell counter (Schärfe Systems, Reutlingen, Germany).
4.5. Invasion Assay
In total, 1 × 103 MR, MR-Axl, Hep3B-GFP or Hep3B-Axl cells were seeded into U-bottom-shaped ultra-low attachment plates (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria) and incubated for 72 h to form spheres. After incubation, the spheroids were embedded in a 1.5 mg/mL rat-tail collagen I supplemented with 0.125% sodium bicarbonate, 15 mM HEPES and 2% FCS as described. Gas6 (500 ng/mL), MK2206 (1.25 µM) or the respective vehicle were added into the collagen matrix and media prior to incubation for 24 h. The images of the spheres were taken by the TiEclipse phase contrast microscopy (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan) and analyzed using ImageJ version 1.38 (ImageJ, Bethesda, MD, USA). The invaded area was calculated by subtracting the core area of the spheroid from the total spheroid area.
4.6. Quantitative PCR (qPCR)
RNA was isolated from cells using the Monarch total RNA isolation kit (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA). The RNA was transcribed into cDNA using the cDNA iScriptTM kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). For the quantification of mRNA expression, the LUNA qPCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) and the BioRad CFX Connect Real-Time PCR system (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) were used. The initial denaturation was performed at 95 °C for 1 min, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 15 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s and extension at 60 °C for 1 min. The primers specific for individual targets are listed in Table S1. 28S was used as the housekeeping gene. The expression of the transcripts was calculated using the CFX Maestro Software version 4.0.2325.0418 (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). The 2–∆∆Ct method was used for the quantification of the RT qPCR.
4.7. Immunofluorescence Analysis of Spheroids
MR and MR-Axl spheroids were each collected in PBS and centrifuged onto glass slides by cytospin (EprediaTM; Kalamazoo, MI; USA). Afterwards, the spheroids were fixed in cold methanol/acetone (1:1) for 20 min. The cells were washed with PBS and blocked for 1 h with mouse IgG (M.O.M Blocking reagent; Agilent; Santa Clara, CA, USA) and 30 min with 5% goat serum in PBS. After blocking, the spheroids were washed and incubated with anti-E-cadherin (1:50; mouse; BD Biosciences; #610182) and anti-actin (1:50; rabbit; Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA; #A2066) antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Next, the spheroids were washed and incubated with goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor488 (1:200; Invitrogen; #A-11008) and goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor647 (1:200; Invitrogen; #A-11001) in 5% goat serum/PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Finally, the spheroids were incubated with Hoechst dye (5 µg/mL) for 5 min and washed. The spheroids were mounted with mounting medium (ProLongTM Glass Antifade, InvitrogenTM; Waltham, MA, USA) and dried overnight at 4 °C before imaging with the IXplore Spinning Disk Confocal system (Olympus; Tokyo; Japan). The intensities of E-cadherin and actin expression were analyzed using the cellSens software version 3.2 (Olympus; Tokyo; Japan). E-cadherin expression was normalized to actin expression.
4.8. Phospho-Proteomics by Mass Spectrometry (MS)
To identify the Gas6/Axl-regulated phosphorylated events, MR and MR-Axl cells were stimulated with Gas6 (500 ng/mL) or the vehicle (PBS). The cells were washed three times with PBS and collected in a 1.5 mL tube, centrifuged and snap frozen. The cell pellets were analyzed at the Mass Spectrometry Facility of the Max Perutz Labs (Vienna, Austria). After lysis of the cells, an analysis of the proteins was performed on an UltiMate 3000 Dual Liquid chromatography (LC) nano-HPLC System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific), containing both a trapping column for the peptide concentration (PepMap C18, 5 × 0.3 mm, 5 μm particle size) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 500 × 0.075 μm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) via a FAIMS Pro ion source (Thermo Fisher). The details of the sample preparation and LC/MS analysis are described in the Supplementary Material and Method.
4.9. Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis
The normalized phospho-proteomics intensities were log2-transformed. The proteins and corresponding genes showing significant differences among each pair of conditions were defined as those with at least one phosphorylation site showing a statistically significant difference (adjusted p < 0.05) and either an increase or a decrease of 20% in the phosphorylation level. The principal component analysis was performed on the entire set of phospho-sites. The analysis revealed a clear separation of the MR and MR-Axl cells. To enhance precision, the analysis was refined by focusing on the top 3000 most variable sites, taking parameters such as the Fano factor and the establishment of a minimum average intensity threshold into account. The clustering of the significantly changed phospho-sites was performed using k-means clustering from the ComplexHeatmap package (v2.6.2) with k = 4. This number of k was empirically optimized by inspecting the dendrogram obtained by hierarchical clustering, using the same parameters (Euclidean distance and complete linkage). The enrichr function from the clusterProfiler package (v 3.18.1) was used to perform the gene set enrichment analyses. Only those gene sets with at least two genes corresponding to the considered input set of differentially phosphorylated proteins were retained. Only the gene sets with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 in at least one comparison were retained for further consideration and analyses. The MSigDB Hallmark Gene Sets and KEGG Pathways were retrieved via the msigdbr package (v7.2.1). The bubble-plots were generated using ggplot2 (v 3.4.1). The PhosphoSite.mouse dataset from the PhosR package (v1.0.0) was then used as the reference annotation. A direction analysis was performed using the directPA package (v 1.5) separately for each direction. Direction n = 1 highlighted those kinases, or targets thereof, that are preferentially activated in Gas6-stimulated MR-Axl cells compared to Gas6-stimulated MR cells. Direction n = −1 highlighted instead those preferentially activated in Gas6-stimulated MR cells. The results were plotted using the perturbPlot2d function. These steps were all performed using the R statistical environment v4.0.4.
4.10. Western Blotting
Western blotting was performed as described previously. The primary anti-Axl (1:2500; R&D, Boston, MA, USA; #AF154), anti-pAkt Ser 473 (1:500; Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA; #4060), anti-Akt (1:500; Cell Signaling #4685) and anti-actin (1:2500; Sigma, Singapore; #A2066) antibodies were diluted in 5% BSA TBS-T (0.1% Tween) and incubated at 4 °C overnight with gentle agitation. The intensities of the individual proteins were assessed by densitometry for further normalization.
4.11. Cytokine Array
For the detection of cytokines in Axl−/− and Axl+/+ tumors, the mouse inflammation antibody array (Abcam; #ab133999) was used according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, the bulk tumor tissue (n = 4 tumors per group) was lysed using the buffer provided by the manufacturer. The antibody-spotted membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature. The cell lysates containing 250 µg protein were subjected to each membrane and incubated overnight at 4 °C with slight agitation. After incubation, the membranes were washed and incubated with biotinylated antibodies and HRP-labeled conjugates. After washing, the membranes were overlaid with detection buffer and exposed to X-ray films for different timepoints. The spots were analyzed using ImageJ version 1.38 (ImageJ, Bethesda, MD, USA) and the spot intensities were normalized to control spots on the respective membrane.
4.12. Animal Experiments
The animal husbandry and animal procedures were approved according to the Austrian guidelines for animal care and protection (BMBWF-66.009/0233-V/3b/2019). All the experiments were conducted in agreement with these protocols. For the endogenous mouse model of liver tumorigenesis, the Albumin-Cre expressing mice were bred with mice having floxed Axl alleles (Axlfl/fl) to delete Axl specifically in hepatocytes (thereof AxlΔhep mice,). To study the systemic effects of Axl, we used Axl−/− and Axl wild-type mice (Axl+/+). To induce endogenous liver tumor formation, diethylnitrosamine (DEN) (25 mg/kg) or the vehicle (0.9% NaCl) were injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) into 14-day-old Axl−/− and Axl+/+ mice or AxlΔhep or Axlfl/fl. At five weeks of age, the mice were injected weekly with CCl4 (0.5 µL/g) or the vehicle (corn oil) for 20 weeks to induce liver fibrosis and tumor formation in a fibrotic background. After the last CCl4 injection (22 weeks after DEN injection), the mice were sacrificed and the livers harvested for the subsequent comparative analysis. All the mice were maintained on a C57BL/6 background. To investigate the primary tumor burden and metastasis, we subcutaneously engrafted 5 × 106 MR, MR-Axl, Hep3B-GFP or Hep3B-Axl cells into immunocompromised SCID mice. The tumors were measured with a caliper and the tumor volume was calculated using the formula [(length × width2)/2]. The MR and MR-Axl tumors were allowed to establish until the mean tumor volume of 50 mm3 was reached and then treated i.p. with either an Axl decoy receptor (20 mg/kg) or vehicle (PBS). The tumors were resected, treatment was discontinued and survival analysis based on tumor recurrence was evaluated. To study the blood vessel exit and metastatic colonization of the cells, 1 × 104 MR or MR-Axl was injected into the lateral tail vein of the SCID mice. The mice were sacrificed 3 weeks after injection.
4.13. Immunohistochemistry
The tissues were fixed with 4% phosphate-buffered formaldehyde (PFA) for 24 h and embedded in paraffin. The 5 µm thick sections of liver and lung were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The tumor burden was determined by counting the tumor nodules per liver or lung lobe and by calculating the ratio of tumor to liver or lung area. To quantify the collagen deposition and fibrosis in the liver, sections were stained with Sirius Red (0.1% Sirius Red in picric acid). The Sirius Red+ areas were quantified and normalized to the whole tissue area using Definiens Tissue Studio® XD 64 software version 2.7 (Definiens Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA). For the immunohistochemistry (IHC), 5 µm thick sections were stained using standard IHC protocols with antibodies against the following: Axl (1:100; R&D; #AF154), mouse Axl (1:100; R&D; #AF854), BrdU (1:1000; Sigma; #B2531), CD31 (1:200; Abcam; ab28364), CD8 (1:200; Cell Signaling; #98941), CD3 (1:200; EprediaTM; # 12644527), Granzyme B (1:100; Abcam; #ab4059), PD-L1 (1:200; Cell Signaling, #64988), PCNA (1:500; Dako; #M0879), E-cadherin (1:200; BD Biosciences; #610182) and vimentin (1:5000; Sigma; #V5255). 3,3′-Diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used as a chromogen. The DAB-positive cells were counted and normalized to DAB-positive and -negative cells to receive the relative positive cell count as indicated in the figure axis labels. The stained sections were quantified with Definiens Tissue Studio® XD 64 software version 2.7 (Definiens Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA).
4.14. Multiplex IHC
Tissue sections of the HCC patients were stained against Axl (1:50; R&D; #AF154), CD8 (1:200; Abcam; #ab4055), Granzyme B (1:100; Abcam; #ab4059), CD31 (1:100; Abcam; #ab28364), α-smooth muscle actin (1:100; Dako; #M0851), CD45 (1:100; BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA; #B368502) and DAPI using the Opal Polaris 7 Color IHC Detection Kit (Akoya Biosciences; Marlborough, MA, USA). The stained sections were scanned using the Vectra PolarisTM automated imaging system (Perkin Elmer; Hopkinton, MA; USA) and analyzed using HALO AI software version 3.6 (Indica labs; Albuquerque, NM; USA). The cells were classified according to their expression of DAPI and the respective marker. The relative cell count was obtained by normalizing the number of cells positive for both DAPI and the marker to the total number of cells positive for DAPI.
4.15. Flow Cytometry
A transcardial perfusion was performed with 20 mL PBS and the livers and spleens were harvested to generate single cell suspensions. The livers were minced to approximately 1 mm3 pieces and incubated in RPMI-1640 supplemented with collagenase type IV (2 mg/mL) and DNAse I (50 U/mL) for 1 h at 37 °C. The suspensions were filtered through 70 µm cell strainers and centrifuged at 100× g at 4 °C. The supernatants, including immune cells, were then filtered through 40 µm cell strainers and erythrocyte lysis was performed using the ACK lysis buffer (Life Technologies; Carsbad, USA). The cells were stained with anti-CD45 (1:100; APC/FireTM 750; BioLegend; #103153), anti-CD3 (1:100; redFluor™ 710; Cytek Biosciences, Fremont, CA, USA; #80-0032), anti-CD4 (1:100; FITC; Cytek Biosciences; #35-0042), anti-CD8 (1:200; PE; Cytek Biosciences; #50-0081), anti-PD-1 (1:50; Brilliant Violet 421; BioLegend; #135221), anti-CD19 (1:50; Brilliant Violet 421; #115537), anti-NK1.1 (1:100; PE/Cyanine7; BioLegend; #108713), anti-FoxP3 (1:50; APC; BioLegend; #15330750), anti-Ly6G (1:400; FITC; Cytek Biosciences; #35-1276), anti-Ly6C (1:400; PE/Cyanine7; BioLegend; #128017), anti-CD103 (1:50; APC; BioLegend; #121413), anti-MHCII (1:100; Brilliant Violet 785; BioLegend; #107645), anti-F4/80 (1:100; PE; Cytek Biosciences; # 50-4801) and anti-CD206 (1:50; Alexa Fluor ® 700; BioLegend; #141733) antibodies. The live/dead cell staining was performed using 7-AAD or AquaZombie fixable dyeTM (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA) to exclude dead cells for the analysis. Flow cytometry was conducted using the LSR FortessaTM X20 cell analyzer (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The data were analyzed using FlowJo (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).
4.16. Statistical Analysis
For the statistical analysis, we used GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software Inc, San Diego, CA, USA). The data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). For the comparison of two groups, the Student’s t-test was used, except for the Kaplan–Meier analysis, where a log-rank test was applied. For the correlation analysis of two groups, the Pearson correlation co-efficient was determined. For the comparison of more than two groups, the Oneway ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test was employed. Grubbs’s test was used for the detection of outliers. Statistically significant p-values were considered and indicated in graphs as * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; and *** p < 0.001.

RESULTS:
2. Results
2.1. Axl Augments Invasive Behavior of HCC Cells
We recently showed that Axl expression correlates with vascular invasion in HCC patients. To assess the phenotypical consequences of Axl expression in neoplastic hepatocytes, we used murine MR and human Hep3B cells and generated cells with transgenic Axl expression. Murine Axl-deficient MR hepatocytes harbor oncogenic H-Ras to induce malignant transformation including tumor formation in vivo. The re-expression of Axl in MR and Hep3B, resulting in MR-Axl and Hep3B-Axl cells, respectively, was confirmed by Western blotting (Figure 1A,B). Axl expression did not affect the proliferation of the MR and Hep3B cells in vitro (Figure 1C,D). In line with this, neither the stimulation of the cells with Gas6 nor the inhibition of Gas6/Axl signaling using an Axl decoy receptor modulated proliferation (Figure S1A–C). In addition, tumor growth in immunocompromised SCID mice was not dependent on Axl expression as indicated by the tumor volume and absolute tumor weight (Figure 1E,F and Figure S1D,E). In line with this, the proliferation of cancer cells in MR- and MR-Axl-derived tumors was not affected as determined by the immunohistochemistry (Figure S1F). However, Axl expression caused a 2.5-fold and 9.2-fold increase in the invasion of MR-Axl- and Hep3B-Axl-derived spheroids compared to MR and Hep3B-GFP spheroids when stimulated with Gas6 (Figure 1G,H). Together, these data show that Axl does not promote proliferation but induces invasiveness of murine and human malignant hepatocytes.
2.2. Axl Promotes Metastasis In Vivo
To investigate the impact of Axl on the metastatic potential of MR cells, we established a resection-based tumor recurrence model. Thus, we generated subcutaneous MR and MR-Axl tumors in SCID mice and resected them after they reached 500 mm3. Subsequently, a Kaplan–Meier analysis was performed to examine whether Axl has an impact on metastatic colonization. Notably, MR-Axl tumors significantly reduced the survival of mice compared to those harboring Axl-deficient tumors (Figure 1I). The survival of mice with MR-Axl tumors was slightly improved by the treatment with the Axl decoy receptor (Figure 1I), which failed to show changes in the survival of mice with MR tumors (Figure S1G). Furthermore, intravenous injection of MR and MR-Axl cells showed that the tumor load of lungs in mice was not significantly affected by Axl expression as indicated by the lung/body weight ratio and tumor/lung area ratio (Figure 1J,K). Yet the number of MR-Axl tumor nodules in the lung was significantly increased, suggesting that Axl supports the extravasation and metastatic colonization of lungs (Figure 1L). From these data, we concluded that tumor cell-intrinsic Gas6/Axl signaling does not control proliferation but augments invasiveness and the metastatic potential of malignant hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo.
2.3. Axl Is Associated with Partial EMT
To investigate whether the Axl-dependent, invasive phenotype of MR-Axl and Hep3B-Axl correlates with changes in epithelial plasticity, we analyzed the expression of EMT constituents by qPCR. We observed that Vimentin, Snai1 and Snai2 were upregulated in MR-Axl cells compared to MR cells (Figure 2A). Similarly, the expression of Vimentin was highly increased by exogenous Axl expression in the human liver cancer cell lines Hep3B and Huh7, while the expression of E-Cadherin was downregulated, emphasizing the role of Axl in the EMT (Figure 2B,C). Moreover, the expression of Vimentin and Snai1 in HCC patients correlated with Axl expression (Figure 2D,E), and additionally, elevated E-cadherin expression was accompanied by increased survival of HCC patients (Figure 2F). The expression of E-cadherin protein was significantly downregulated in MR-Axl spheroids, suggesting that Axl promotes the mesenchymal phenotype of malignant hepatocytes (Figure 2G and Figure S2A). Moreover, we examined the expression of E-cadherin and Vimentin in subcutaneous tumors derived from MR and MR-Axl cells, which did not exhibit significant changes (Figure S2B). Together, these data show that Axl is associated with the expression of EMT-associated genes in human and murine liver cancer cell lines, suggesting a partial EMT phenotype.
2.4. Gas6/Axl/Akt Signaling Mediates Invasion of Liver Cancer Cells
Next, we investigated which Gas6/Axl-mediated pathways promote the invasive phenotype of liver cancer cells. Thus, we performed a phospho-proteomic analysis of MR and MR-Axl cells in the presence and absence of Gas6. A principal component analysis showed sample-dependent clustering (Figure 3A). Protein clustering based on the pattern of phosphorylation across the conditions and samples revealed four clusters: phospho-sites that are upregulated dependent on Axl expression (cluster 1) or Gas6 expression (cluster 2) and phospho-sites that are downregulated dependent on Axl expression (cluster 3) or Gas6 expression (cluster 4) (Figure S3A). A functional enrichment analysis showed the enrichment of protein sets associated with cellular polarity and motility (KEGG Pathways: Regulation of the Actin Cytoskeleton; MSigDB Hallmark: Tight Junctions, Apical Junctions and Adherens Junctions) (Figure S3B), depending on the changes in Axl expression and Gas6 activation. Furthermore, we analyzed the phospho-proteomic data to estimate the activity of kinases based on kinase–substrate interactions using PhosR. A kinase perturbation analysis indicated the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) as the one with the highest upregulated activity (p = 0.06; one-sided Pearson’s method) in Gas6-stimulated MR-Axl cells compared to Gas6-stimulated MR cells (Figure 3B). Accordingly, we analyzed the substrates of mTOR and found that the phosphorylation of Akt (Ser473) was upregulated in cluster 1 and highly increased in Gas6-stimulated MR-Axl and Hep3B-Axl cells, suggesting that Akt is regulated by Axl. To examine whether Akt signaling is regulated by Gas6/Axl signaling, we treated cells with Gas6 and concomitantly inhibited Akt using MK2206, resulting in the reduced phosphorylation of Akt in MR-Axl and Hep3B-Axl cells (Figure 3C,D). In agreement with these data, the inhibition of Akt decreased the invasive phenotype of Gas6-stimulated MR-Axl and Hep3B-Axl tumor spheroids, indicating that Gas6/Axl/Akt signaling mediates the invasion of liver cancer cells (Figure 3E,F).
2.5. Tumor Cell-Extrinsic Axl Signaling Promotes Proliferation of Neoplastic Hepatocytes
We further focused on the cell-specific role of Axl in endogenous mouse models of liver tumorigenesis. We induced liver tumor formation and inflammation in mice harboring a hepatocyte-specific deletion of Axl (AxlΔhep) and mice with a systemic Axl knockout (Axl−/−) by administering DEN+CCl4. Axlfl/fl and Axl wild-type (Axl+/+) mice were used as the respective controls (Figure 4A,B). First, we confirmed the published data demonstrating that Axl expression increases hepatic fibrosis compared to Axl−/− mice but is not altered between Axlfl/fl and AxlΔhep mice (Figure S4A,B). The proliferation of tumor cells as indicated by the relative abundance of BrdU+ cells was not affected between Axlfl/fl and AxlΔhep mice but was significantly increased in the Axl−/− mice, indicating that tumor cell-extrinsic Axl expression impacts liver tumor growth (Figure 4C,D). In accordance with this, no difference in liver tumor burden was observed between Axlfl/fl and AxlΔhep mice (Figure S4C,D). We detected a slight, but not significant, increase in tumor burden in Axl−/− mice (p = 0.0822), while the absolute body weights of mice were not altered (Figure S4E,F). Moreover, liver tumor mass (tumor area/liver area and tumor number/section) of Axlfl/fl, AxlΔhep, Axl+/+ and Axl−/− mice was not changed between the groups, suggesting that Axl expression does not affect primary tumor burden (Figure S4G–J). Interestingly, the analysis of Axl expression in DEN+CCl4-treated livers of the Axlfl/fl, AxlΔhep and Axl+/+ mice revealed that Axl is expressed in stromal cells rather than in neoplastic hepatocytes, explaining the lack of a tumor phenotype by comparing Axlfl/fl and AxlΔhep mice (Figure S4K). Together, these data show that tumor cell-extrinsic Axl expression decreases the proliferation of malignant hepatocytes.
2.6. Axl Stimulates Infiltration of Cytotoxic Immune Cells
Based on the regulatory role of Axl on immune cells and on our observation that extrinsic Axl expression reduces tumor cell proliferation, we investigated the impact of Axl on the immune microenvironment of DEN+CCl4-induced liver tumors. Notably, we found that cytotoxic CD8+ T cells highly infiltrated Axl+/+ tumors compared to Axl−/− tumors (Figure 5A,B), whereas no changes were detected in the myeloid immune cell compartment (Figure S5A). We further found that Axl+/+ tumors were significantly more infiltrated with Granzyme B+ cells, showing cytotoxic activity in those tumors (Figure S5B). Yet the number of PD-L1+ cells did not vary between the Axl+/+ and Axl−/− tumors, suggesting that Axl does not affect tumor immune escape via the PD-1/PD-L1 axis (Figure S5C and Figure 5A,C). Notably, the livers of the untreated Axl+/+ and Axl−/− mice did not display any differences in the relative abundance of CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells and FoxP3+ regulatory CD4+ T cells, indicating that Axl does not alter the healthy liver environment (Figure S5D). Moreover, we neither observed changes in the CD8+ T cell infiltration nor myeloid cell subsets in Axlfl/fl and AxlΔhep mice (Figure 5C,D and Figure S5E), suggesting that the tumor cell-extrinsic expression of Axl is responsible for the elevated number of CD8+ T cells in Axl+/+ tumors. In summary, these data show that tumor cell-extrinsic Axl expression impacts the infiltration of CD8+ and Granzyme B+ cells to liver tumors.
2.7. Ccl9/Ccl15 Negatively Correlates with Axl Expression
In a further step, we aimed to obtain comprehensive insights into the inflammatory milieu of DEN+CCl4 tumors by cytokine profiling of tissue lysates of Axl+/+ and Axl−/− mice. We detected six significantly upregulated (Cxcl2, Cxcl4, P-Selectin, Vcam1, Vegf-a and sTnfR I) and one downregulated (Ccl9) cytokine in Axl+/+ tumors (Figure 5E and Figure S5F). Ccl2 (p = 0.0886) and Cxcl5 (p = 0.0532), which has been associated with Axl expression, were borderline significantly upregulated in Axl+/+ tumors (Figure 5E). Notably, the expression of these deregulated cytokines was not altered on the transcript level in Axlfl/fl and AxlΔhep tumors (Figure 5F). Accordingly, we found that the expression of Ccl15, the human homologue to Ccl9, negatively correlated with Axl expression in HCC patient tissue but not in normal liver tissue (Figure 5G,H). In line with this, CCL2, CXCL2, CXCL4, P-Selectin and VCAM1, but not VEGF-A, positively correlated with Axl expression in the HCC patient tissue but to a lesser extent in normal liver tissue (Figure 5I,J and Figure S5G–P). In conclusion, we found that several chemokines were upregulated in tumors of the Axl+/+ mice, which also positively correlated with the expression of Axl in human HCCs, suggesting the augmented activation of immune cells depending on Axl expression in tumors.
2.8. Tumor Cell-Extrinsic Axl Expression Correlates with the Infiltration of CD8+ and Granzyme B+ Cell in HCC Patients
Given the correlation of Axl expression and elevated CD8+ and Granzyme B+ cells in DEN+CCl4-induced liver tumors, we investigated whether a comparable phenotype could be observed in HCC patients. First, we observed that the expression of immune cytotoxic effector molecules such as Granzyme A, Granzyme B and Perforin-1 positively correlated with Axl expression in HCC patients (Figure 6A–C). In accordance with this, expression of Axl and Granzyme A, Granzyme B or Perforin-1 was also associated with an increased survival probability of HCC patients (Figure 6D–F). To investigate whether the infiltration of CD8+ and Granzyme B+ cells correlates with Axl expression in tumor cells, we analyzed tissue samples of 40 HCC patients for the infiltration of CD8+ T cells (CD45+ CD8+), Granzyme B+ cells (CD45+ Granzyme B+) and Axl expression in tumor cells (Axl+ CD31- αSMA− CD45−) or immune cells (Axl+ CD45+) by multiplexed immunohistochemistry (Figure 6G). Interestingly, we did not observe a correlation between Axl expression on the tumor cells (Figure S6A). However, we observed that patients with a high infiltration of CD45+ CD8+ T and CD45+ Granzyme B+ cells harbored tumors with an increased infiltration of CD45+ Axl+ cells (Figure 6H,I). Interestingly, high levels of Axl+ CD45+, CD45+ CD8+ and Axl+ CD31− alpha-smooth muscle actin (αSMA)− CD45− (tumor cells) did not correlate with survival probability (Figure 6J and Figure S6B,C) but increased the infiltration of CD45+ Granzyme B+ associated with an increased survival probability (Figure 6K). Together, these data suggest that Axl expression on CD45+ cells, rather than on tumor cells, correlates with the increased infiltration of CD8+ and Granzyme B+ in HCC patients.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Gas6/Axl signaling has emerged as a driver of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression, impacting several cellular processes, including the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis. Moreover, immune-modulatory functions of Axl affect the tumor microenvironment (TME), which unveils additional aspects for developing therapeutic strategies in cancer.
HCC is the major subtype of liver cancer and represents a highly lethal malignancy with rising incidence. The majority of HCC cases develop in the background of cirrhosis caused by chronic liver inflammation. Chronic infection with hepatitis B or C virus, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and permanent alcohol abuse are predominant causes for developing cirrhosis and HCC. Immunotherapy in combination with anti-angiogenic treatment has replaced first-line therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. In this context, the classification of HCC into inflamed and non-inflamed subclasses, the latter containing the majority of HCC patients, has been proposed. Non-inflamed tumors indicate low expression of immune checkpoints together with minor or even no immune cell infiltration, resulting in less suitability for immunotherapy.
Most HCC patients are diagnosed at advanced stages of disease characterized by the vascular invasion of cancer cells and their dissemination to intra- or extrahepatic sites. The heterogeneity of HCC cells is associated with changes in epithelial cell plasticity, which most commonly includes EMT of neoplastic hepatocytes or hepatic progenitor cells. A large panel of EMT regulators, acting at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level, causes the dissociation of HCC cells from epithelial organization, allowing for individual cell movement and local cell invasion into the surrounding tissue. The reprogramming from the epithelial to mesenchymal state encompasses the impaired expression of the cell adhesion constituent E-cadherin and the upregulation of EMT transcription factors together with cytoskeletal modulators. Recent advances describe EMT as an intermediate continuum displaying quasi-mesenchymal phenotypes termed the partial EMT, which are essentially involved in the metastatic process. Cancer cells exhibiting partial EMT assemble an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment (TME), which is refractory to immune checkpoint blocking therapy. Yet the role of the partial EMT in HCC and its link to Axl remains to be elucidated.
The receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) Axl belongs—together with MerTK and Tyro3—to the family of TAM receptors and has been identified as a major driver of cancer progression. Upon binding to its ligand Gas6 and homodimerization, phosphorylated Axl activates numerous signaling pathways, including MAPK, Akt, Src and Jak/Stat. In cancer, the upregulation of Axl is frequently associated with tumor cell survival, EMT, angiogenesis and drug resistance. Indeed, the impact of Axl in promoting EMT, resistance to targeted therapy and the induction of a pro-tumorigenic TME is comprehensively described in breast and lung cancer. In HCC, elevated Axl expression is found in a large proportion of patients, which correlates with vascular invasion and a poor survival outcome. In line with this, mesenchymal-like HCC cells express high levels of Axl and display increased migratory characteristics compared to epithelial HCC cells, highlighting the role of Axl in cellular plasticity. Yet the role of tumor cell-intrinsic Axl expression in modulating neoplastic epithelial liver cancer cells and its mechanistic contribution to HCC dissemination is still poorly understood. It is noteworthy that the multi-tyrosine kinase inhibitor Cabozantinib, which targets Axl among other RTKs, is used as a third-line treatment option for patients with advanced HCC, supporting the potential clinical relevance of Axl in this disease.
Besides its expression in tumor cells, Axl has established roles in a variety of stromal cells. Physiologically, Axl is expressed on endothelial cells, platelets, fibroblasts and immune cells, including dendritic cells (DCs), macrophages and natural killer (NK) cells. Axl is mainly involved in maintaining immune homeostasis by suppressing TLR signaling and reducing pro-inflammatory cytokines, which activate DCs, macrophages and NK cells. TAM receptor triple-knockout mice suffer from severe immunological adverse events due to the inability to phagocytose apoptotic cells resulting in the elevated release of self-antigens. Furthermore, Axl plays a crucial role in the maturation of NK cells, emphasizing its impact in immune cell function. Besides its immune-modulatory roles, Gas6/Axl signaling contributes to endothelial cell function by regulating vascular integrity. Moreover, Axl expression promotes the stabilization of platelets and therefore thrombus formation. In liver fibrosis, Axl is required for the activation of hepatic stellate cells and trans-differentiation to myofibroblasts, thereby driving disease progression. These findings underline the versatile function of Axl in stromal cells and emphasize the relevance of investigating the impact of tumor cell-extrinsic Axl expression.
Despite evidence that Axl has a disease-promoting role in HCC cells and fibrosis, it is unclear how tumor cell-intrinsic and -extrinsic Axl expression shapes the development and progression of HCC. In this study, we show, on the one hand, that tumor cell-intrinsic Axl expression induces Akt signaling and promotes partial EMT, cell invasion and metastatic colonization of lungs. On the other hand, we show that tumor cell-extrinsic Axl expression modulates the TME towards an immune-activated, “hot” tumor in mice and HCC patients, suggesting a novel role of Axl in HCC.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: .
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data are openly available in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD047577.