PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Colon
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Mushroom extract; Colonl cancer; Tmt proteomics; Mouse

ABSTRACT:
In this study, we conducted both qualitative and quantitative proteomic analysis using tandem mass tags on CT26.WT colon cancer tissue from Balb/c mice treated with a special blend of medicinal mushroom extracts, with and without the chemotherapy agent 5-fluorouracil.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic investigation of treatment with medicinal mushroom supplement Agarikon Plus® alone and in combination with 5- fluorouracil in advanced colorectal cancer animal model

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tumor tissue was mechanically grinded with liquid nitrogen and dissolved in 1 mL of a lysis buffer [7 M urea/2 M thiourea (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), 4% (w/v) CHAPS (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% (w/v) dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich)], and 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Switzerland). The obtained lysate was sonicated (4 mm probe, power of 6 W; MicrosonTM, PGC Scientifics, USA), four times for 10 s. After sonication, the samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with gentle agitation (Eppendorf, Germany). Samples were centrifuged for 45 min at 14,000 rpm and 4°C (Eppendorf, Germany) and the supernatant was collected for further analyses. Protein concentrations were determined using the Qubit™ fluorometric (Invitrogen,USA) quantitation platform.  From each sample, acetone-precipitated proteins were dissolved in triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and subjected to reduction, alkylation, digestion and labelled using 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag reagents according to manufacturer instructions (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA; 200 mM DTT and 375 mM IAA from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Proteins were acetone precipitated overnight and the pellets were collected by centrifugation (8,000×g, 4°C), dissolved in 50 μL 0.1M TEAB and digested using 1 μL of trypsin (1 mg/mL, Promega; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37°C overnight). TMT label reagents were equilibrated to room temperature, resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile LC-MS grade (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and added to each sample. Labelling was performed for 1 hour at room temperature and then quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) for 15 min. Samples were then combined at equal amounts and 5 μg of each mixed sample set was vacuum dried and stored at - 80°C for LC-MS/MS analysis. High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described elsewhere (Horvatić et al., 2019).

DATA PROCESSING:
For peptide identification and relative quantification the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Database search against Mus musculus FASTA files downloaded from NCBI database (11/4/2019, 185475 entries) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm within the Proteome Discoverer workflow and was set at 1% FDR. Only proteins with at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were reported as identified. Protein quantification was accomplished by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from tandem mass spectra to that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The internal standard was used to compare relative quantification results for each protein between the experiments.