PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
organism parts: Seedling
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; methylthiolated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Atg8; Selective autophagy

ABSTRACT:
Autophagy is a vital cellular process that maintains organismal health by recycling damaged or superfluous cellular components within autophagosomes. This process is mediated by conserved ATG proteins, which coordinate autophagosome biogenesis and selective cargo degradation. Among these, the ubiquitin-like ATG8 protein plays a central role by linking cargo to the growing autophagosomes through interactions with selective autophagy receptors. Unlike most ATG proteins, which are represented by single or few isoforms, the ATG8 gene family is expanded in vascular plants, yet the extent of functional specialization within ATG8 isoforms remains largely unknown. Using transcriptional and translational reporters in Arabidopsis thaliana, we revealed that ATG8 isoforms are differentially expressed across tissues and form distinct autophagosomes within the same cell. To explore ATG8 specialization, we generated the nonuple Δatg8 mutant lacking all nine ATG8 isoforms. The mutant displayed hypersensitivity to carbon and nitrogen starvation, coupled with defects in bulk and selective autophagy as shown by biochemical and ultrastructural analyses. Complementation experiments demonstrated that ATG8A could rescue both carbon and nitrogen starvation phenotypes, whereas ATG8H could only complement carbon starvation. Proximity labeling proteomics further identified isoform-specific interactors under nitrogen starvation, underscoring their functional divergence. These findings provide genetic evidence for the specialization of ATG8 isoforms in plants and lay a foundation for investigating their roles in diverse cell types and stress conditions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Nonuple atg8 mutant provides genetic evidence for functional specialization of ATG8 isoforms in Arabidopsis thaliana

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
All samples were sourced from transgenic plants either grown on N-rich medium or N-depleted medium and extracted using appropriate buffers, trypsin digested and analyzed by mass spectrometry.

DATA PROCESSING:
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Scientific). All MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.19924 (Dorfer V. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3679- 84). The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to±10 ppm, the maximum number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic enzymatic specificity without proline restriction. The RAW-files were searched against the Arabidopsis database (32,785 sequences; 14,482,855 residues), supplemented with common contaminants and sequences of tagged proteins of interest. The following search parameters were used: Oxidation on methionine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine, iodoacetamide derivative on cysteine, beta-methylthiolation on cysteine, biotinylation on lysine, ubiquitinylation residue on lysine, ubiquitination on lysine, pyro-glu from q on peptide N-terminal glutamine, acetylation on protein N-Terminus were set as variable modifications. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using the Percolator algorithm (Käll L. et al., Nat. Methods. 2007 Nov; 4(11):923-5) integrated in Proteome Discoverer. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus T. et al., J. Proteome Res. 2011, 10, 5354-62). Additionally, an Amanda score cut-off of at least 150 was applied. Protein areas have been computed in IMP-apQuant (Doblmann J. et. al, J Proteome Res 2019, 18(1):535-41) by summing up unique and razor peptides. Resulting protein areas were normalized using iBAQ (Schwanhäusser B. et al., Nature 2011, 473(7347):337−42) and sum normalization was applied for normalization between samples. Match-between-runs (MBR) was applied for peptides with high confident peak area that were identified by MS/MS spectra in at least one run. Proteins were filtered to be identified by a minimum of 2 PSMs in at least 1 sample and quantified proteins were filtered to contain at least 3 quantified peptide groups. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma (Smyth, G. K. - Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing differential expression in microarray experiments. Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, 2004, Volume 3, Article 3.)