PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Nucleocytoplasmic traffic; Pkr; Nucleocytoplasmic trafficking disorder (nctd); Cardiovirus; Stress granules.; Picornavirus; Nucleoli; Double-stranded rna; Eif2ak2

ABSTRACT:
Protein kinase R (PKR) is a key antiviral kinase activated by binding double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) produced during viral replication. Upon activation, PKR phosphorylates eIF2α, leading to the inhibition of translation and viral replication. However, many viruses have evolved mechanisms to counteract PKR activity. In Cardioviruses, the Leader protein (L), a short peptide cleaved from the N-terminus of the viral polyprotein, not only inhibits PKR but also blocks interferon production and disrupts nucleocytoplasmic trafficking (NCT). L disrupts NCT by recruiting host RSK kinases to the nuclear pore complex (NPC), where RSK phosphorylates FG-nucleoporins, thereby impairing NCT. L mutations that affect NCT disruption also impact its ability to inhibit PKR, suggesting a mechanistic link. Recombinant TMEV and EMCV viruses designed to disrupt NCT through different mechanisms exhibited some extent of PKR inhibition, supporting the link between NCT disruption and PKR inhibition. Immunostaining and live-cell imaging revealed that L-induced NCT disruption redistributes a fraction of PKR to the nucleoli, where PKR remains inactive. This suggests that nucleolar sequestration contributes to PKR inhibition. Additionally, L-mediated NCT disruption leads to the release of nuclear RNA-binding proteins (nRBPs) into the cytosol, which may bind or modify viral dsRNA, further preventing PKR activation. Collectively, these results highlight nucleocytoplasmic trafficking as a critical regulatory mechanism governing PKR activation. Thus, beyond the specific action of the Cardiovirus L protein, our study reveals a broader principle in which interference with host nucleocytoplasmic transport can significantly impact the subcellular localization and functional regulation of immune effectors, such as PKR

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cardiovirus-Mediated PKR Inhibition Results from Nucleocytoplasmic Trafficking Disruption

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
A total of 1.5 x 106 HeLa PKR-APEX cells were plated in 10cm diameter culture dishes. Cells were either mock-infected or infected with TMEV-LWT or TMEV-LM60V for 4, 6, 8 or 10 h with an MOI of 5. 1 h before the end of the infection, medium was replaced by fresh medium containing 5mM of biotin-phenol and incubating at 37°C under 5% CO2 for 1 h. Medium was finally replaced by fresh medium containing 1mM of H2O2 for 2min. Cells were then washed two times with 5mL of quenching solution (10mM sodium ascorbate, 10mM sodium azide and 5mM Trolox in PBS) and one time with PBS.Cells were lysed with 800µL/dish of stringent lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 500mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 1mM DTT, 1 tablet of Pierce phosphatase/protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific) per 10ml of lysis buffer) for 15 min at room temperature (RT). Lysates were then homogenized by 10 passages through 21G needles. Lysates were then cleared by centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min at RT. Supernatants were then passed through ZebaSpin columns, as described by the manufacturer (ThermoScientific ZebaTMSpin Desalting Columns 7K MWCO ref 89892), to eliminate free biotin. 25μL (per condition) of protein A/G magnetic beads (Pierce) were added to remove non-specific binding and incubated for 30 min at RT. The rest of the supernatant was incubated for 2h at RT with 50μL (per condition) of Streptavidin magnetic beads (Pierce).

DATA PROCESSING:
Streptavidin pulldown samples were resolved using a 10% Tris-Glycine SDS gel run until 6mm migration in the separating gel. Proteins were colored using PageBlue (Thermo Scientific, 24620). The 6mm bands containing whole proteins were cut into 3 different slices and trypsin digested. Peptides were extracted with 0.1% TFA in 65% ACN and dried in a speedvac. Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN), directly loaded onto reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 x 250 mm,Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 4%-27.5% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 40 min, 27.5%-50% solvent B for 20 min, 50%-95% solvent B for 10 min and holding at 95% for the last 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an Vanquish Neo system. The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid or Exploris240 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Fusion Lumos or Exploris240 coupled online to the nano-LC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using HCD setting at 30, ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 (Exeploris240) or in the linear ion trap (LUMOS). A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for 3 seconds for ions above a threshold ion count of 2.0E4 in the MS survey scan with 40.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4E5 ions and a maximum injection time of 50ms, and MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 5E4 ions and a maximum injection set to dynamic. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 375 to 1800. The resulting MS/MS data was processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 SP1 against a Homo sapiens protein database obtained from Uniprot including the Theiler viral polyprotein and PKR-Apex sequences. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for-fragment ions (LUMOS) or 10ppm (Exploris240). Oxidation on Met (+15.995 Da), conversion of Gln (-17.027 Da) or Glu (- 18.011 Da) to pyro-Glu at the peptide N-term were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. For abundance comparison, abundance ratios were calculated by Label Free Quantification (LFQ) of the precursor intensities within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 SP1.