PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Vitreous humor
diseases: Retinal detachment
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Eye; Vitreous humor; Uhplc-ms; Ocular fluids; Dda

ABSTRACT:
Retinal detachment is a severe eye condition characterized by the detachment of the neurosensory retina from the retinal pigment epithelium and caused by retinal tears. Pars plana vitrectomy is the elective surgical procedure during which vitreous humor, a fluid which shapes the eye globe and supports mechanically the adherence of the retina to the posterior chamber of the eye, is collected. Therefore, profiling of the vitreous humor proteome of subjects diagnosed with retinal detachment is supposed to provide molecular evidence on the pathobiology of the disease and on its secondary complications, such as proliferative vitreo-retinopathy, which predispose to recurrent RD (observed in 20% of cases), a sight threatening condition.  Herein, we investigated the perturbations of vitreous proteome between subjects affected by primary retinal detachment and controls by shot-gun proteomics approaches.  Proteomic datasets were first analyzed and searched for global proteome changes. Thereafter, starting from the assumption that the disease could be sustained by altered proteolytic processing of structural and non-structural elements of the VH, mining of N- and C-termini was performed to uncover endogenous proteolytic events underscoring the disease condition.  The search retrieved evidence of a wide repertoire of either previously characterized or uncharacterized proteolytic events. Most notably, comparison of the N- and C-termini landscape between experimental groups highlighted robust alterations in the repertoire of cleaved proteins. Further strengthened by immunoblotting studies on a select panel of proteins, the data envisage that retinal detachment is promoted or characterized, as a secondary process, by proteolytic-based alterations of structural and non-structural components involved in the regulation of immune process, proteases inhibition and most notably, angiogenesis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ALTERED PATTERN OF PROTEOLYSIS OF EXTRACELLULAR PROTEINS IN RHEGMATOGENOUS RETINAL DETACHMENT BY MINING OF TRYPTIC AND N-TERMINI DATASETS FROM VITREOUS HUMOR PROTEOME

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Vitreous samples were obtained from patients undergoing PPV for either retinal detachment  or epiretinal membrane peeling.  The study was approved by the local ethics committee and adhered to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Enrolled patients signed an informed consent form. Vitreous samples were cleared by centrifugation and protein concentration quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Thereafter, samples were subdivided into different aliquots. In the case of proteomic analysis, samples (100 μg of VH proteins) were dehydrated in a SpeedVacuum system, reconstituted in denaturing buffer (6M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM Hepes, pH 7.8).  Proteins were then reduced [5 mM dithiothreitol, 45 min, room temperature (r.t.)], alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, r.t) and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio, overnight, 37 °C) (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Trypsin digestion was quenched with 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides cleaned using Stage-Tips (C18 resin) (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Thereafter, eluted peptides were dried by SpeedVacuum system and resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile, 0.05% Trifluoracetic Acid for mass spectrometry injection.  Proteomic analysis was performed injecting (twice) 1 µg peptides for each experimental conditions into an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra high performance liquid chromatography (nano-UHPLC) system. Solvent A: 100% H2O, 0.1% Formic Acid; Solvent B: 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid. UHPLC Gradient (minutes - %B): 0 - 6.7; 2 - 6.7; 62 - 34.4; 67 - 55.5; 72 - 100; 80 – 100; 82 - 6.7; 88 - 6.7. Column oven temperature: 45°C. Run time: 88 min. Loading Pump flowrate: 30 μL/min. NC Pump flowrate: 250 nL/min. Data acquisition was conducted in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode.  Orbitrap Resolution: 120,000; Scan Range (m/z): 375-1650; RF Lens (%): 80; Normalized AGC Target (%): 300. ddMS² was triggered using the following filters: Isolation Window (m/z): 2; Normalized HCD Collision Energy (%): 30; Orbitrap Resolution: 15000; Normalized AGC Target (%): 50.

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein and peptides were searched using Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (v. 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a UniProt human protein FASTA database including protein isoforms. Sequest implemented with the Inferys rescoring algorithm was used and a concatenated target-decoy strategy applied for determination of the proteins False Discovery Rate (strict FDR≤0.01 and relaxed FDR≤0.05).  Trypsin (full) was set as enzyme, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.021) was set as static modification, whereas oxidation on methionine (+15.995) as dynamic modification per peptides according to the requirements of Inferys algorithm. The search of N-termini and C-termini was instead run using FragPipe/MsFragger (v. 22.0), as reported elsewhere18.  The resulting protein and peptides identifications and quantitation data were analysed using an in-house built R script (v. 2.5).

METHODS:
Methods
Ethics approval – Study design
The study (P.R.O. project) was submitted by the proponent institution, IRCCS Fondazione Bietti, to the local ethic committee, Territorial Ethics Committee Lazio Area 5 (P.R.O. Project, first approved - ifo_058.IFO_AOO.REGISTRO UFFICIALE.0014544, approved on 11-15-2023; updated version approved - ifo_058.IFO_AOO.REGISTRO UFFICIALE.0000158, approved on 01-02-2024). The main goal of the study is to collect vitreous and aqueous humour to investigate pathogenic determinants and potential biomarkers of most prevalent retinal disorders, including RRD, by proteomics approaches.
Samples collected are stored in an internal biobank of the institute.
In accordance to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki, enrolled patients were asked to read and sign an informed consent form. The authors affirm that human research participants (or their legal guardians) provided informed consent, for publication of the identifying demographic and clinical details in Table 1. Inclusion criteria for cases: age > 18 years, diagnosis of primary RRD requiring PPV repair in phakic or pseudophakic patients.
Inclusion criteria for controls: age > 18 years, patients undergoing PPV with a diagnosis of idiopathic ERM, both phakic and pseudophakic.
Exclusion criteria (apply to both experimental groups): any ocular co-morbidity including age related macular degeneration, high myopia exceeding 6 diopters, eyes receiving intraocular therapies for any reason, including vascular occlusion, glaucoma, concomitant neurodegenerative, inflammatory or infective eye diseases and systemic conditions including diabetes, collagenopathies (e.g. Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome), cancer (local and systemic), vitreous hemorrhages, alterations of the electrophoretic profile of the gamma-globulin band.
Vitreous samples were obtained from patients undergoing PPV for either RRD or ERM peeling (Control). Initially, n = 9 RRD cases and n = 9 Controls were enrolled in the study and analysed by mass spectrometry (MS). One subject per group was then filtered out from analysis for technical issues during sample preparation. Raw mass spectrometry data of these samples were uploaded (corresponding to original samples #6 and #16) in the PRIDE repository (see “Data availability statement”) together with all samples effectively analysed and part of the study.
Selection of samples was based on the best matching of demographic and clinical characteristics of the subjects. These data are introduced in the results section and further reported in Table 1.
Approximately 1 mL of vitreous fluid was collected using a sterile 5 mL syringe and poured into a sterile 1.7 mL Eppendorf test tube. Vitreous samples were then immediately cleared by centrifugation to remove eventual debris, cells or aggregates. Protein concentration of individual vitreous samples was then quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) following manufacturer’s instruction either for measurements and for preparation of the calibration curve (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Thereafter, samples were subdivided into different aliquots and stored at -80 °C until use. No freeze/thaw cycles were applied for proteomics or Western blotting (Wb) studies, since individual aliquots were used for the two approaches.
All samples discussed in the study were processed and analysed in parallel. Anonymity of subjects was guaranteed throughout the entire study.
Mass spectrometry settings and search parameters
In the case of proteomic analysis, samples (100 µg of VH proteins) were dehydrated in a SpeedVacuum system, reconstituted in denaturing buffer (6 M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM Hepes, pH 7.8) supplemented with inhibitors of peptidases and proteases (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
Proteins were then reduced [5 mM dithiothreitol, 45 min, room temperature (r.t.)], alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, r.t) and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme: protein ratio, overnight, 37 °C) (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Trypsin digestion was quenched with 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides cleaned using Stage-Tips (C18 resin) (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
Thereafter, eluted peptides were dried by SpeedVacuum system and resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile, 0.05% Trifluoracetic Acid for mass spectrometry injection.
Proteomic analysis was performed injecting (twice) 1 µg peptides for each experimental conditions into an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra high performance liquid chromatography (nano-UHPLC) system. Solvent A: 100% H2O, 0.1% Formic Acid; Solvent B: 80% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid. UHPLC Gradient (minutes - %B): 0–6.7; 2–6.7; 62–34.4; 67–55.5; 72–100; 80–100; 82 − 6.7; 88 − 6.7. Column oven temperature: 45 °C. Run time: 88 min. Loading Pump flowrate: 30 µL/min. NC Pump flowrate: 250 nL/min. Data acquisition was conducted in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode.
Orbitrap Resolution: 120,000; Scan Range (m/z): 375–1650; RF Lens (%): 80; Normalized AGC Target (%): 300. ddMS² was triggered using the following filters: Isolation Window (m/z): 2; Normalized HCD Collision Energy (%): 30; Orbitrap Resolution: 15,000; Normalized AGC Target (%): 50. Protein and peptides were searched using Proteome Discoverer (PD) software (v. 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a UniProt human protein FASTA database including protein isoforms. Sequest implemented with the Inferys rescoring algorithm was used and a concatenated target-decoy strategy applied for determination of the proteins False Discovery Rate (strict FDR ≤ 0.01 and relaxed FDR ≤ 0.05).
Trypsin (full) was set as enzyme, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+ 57.021) was set as static modification, whereas oxidation on methionine (+ 15.995) as dynamic modification per peptides according to the requirements of Inferys algorithm.
The search of N-termini and C-termini was instead run using FragPipe/MsFragger (v. 22.0, https://github.com/Nesvilab/FragPipe/releases), as reported elsewhere.
Western blotting studies
A selection of proteins identified by the proteomic approach was further analyzed by denaturing and reducing Western blotting (Wb) using an aliquot of VH sample different from the one used for MS analysis. In fact, guanidine-HCl denaturation step, which is required for N-termini MS studies, is incompatible with SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. For Wb studies, the vitreous fluid of the same subjects enrolled in the MS analysis (n = 8 per experimental group) was used without introducing any dehydration or chemical manipulation.
In all cases, 5 µg of vitreous proteins per subject were heat-denatured and reduced in Laemmli buffer 1x supplemented with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Thereafter, 4–20% acrylamide pre-cast gels (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) were used to separate proteins by SDS-PAGE. After separation, proteins were transferred to a HyBond-ECL nitrocellulose filters (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), stained with Ponceau S, which is now often preferred for normalization procedures, and probed with the antibodies indicated.
Primary antibodies raised against anti-Dickkopf homolog 3 protein (DKK3, cat. #10365-1-AP, rabbit ), anti-osteopontin (OPN, cat. #22952-1-AP, rabbit), anti-vitronectin (VNT, cat. 15833-1-AP, rabbit) were purchased from ProteinTech (Rosemont, IL, USA). The anti-interphotoreceptor matrix proteoglycan 1 (IMPG1 – SPACR, sc-377366, cat. # lot C1220, mouse) antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz Technology (Dallas, Texas, USA). The anti-interphotoreceptor matrix proteoglycan 2 (IMPG2, cat. #PACO61546, rabbit) was purchased from AssayGenie (Dublin, Ireland).
All primary antibodies were diluted 1:3000 in 0.1% Tween-PBS 0.1% fat-free milk and with a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG antibody (Cell Signaling Technologies, cat. #7074P2 and cat. #7076P2, respectively), diluted 1:10.000 in 0.1% Tween-PBS 0.1% fat-free milk.
Proteins were developed by ECL chemiluminescence and recorded in a iBright 1500 (ThermoFisher scientific). Band intensity, including Ponceau S pattern, was done using the iBright analysis software incorporated in the instrumentation. Uncropped Wb data are provided in Supplementary Fig. 4.
Statistical analysis
Identifications and quantification of proteins and peptides was done using in-house built R Studio scripts (v. 4.3.1, https://posit.co/download/rstudio-desktop/). Raw data were first analysed using a pre-built method configured in PD software based on pairwise median ratio comparison between all combinations of subjects of the two groups, followed by a background based Student’s t test and Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) correction.
To address the limited sample size of the study, a class-specific quantile normalization on non-normalized protein intensities computed by PD processing, was applied. Imputation of missing values was done using the Classification and Regression Tree Method (CART) implemented in mice package in R Studio. A moderated Bayesian t-test (LIMMA) was then used to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between the two experimental groups. The analysis was performed in R using the limma and Q packages. Significance was set at p.mod value ≤ 0.05 with FDR control (q.mod) ≤ 0.05.
Since this approach and the values obtained (p.mod and q.mod by Storey’s test for FDR control) show optimized robustness for limited sample size studies, the data discussed in this paper are based on this approach. Nevertheless, the PD approach provided a very similar outcome.
Additional details regarding the differential expression of proteins and peptides between RRD and control groups are described throughout the results section.
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis was performed using the R package ClusterProfiler and setting a FDR ≤ 0.05 threshold after BH correction.
Histograms and statistical tests of Western blotting data were generated using GraphPad Prism software (v8.0). A non-parametric Mann-Whitney test was used to compute the p-value, with the significance threshold set at p ≤ 0.05.

RESULTS:
Results
Subjects enrollment and study design
Vitreous samples were obtained from patients undergoing PPV for either RRD (n = 8, mean age 69 ± 4 years) or idiopathic ERM (n = 8, mean age 75 ± 6 years), enrolled as controls (Control). Additional demographic, epidemiological and clinical data of enrolled patients are summarized in Table 1. Systemic hypertension was the prevalent co-morbidity across enrolled subjects. A heterogeneous localization (supero-temporal and inferior) of the retinal detachment was documented in the RRD group.
An equal quantity (µg) of VH protein for each enrolled sample was digested with trypsin and subjected to proteomics analysis. A workflow of the study is summarized in Fig. 1.
Dysregulation of metabolic pathways and structural components of the ECM in VH from RRD patients
MS spectra were searched against a human FASTA database and results were then filtered for Master proteins, as they are defined in PD glossary, setting as thresholds proteins identified with ≥ 1 unique peptides and FDR ≤ 0.05. Technical contaminants (e.g., trypsin, keratin, etc.) were filtered out.
In total, 798 proteins were identified (624 with FDR ≤ 0.01) and they showed
a robust overlap between RRD and Control groups: 745 proteins were common to the two experimental groups, 22 proteins were documented as exclusive of RRD and 31 of Controls. Discussion of exclusive proteins is limited to those identified and quantified in ≥ 50% subjects/group (prior to missing value imputation) to strengthen the consistency of their observation (Fig. 2A). Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 report the list of proteins exclusive for RRD and Control groups, respectively.
The distribution of protein intensities was verified upon log2 transformation (Fig. 2B). Density-plots of non-normalized intensities, though highlighting moderate intragroup variability, suggested a comparable intra-group and inter-group distribution for both RRD and Control datasets. Therefore a class-specific quantile normalization strategy was deemed applicable. The experimental variability improved, as shown in the post-quantile normalization density plot (Fig. 2C). Thereafter, missing values were imputed using Classification and regression trees (CART) approach.
Data were then analyzed by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to further check for global differences between RRD and Control experimental groups; separation across the three principal components (PC1, PC2, PC3) suggested that RRD and Control proteins had indeed different features (Fig. 2D). A scree plot highlighted that the 3 PCs explained more than 50% of features between the two groups (Fig. 2E), confirming this hypothesis.
Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs) between RRD and Control subjects were then analyzed using a moderate Bayesian t test LIMMA statistical approach (log2FC ≤ 0.57 and log2FC≤-0.57). To address the impact of the relatively small sample size, we then analyzed data using a robust statistical method that employs the evaluation of the moderated p.values (p.mod), which are calculated borrowing variance estimates from all proteins. FDR control of DEPs was then run using the Storey’s q.value (q.mod value) (Fig. 3).
In total, 52 proteins were found upregulated and 41 downregulated in the RRD group, compared to Controls (RRD/Control ratio); the entire list of upregulated and downregulated proteins in RRD and Control VH is shown in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. To better cluster and rationalize data, DEPs discussed above and group-exclusive proteins identified and quantified were submitted to gene ontology (GO) to infer statistically enriched (p ≤ 0.05 after Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing) molecular function (MF) (Fig. 4A, B), cellular components (CC) (Suppl. Figure 1), and biological processes (BP) charts (Suppl. Figure 2).
With regard to proteins upregulated in RRD VH, it is worth mentioning extracellular matrix components such as interphotoreceptor matrix proteoglycan 1 and 2 (Q17R60 and Q9BZV3, respectively). Moreover, proteins involved in TGF-β signaling and pro-inflammatory cascades or angiogenic processes such as Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 12 A (Q9NP84), prosaposin (P07602), noelin-2 (O95897), vasorin (Q6EMK4) were found upregulated together with complement factors and natural inhibitors of peptidase and protease activity, such as metalloproteinase inhibitor 1 (P01033), α1-antichymotrypsin (P01011) and S-arrestin (P10523).
Accordingly, GO term analysis identified enrichment (padjBH≤0.05) of terms generally associated with inflammatory and pro-fibrotic environments, in accordance with the transformation of the RRD vitreous, namely: glycosaminoglycan binding (GO:0005539), collagen-containing extracellular matrix (GO:006023), photoreceptor outer segment and cell cilium (GO:0001750 and GO:0097733, respectively), collagen (GO:0005518) (GO:0005518) and fibronectin binding (GO:0001968), enzyme inhibitor activity (GO:0004857) peptidase inhibitor and endopeptidase regulatory activity (GO:0030414 and GO:0061135, respectively). Upregulation of these terms potentially highlighted a tight interplay between unbalanced proteolysis, structural breakdown and aberrant deposition of matrix components, altered cell-to-cell contact and adhesiveness and damage to photoreceptor layers.
Conversely, proteins downregulated in RRD VH were mostly involved in proteostasis regulation and energetic/metabolic cycles, including aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A1 (P00352), transketolase (P29401 ), sorbitol dehydrogenase (Q00796), aldo-keto reductase family 1 member B1 (P15121), glutathione synthetase and reductase (P48637 and P00390, respectively), stress proteins, such as heat shock protein 90 (P07900), β-crystallins A2, A3 and B1 (P53672, P05813, P53674, respectively).
Accordingly, GO charts highlighted an enrichment in terms referable to mechanisms of proteostasis regulation and energetic metabolism such as NAD binding, (GO:0051287), protein folding chaperone (GO:0044183), oxidoreductase activities (GO:0016616, GO:0016614). Therefore, the enrichment pathways and charts associated with the downregulated proteins pointed to the dysregulation of central metabolic and proteostasis-related pathways which are suggestive of metabolic dysfunction and impaired cellular resilience in the context of RRD.
Mining of N-termini highlights dysregulation of proteolysis in vitreous humor from RRD patients
Given the enrichment of peptidases and inhibitors observed in functional enrichment analysis of DEPs, we hypothesized that RRD patients may suffer from unbalanced extracellular proteolysis. To test this hypothesis, FragPipe/MSFragger software was used to search for semi-tryptic peptides indicative of proteolytic processing, with the specific aim of identifying N-termini and C-termini. A peptide-level FDR ≤ 0.01 was applied, and the main criteria for N-termini identification were set for the absence of a lysine (K) or arginine (R) residue at the N-terminal flanking position of the peptide. This last search parameters were set to filter out peptides probably generated by the trypsin digestion of samples, thus not representing bona fide endogenous N-termini.
The search parameters chosen for the analysis enabled the identification of two classes of termini: mature N-termini, which, in most cases, originate from the enzymatic processing (often intracellular) of the signal peptide during protein secretion, and neo N-termini, which typically correspond to enzymatic cleavage of mature proteins.
Upon further filtering for N-termini identified in at least 3 out of 8 subjects/group (i.e., this threshold was chosen for statistical testing), the search identified a total of 457 peptides common to RRD and Control VH, 182 exclusive of RRD and 216 of Control VH samples (Fig. 5A). Neo N-termini were more represented than mature N-termini in both experimental groups.
N-termini documented as exclusive of either one of the two groups, and N-termini upregulated or downregulated (LIMMA test, Supplementary Fig. 3) were submitted (separately for each group) to TopFINDer (v. 4.1, https://topfind.clip.msl.ubc.ca/) to search for known cleavage sites of proteins identified and putative enrichment of specific proteases (the complete name of enzyme discussed below is summarized in Table 4).
Several previously characterized neo N-termini were identified as downregulated (-0.57 Log2FC, p.mod ≤ 0.05) in the RRD/Control ratio or specific (assigned for those identified and quantified in ≥ 75% subjects) of Control VH samples (Supplementary Table 3). They included: (i) several (n = 15) known neo-terminal fragments of crystallin αB released by MMP9 shedding; (ii) a wide array of proteolytic fragments of additional crystallins, such as γ-crystallins (isoforms 2 − 1, 4 and S, P07315, P07320 and P22914, respectively), β-crystallin (P43320) and heat shock protein β4 (P02489); (iii) a neo N-terminus of serpin-B9; (iv) a previously unknown neo N-terminus of protein bassoon (Q9UPA5), which is a presynaptic protein and major component of photoreceptor ribbon. In this case, the potential cleavage site was mapped between 1228↓Tyr1229; (v) a neo N-terminus of osteopontin (P10451-4). This fragment was reported to be generated by cleavage of the protein at 185↓Ala186 by MMP3/MMP7.
Interestingly, although the observation did not reach statistical significance, a previously unknown neo N-terminus of interphotoreceptor matrix proteoglycan 2 (IMPG2) (Q9BZV3) was found enriched in Control VH (Supplementary Table 4).
With regard to mature N-termini enriched in Control VH, it is worth documenting the identification of Wnt1 inhibitory factor (Q9Y5W5), secreted frizzled-related protein 3 (DKK3) (Q92765), spondin-1 (Q9HCB6), oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein (Q5SSB8), APP amyloid-beta precursor protein (P05067) and isoform 2 of fibrinogen alpha chain (A0A0S2Z3E8).
In the case of VH samples of RRD subjects, although a very limited number of upregulated N-termini (RRD/Control ratio, ≥ 0.57 Log2FC, p.mod ≤ 0.05) was identified, mature N-termini of several enzyme inhibitors and immune system components were documented (Supplementary Table 5): (i) C3 and PZP-like alpha-2-macroglobulin domain-containing protein 5 (P01023); (ii) α-1-antichymotrypsin (P0101); (iii) complement factor B (P00751); (iv) cystatin-3 (P01034); (v) CSF1 receptor (P07333); (vi) retinol binding protein (P10745); (vii) insulin binding proteins-4 (P22692); vi) serum amyloid A protein (P0DJI8). In this last case, the peptide was previously reported to be released by the CATL1, MMP3 and CATB cut at residues↓Ser.
Looking beyond the neo-termini which were specific of RRD VH group (focusing on those identified and quantified in ≥ 50% subjects/group) highlighted several known and unknown peptides serving roles for the regulation of cell adhesiveness and, most notably, angiogenesis (Supplementary Table 5), yielding insights into the proteolytic landscape of vitreous humor: (i) several proteolytic fragments of plasma proteins such as Albumin (P02768), including a previously unknown fragment generated by MEP1B and BACE2 cut between residues 174↓Ala175; (ii) serotransferrin (P02787) identified by two legumain cleavage sites mapped between residue 601↓Asn602 and 602↓Pro603; (iii) a fragment of complement C1r subcomponent (P00736), with a cleavage site located between residues 186↓His187; (iv) a fragment of clusterin (isoform 2, P10909-2) for which a cleavage fragment generated by MMP-3 and MMP12 at residues 309↓Met310 was documented; (v) calsyntenin-3 (isoform 2, Q9BQT9-2) reporting a cleavage site of ADAMTS-10 and − 17 at residues 824↓Val825; (vi) apolipoprotein A1 showing a MMP7 and MMP12 cleavage site at residues 224↓Ser225; (vii) fibronectin A - isoform2 for which two cleavage sites of MMP2, MMP8, MMP13 at residues↓Ala20 and 20↓Asp were documented; (viii) basement membrane-specific heparan sulfate proteoglycan core protein (P98160). In this case, a peptide spanning across residue 4196–4221 within the C-terminal portion of the molecule and a potential cleavage site between residues 4195↓Glu4196 was identified. The fragment, called endorepellin, has been previously characterized to be released by BMP1 and to possess potent antiangiogenic activities; (ix) vitronectin (P04004), with a potential cleavage site not previously reported and located between residues 422↓Asp423 and falling within the cell adhesion domain (hemopexin domain 4).
To circumstantiate further these findings, cleavage sites derived from protein termini of RRD and Control groups were analyzed by a sequence logo plot (Fig. 5B, C).
A net prevalence of polar residues, in particular glycine (G) and serine (S) was observed in P1 and P1’ position in the case of Control VH (Fig. 5B).
Conversely, RRD VH samples show a robust prevalence of polar residues such as alanine (A) and valine (V) over the same positions (Fig. 5C).
These preferences were confirmed also proceeding toward the P5 position, suggesting that different proteases may contribute to the proteolytic events of VH between RRD and Control subjects.
Mining of proteolytic events was then implemented with the search of C-termini by applying again a peptide-level FDR ≤ 0.01. In this case, the main criteria for identification were the absence of a K or R residue at the C-terminus of the peptide.
Mining of C-termini further expanded coverage of the VH degradome. In total, 149 C-termini were found as common to both the experimental groups, 46 exclusive of RRD and 130 exclusive of Control groups respectively (Fig. 5D). Whilst no significantly upregulated or downregulated C-termini were identified, in the case of Control VH, C-termini for several crystallin proteins were detected, including a previously characterized MMP9 cleavage site within crystallin αB which is complementary to one of the neo N-termini identified for the same protein and discussed above. The full list of C-termini identified is provided in Supplementary Table 6.
Figure 6 shows a schematic representation of biologically relevant N-termini and C-termini cleavages sites within the domain of proteins identified.
Western blot validation of protein identification and proteolytic processing of osteopontin and vitronectin
We validated the proteolytic processing of selected proteins using Western blot analysis, focusing on those with suitable electrophoretic properties (excluding perlecan due to its complexity) (Fig. 7).
For each sample, we loaded 5 µg of vitreous humor (VH) proteins from each sample enrolled in the MS analysis and probed them with antibodies against osteopontin (OPN), vitronectin (VTN), interphotoreceptor matrix proteoglycan 1 (IMPG1), interphotoreceptor matrix proteoglycan 2 (IMPG2), and DKK3. To enable semi-quantitative comparisons between the RRD and Control groups, and acknowledging the lack of genuine loading controls for extracellular fluid like VH, we normalized the intensity of the full-length protein bands to the total protein pattern stained by Ponceau S. Immunostaining for OPN revealed the typical multi-band pattern of the full-length protein. While a semi-quantitative analysis showed possible increase (p ≤ 0.01) in full-length OPN intensity in RRD VH compared to Control, a longer exposure of the Wb filters highlighted a faint ∼30 kDa band exclusively in the Control samples. This fragment was consistent with a potential cleavage site identified through N-terminal proteomic analysis and has been previously reported to result from proteolytic shedding of OPN by MMPs.
Similar to OPN, the full-length VTN also turned out to increase (p ≤ 0.01) in the RRD VH group, compared to Controls. Notably, the anti-VTN antibody also immunostained several putative fragments in the lower molecular weight regions of the blot, observed exclusively in the RRD samples. The Wb patterns for IMPG1 and IMPG2 were unequivocal. Both full-length proteoglycans were detected solely in RRD samples, precluding quantitative comparison via histograms. Interestingly, an additional ∼50 kDa band for IMPG1 was identified across all samples (both RRD and Controls). For IMPG2, several immunoreactive bands were documented at molecular weights lower than the full-length protein and even smaller than the well-characterized fragments generated by cleavage within its sperm protein, enterokinase, and agrin (SEA) domain.
This may support the novel N-terminal cleavage observed in our proteomic data.
With regard to DKK3, whilst the band intensity of the full-length protein showed comparable between samples, different potential cleavage patterns were observed especially for Control VH samples.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Rhegmatogenous Retinal Detachment (RRD) is a severe condition characterized by the detachment of the neurosensory retina from the Retinal Pigment Epithelium (RPE) due to the presence of retinal tears. The incidence of RRD is 7 to 12/10.000 cases per year with a guarded prognosis and a heavy burden for the patients’ quality of life and health care expenditures. Recurrent retinal detachment occurs in up to 20% of cases, leading to severe visual loss and often requiring multiple surgery.
Proliferative Vitreoretinopathy (PVR) is the primary cause of recurrent retinal detachment and subsequent severe visual loss. It is characterized by the growth and contraction of cellular aggregates on the retinal surface and within the vitreous chamber.
A hallmark of PVR is the Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), where retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells acquire mesenchymal characteristics. This transformation leads to altered blood hemodynamics, changes in vessel microarchitecture, fibrosis, and ultimately, retinal contraction. While the molecular footprint and cascade of events driving EMT and the associated pathological retinal remodeling in PVR have been extensively studied, they are still not fully understood.
In this context, the ultrastructural and microarchitectural composition of extracellular matrices (ECM) plays a central role in cellular and tissue homeostasis. Beyond providing mechanical, structural, and nutritional support, the ECM also serves as a reservoir of bioactive peptides that potently regulate cell behavior and function.
Accordingly, previous studies have demonstrated significant changes in RPE cell metabolism, mRNA transcription, and translation in relation to the stiffness of Bruch’s membrane. Bruch’s membrane, the specialized ECM of the RPE, itself exhibits altered properties in various retinal pathological processes.
Consistent with this scenario, dysregulation of photoreceptor metabolism, cell adhesiveness and polarization, extracellular matrix turnover and remodeling, immune system crosstalk, redox imbalance, angiogenesis, and inflammation have also been documented during PVR.
Pars Plana Vitrectomy (PPV) is the standard surgical procedure for complex RRDs and allows the collection of vitreous (VH) and aqueous (AH) humor samples. Research activities on these fluids are intrinsically complex since protein concentration is typically very low and identification of relevant proteins is hidden by abundant contaminating proteins (e.g., albumin, IgG etc.), often requiring sample pooling procedures and off-line separation or depletion of these proteins.
Previous relevant proteomics studies applied to the human vitreous and specifically to RRD patients suggested novel molecular perspectives on RRD and PVR pathobiology. However, to date, post-translational modification (PTM) profiling of VH samples has not yet (to the best of our knowledge) been performed. PTMs such as phosphorylation, glycosylation, and proteolytic processing are able to profoundly alter the structure and function of a protein. In this regard, we reasoned that retinal detachment could be linked to the dysregulation of physiological PTMs and, in particular, endogenous proteolytic events carried out by the different classes of enzymes populating the VH.
The present study reports the results of a pilot shotgun Label Free Quantification (LFQ) proteomic characterization of vitreous samples collected from a relatively small cohort of primary RRD patients (n = 8), compared to Controls (n = 8) who underwent vitreoretinal surgery for formation of epiretinal membranes (ERM). Without immunodepleting for most abundant proteins and working on a single-subject scale, using a moderated Bayesian t-test we identified a total 93 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between RRD and Control VH, uncovering precise alterations of key pathways for cell metabolism and tissue homeostasis. Thereafter, using proteomics analysis tools, we explored the repertoire of endogenous N-termini (and C-termini). This approach identified several known and unknown sites of proteolysis in structural and non-structural VH components and significant alterations on proteins serving roles for immune system regulation, proteolytic balance and, particularly, angiogenesis. This scenario introduces the perspective that the pathogenesis of RRD progresses through unbalanced extracellular proteolysis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Data availability
“The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD057155 and 10.6019/PXD057155".
Declarations