PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Hela cell
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Hela; Total protein levels; Polyamines; Affinity-based probes

ABSTRACT:
HeLa cells were incubated with affinity-based probes, synthetic analogs of endogenous metabolites: putrescine, spermidine, and spermine. Cells were photoirradiated briefly and proteins were extracted, digested with trypsin, and the resulting peptides were labeled with TMT. Proteins were quantified across conditions to assess the effect of polyamine analogs on total protein levels in cells. This dataset is related to dataset PXD058706 (HeLa cell protein interactome of polyamine affinity-based probes).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Shotgun analysis of proteins in HeLa cells following treatment with polyamine affinity-based probes

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HeLa cells were grown in complete medium composed of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S) in a humidified 5% CO2-containing atmosphere at 37 °C. Cells were plated 24 h before treatments. The complete medium was removed, cells were washed with Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated with polyamine analogues in FBS-free DMEM for 2 h. The medium was removed, cells were washed with PBS and immediately irradiated at 365 nm for 10 min in PBS using an LED light reaction box (WaveyTech Ltd, London, UK). The cells were lysed in 2% SDS in PBS, probe sonicated (3 pulses of 5 s), and cysteine residues were reacted with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. Proteins were precipitated by addition of methanol (1 vol.) and chloroform (1/4 vol.), followed by a brief vortex-mixing. The pellets were washed with methanol twice, air-dried, resuspended in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.0 and containing 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM chloroacetamide, and subjected to overnight digestion at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (1 µg : 100 µg total protein). Next, the samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to the final concentration of 1 % and centrifuged at 21,000 x g for 3 min at RT. Tryptic peptides (10 µg per sample) were then desalted and TMT-labeled on StageTip, compiled into a single TMT sample, and concentrated using a SpeedVac concentrator. Peptides in the compiled sample were fractionated (8 fractions) using the bRP fractionation (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC-MS measurement, the peptide fractions were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50 cm long × 75 µm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55 °C by applying a 180 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in TMT mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 15 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 32, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200) were 50 and 150 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 2.6.7.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot Human Reference Proteome (UP000005640) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was applied with reporter mass tolerance = 0.003 Da and min. reporter PIF = 0.75. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamination, as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.