PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Foreskin fibroblast
diseases: Upper respiratory tract disease
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Viral replication compartment (rc); Hmgb1; Human adenovirus (hadv); Biomolecular     condensates (bmcs); Histone chaperones; Tandem mass tag-based quantitative mass spectrometry

ABSTRACT:
Human adenoviruses are double–stranded DNA viruses that replicate in the cell nucleus and induce the formation of replication compartments (RCs) that are critical in viral replication and control of virus-host interactions. RCs are specialized virus-induced subnuclear microenvironments in which viral genome replication and expression are orchestrated, but also where host proteins known to restrict viral replication are co-opted and subverted. However, the protein composition of these RCs remains largely unexplored. In this study, we isolated adenovirus RC-enriched fractions from infected cells at different times post-infection and employed a tandem mass tag-based quantitative mass spectrometry approach to identify proteins associated with RCs. To validate the RC-protein components identified by mass spectrometry, we employed immunofluorescence and western blotting techniques. Proteins previously described to colocalize in RCs in infected cells were identified in the isolated subnuclear fractions. Moreover, we were able to validate previously unidentified RC-associated proteins, including the High Mobility Group Box 1, the SET nuclear proto-oncogene, the Structure Specific Recognition Protein 1 and the CCCTC-binding protein. These findings reveal an elaborate network of host and viral proteins potentially relevant for RC formation and function. The results also suggest potential candidate targets for therapeutic intervention and further mechanistic insights into the molecular basis of virus-host interactions

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The Protein Composition of Human Adenovirus Replication Compartments.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell fractionation: 1 × 107 mock-infected or HAdV-C5-infected cells were harvested at 16, 24, and 36 hpi and fractionated following a previously published protocol (Hidalgo et al. 2016; Hidalgo and Gonzalez 2015). Briefly, cells were lysed and subnuclear fractions were isolated via sucrose cushions and centrifugation. The nucleoplasmic fractions (Npl) and the pellets containing the RC-enriched fraction or the nucleolar fraction (Nlo; in mock-infected cells) were stored at -80°C until further use.  TMT-based MS analysis: The proteomic analysis of Npl and RC-enriched fractions from the same number of mock-infected or HAdV-C5-infected HFF cells was performed in 3 biological replicates. Approximately 400 µg of protein for each sample were resuspended in lysis buffer (0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, 2.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM pH neutral TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine), 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAM). The proteins were subsequently precipitated with a methanol:chloroform solution and digested with trypsin. Protein concentration was measured by the BCA protein assay and 100 µg of digested peptide were processed for TMT-based MS quantification as described previously (Jean Beltran, Mathias, and Cristea 2016).   Protein identification and quantification: TMT MS data were extracted using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann 2008), and the human subset of the UniProt protein sequence database, appended with HAdV-C5 sequences and common sample contaminants for protein identification and quantification. The search parameters were as follows: trypsin as the enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages permitted. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions. Carbamidomethyl was set as the fixed modification. The intensities of all TMT reporter ions from peptide spectrum matches were extracted. Protein abundances were therein calculated as a simple summation of their associated peptide group abundances. Peptide groups were considered for quantification based on their uniqueness (unique peptides) and in accordance with the principle of parsimony. The final criterion was at least two peptide matches. Three biological replicates were carried out to evaluate the reproducibility of the identification.

DATA PROCESSING:
Bioinformatics analyses: Exploratory analysis using a principal component analysis (PCA) and Box plots were done using R environment (v 4.2.3) (R Studio Core Team 2020). To select significant Differentially Abundant Proteins (DAPs) from RC-fractions three different approaches were used: i) Proteins present in all the three biological replicates from the RC-enriched subnuclear fractions; ii) a multivariate analysis comparing the proteins from HAdV-C5-infected cells to mock-infected cells (mock); and iii) a univariate analysis to compare the proteins of RC-fractions against Npl-fractions. The analysis of DAPs was done with the Limma package using a threshold of > 2 peptides per protein without missing values by group and a standard cut-off p-value ≤ 0.05 was applied. The DAPs were used in the multivariate and univariate analysis. Heatmaps using Euclidean distance were constructed in all cases. The heatmaps were divided into clusters based on the optimal number of clusters determined by the gap statistic, using default parameters in the clusGap-function from the cluster package (v 2.1.4) (https://stat.ethz.ch/R-manual/R-devel/library/cluster/html/clusGap.html). Venn diagrams were created with ggVennDiagram (v 1.2.2) and ggplot (v3.4.1). Proteins without values at any specific time-point were denoted as zero for visualization purposes. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, and pathway enrichment analysis of DAPs were carried out using g:Profiler (v 0.2.2) and KEGG pathways respectively. To validate previously reported data on proteins of interest, a targeted search was conducted on the DAPs, and the results were presented as a heatmap. To identify protein-protein interactions between the significant selected candidate DAPs we used the STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins, https://string-db.org/, (von Mering et al. 2007)) database. The interaction networks were visualized with Cytoscape (version: 3.9.1).