PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
diseases: Pancreas adenocarcinoma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Human; Pancreatic cancer; Plasma; Proteomics; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal cancer types worldwide, with the majority of the diagnostics being pancreatic adenocarcinomas (PDAC). Early and accurate diagnosis are among the best alternatives to improve treatment effectiveness and survival of PDCA patients; however, plasmatic biomarkers molecules are scarce. Here, we describe a proteomic screening on depleted plasma from 29 PDAC patients and 30 healthy controls, aiming to identify potential biomarkers for PDAC diagnosis. We observed 121 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), which were associated with the tumor biology and clinical behavior. We emphasize the potential of three over-expressed proteins (ORM1, ORM2, and SERPINA1), and four down-expressed proteins (ALDOA, PPIA, VCL, and SPARC) as biomarkers in PDAC, which were also correlated with disease staging. It was also demonstrated that some proteins could be used as complementary biomarkers associated with gold-standard CA19-9. Our high throughput proteomics approach suggests a set of proteins with potential use in PDAC diagnosis, giving light to future validation and application in clinical practice, enabling target proteomics and other serological assays.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic profiling reveals potential plasmatic biomarkers for pancreatic adenocarcinoma in Brazilian patients

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample preparation for NanoLC-MS/MS Digestion of depleted plasma was carried out with 40 µg of proteins after sample drying in SpeedVac Vacuum Concentrator (ThermoFisher Scientific). Protein denaturation and reduction were achieved by sample incubation with 40 µL of 8 M ureain 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 25 mM DTT for 1h at 37°C and 800 rpm followed by alkylation with 60 mM iodoacetamide for 1h at room temperature 25°C and 800 rpm in the dark. Urea 8M was diluted to 0.8M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to digestion with Sequencing Grade Trypsin (Promega) at 1:25 enzyme:protein (m/m) for 18 hours at 37°C. Before injection, samples were desalinated with in-house produced stage-tips, and the peptides were quantified in NanoDrop (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 280 nm absorbance. Sample concentrations were normalized prior to injection. NanoLC-MS/MS analysis The digested samples (0.5 µg) were separated by online nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography and analyzed by nanoelectrospray tandem mass-spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS). The chromatography was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher Scientific) followed by nanoelectrospray ionization, and MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The chromatographic conditions were as follows: mobile phase A 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B 0.1% formic acid, and 95% acetonitrile. The flow used was 250 nL/min, with a 90 min linear gradient from 5 to 40% B. The separation was carried out on a C18 in-house packed emitter with 15 cm length, 75 μm Internal diameter, packed with 3 μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch - ReproSil-Pur). MS and MS/MS scan parameters were as follows: MS1 acquisition in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 120,000, m/z window of 300 to 1500, positive profile mode with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 analysis was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode of ions with 2-7 charges, 2 s per cycle where the most intense ions were subjected to high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy, followed by acquisition in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 15,000 in centroid mode. A dynamic exclusion list of 60 s and the internal mass calibration for the MS1 scans were applied. The nESI voltage was 2.3 kV, and the ion transfer capillary temperature was 275 °C.

DATA PROCESSING:
The spectra identification was carried out in MaxQuant (v. 2.2.0.0)21. Oxidation on methionine and acetylation on protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylating of cysteine selected as fixed modifications. The analysis was performed using the specific digestion mode and trypsin defined as protease. The search tolerance was set to 20 ppm for both MS and MSMS. The search was conducted using a peptide length of at least seven amino acids and tolerance of two missed cleavages in the in-silico digestion. The Homo sapiens dataset was downloaded from UniProt (UP000005640; 82,499 entries) in March 2024 and used as the reference proteome, to which common contaminants (human keratins, BSA, and porcine trypsin) were added. The reverse dataset was employed as a decoy for FDR estimation (1% FDR for both Peptide Spectrum Match and protein assignment was accepted). The ‘match between runs’ and ‘label-free quantification’ (LFQ) options were enabled.