PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Alzheimer's disease; Human

ABSTRACT:
Alzheimer’s disease is a relentlessly progressive, fatal neurodegenerative disorder  associated with widespread aberrant proteomic changes. The full extent of protein  dysfunctions in AD and their impact on cellular physiology remains unknown. Here,  we used plexDIA, a proteomic profiling approach that parallelizes the acquisition  of samples and peptides, to characterize proteomic changes in AD. Using human  dorsolateral prefrontal cortex tissue, we identified 281 differentially abundant  proteins between AD and non-AD, including multiple AD-associated proteins, as  well as many proteins with no known role in AD. By systematically analyzing  cellular compartment-specific shifts in protein abundance, we identified an AD specific decrease in levels of the 20S proteasome, the catalytic core of the cell’s  primary protein degradation pathway. Many proteasome substrate proteins were  negatively correlated with 20S levels and increased in AD, suggesting reduced 20S  levels lead to abnormal protein accumulation. By analyzing proteins increased in  AD, we identify key properties of such proteins. Namely, they have highly specific  subcellular localizations and fast degradation rates, they contain signal sequences  that allow them to be targeted for proteasomal degradation, and they are targeted  by quality control pathways that recognize mislocalized proteins. Furthermore, we  identify coherent sets of ubiquitin system enzymes, proteins that mark substrates  for proteasomal degradation, whose levels robustly discriminate AD from non ADsamples. One subset exhibited consistent increases in AD, while consistent  decreases were observed in the other, revealing complex alterations in substrate  targeting pathways. Taken together, our results suggest that decreased ubiquitin proteasome system capacity and impaired clearance of short-lived and mislocalized  proteins contribute substantially to proteopathic burden in AD

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Ubiquitin-Proteasome System Dyeregulation in Alzheimer's Disease Impacts Protein Abundance.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Bulk tissue samples were processed to generate cell lysates using bead-based  tissue disruption, as previously described164. Approximately 50 mg of tissue was  transferred to a microcentrifuge tube containing zirconium oxide beads (Next  Advance 430917) and 600 µl lysis buffer on ice. The lysis buffer contained 75  MNaCl, 50 mMEPPS(pH8.5), 10 mMsodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM sodium  orthovanadate, 3% SDS, 10 mM PMSF, and one EDTA-free protease inhibitor  tablet (Roche 11873580001). After adding the tissue, the tubes were transferred  to a Mini-Beadbeater 16 (Biospec). Samples were processed for 30 seconds then  placed on ice for 2 minutes. This process was then repeated twice to ensure the  tissue lysed completely.  Weused the single-pot, solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method165  to extract and purify peptides from brain tissue lysates. The SP3 workflow uses  paramagnetic beads that bind proteins via hydrophilic interactions to separate  proteins from complex mixtures165. Equal amounts of Sera-Mag E3 and E7 beads  (5 mg; Cytiva 65152105050250 [E3] and 45152105050250 [E7]) were added to a  microcentrifuge tube. To condition the beads, the tube was placed in a magnetic  rack, the supernatant was removed, 200 µl of mass spectrometry grade water was  added, and the mixture was gently mixed by pipetting after removal from the  magnetic rack. This process was repeated twice. The conditioned beads were then  added at a 10:1 (wt:wt) ratio to the tissue lysates and mixed by gentle pipetting.  One volume of 100% ethanol was then added to the bead-lysate mixture to induce  protein binding to the beads. To enhance protein binding to beads, tubes were  incubated in a thermal mixer at 24◦C for 5 minutes with shaking at 1000 rpm.  The tubes were then returned to the magnetic rack and the supernatant removed.  The tube was then removed from the magnetic rack and washed three times with  180 µl of 80% ethanol. The samples were then air dried. We carried out on-bead  tryptic digestion of proteins to peptides by re-hydrating the samples in  100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB; pH 8.5) and trypsin. Tubes were gently inverted to mix the beads  and solution. Each tube was subsequently sonicated in a water bath to disrupt bead  aggregates. Digests were carried out overnight by incubating samples on a thermal  mixer set to 37◦C for 18 hours with shaking at 1000 rpm. Peptide abundances were  quantified by absorbance at 280 nm using a NanoDrop Eight spectrophotometer  (Thermo). Peptide supernatants were then transferred to new tubes and evaporated  to dryness. Samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB.  To multiplex the analysis of brain tissue samples, peptide digests were labeled with  mTRAQusing a previously-described approach38. We used the ∆0, ∆4, and ∆8  tags (Sciex 4440015, 4427700, and 4427698, respectively) for sample labeling.  Patients were assigned to batches, where each batch contains one sample each  tagged with ∆0, ∆4, and ∆8 tags. Batch assignments were carried out so that each  batch had a similar distribution of age, sex, and disease stage. Each mTRAQ tag  was resuspended in isopropanol, then added a concentration of 0.1 U per 10 µg of  peptides per sample. The tag labeling reaction was carried out by incubating the  samples at room temperature for 2 hours. Labeling reactions were quenched by  adding 0.25 % hydroxylamine to the samples and incubating for 1 hour at room  temperature, as previously described38. After quenching, samples were pooled  based on the batching scheme described above.

DATA PROCESSING:
We first searched the gas phase fractionated spectra to create an empirical spectral  library using DIA-NN40. The generated library was used to search all samples.  Weused the following DIA-NN settings to search the gas phase fractionated data:  N-terminal methionine excision: enabled, peptide length: 7- 30 amino acids,  precursor m / z: 375- 880, and charge: 1- 5, variable modifications: acetlyation  and oxidation, and fixed modifications: mTRAQ. Channel-specific normalization  was used and mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for both MS1 and MS2. The  match-between-runs feature was enabled.