PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: timsTOF Pro
modifications: monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Plasma proteomics dia

ABSTRACT:
State-of-the-art liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS)-based proteomic technologies, using microliter amounts of patient plasma, can detect and quantify several hundred plasma proteins in a high throughput fashion, allowing for the discovery of clinically relevant protein biomarkers and insights into the underlying pathobiological processes. Using such an in-house developed high throughput plasma proteomics allowed us to identify and quantify > 400 plasmas proteins in 15 minutes per samples, i.e., a throughput of 100 samples/day. We demonstrated the clinical applicability of our method in this pilot study by mapping the plasma proteomes from patients infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or herpes virus, both groups with involvement of the central nervous system (CNS). We found significant disease-specific differences in the plasma proteomes. The most notable difference was a decrease in the levels of several coagulation-associated proteins in HIV vs. herpes virus, amongst other dysregulated biological pathways providing insight into the differential pathophysiology of HIV compared to herpes virus infection. In a subsequent analysis, we found several plasma proteins associated with immunity and metabolism to differentiate patients with HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) compared to cognitively normal people with HIV (PWH), suggesting the presence of plasma-based biomarkers to distinguishing HAND from cognitively normal PWH. Overall, our high-throughput plasma proteomics pipeline enables identification of distinct proteomic signatures of HIV and herpes virus, which may help illuminate divergent pathophysiology behind virus-associated neurological disorders.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Using Plasma Proteomics to Investigate Viral Infections of the Central Nervous System including Patients with HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorders

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10058233/  Our cost-effective method includes addition of 5% (final concentration) perchloric acid, which results in protein precipitation and separation of soluble and insoluble protein fractions. The vast majority of the highly abundant proteins remain in the insoluble fraction and is removed from the sample used for the subsequent analysis, which comprises the soluble fraction(Makszin, Kustan et al. 2019). Perchloric acid sample preparation method is as follows. After dilution of 50 μL plasma samples with 450 μL water, 5 % of perchloric acid (25 μL) is added and after vigorous agitation, the suspension is allowed to stand on ice for 15 min. Then samples are centrifuge for 15 min (4° C, 16 000×g). The supernatant is transferred and then mix with 50 μL of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a μSPE HLB plate, previously conditioned with 300 μL methanol and 500 μL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid twice, for desalting and removal of perchloric acid. Elution of the proteins is done with 100 μL 90 % acetonitrile 0.1% TFA. Samples are dried with a Speedvac. The samples are then resuspended in 40 μL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37° C. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 10% formic acid (final volume of 50 μL). Without any further desalting strategy, 2 μL was injected into the LC-MS instrument.

DATA PROCESSING:
The DDA runs were used to generate a spectral library in Spectronaut version 13.12.200217 (Biognosys). The DIA runs were also analyzed in Spectronaut version 13.12.200217 (Biognosys). Default BGS Factory settings were employed for both library generation with Pulsar and DIA analysis. Only DIA data were used for identification and quantification of proteins, and the subsequent statistical analysis. Results were filtered with a 1% FDR at both the precursor and protein level. All statistical analysis was performed using Perseus v 1.6.10.43 and GraphPad Prism 9.