PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Lc-msms; Hek293 stable cells; Full length rat kir4.1; Lc8 copurification

ABSTRACT:
The project aims to determine the interactome of full-length Kir4.1 overexpressed in HEK293 stable cells. The overexpressed proteins were purified, and the purified samples, along with three bands from a 1D SDS-PAGE gel, were analyzed by LC-MSMS after trypsin digestion. The primary goal was to identify the highly populated 10 kDa proteins, which were likely direct binders of Kir4.1 proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Rat Kir4.1 interactome with the particular purpose to identify 10 kDa copurified proteins using LC-MSMS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
N-terminally FLAG-GFP tagged full-length rat Kir4.1 proteins were overexpressed and purified through affinity purification using anti-FLAG antibody conjugated resins. N-terminal tags were removed by overnight cleavage by HRV 3C proteases. The samples were further purified via a Superose 6 column. Tetramer fractions were collected and concentrated to approximately 8 mg/mL for peptide mass finger printing experiments.  The purified protein sample was further analyzed by 1D SDS-PAGE. Two bands corresponding to the size of Kir4.1 tetramers, along with one band around 10 kDa, were cut out for in-gel digestion and peptide mass finger printing experiments.  Peptides were prepared from the rKir_41 solution sample using a modified filter-aided sample preparation method. The sample was mixed with 200 µl of 100 mM Tris-HCL buffer, pH 8.5 containing 8 M urea (UA buffer). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced using 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) with heating to 37 ºC for 1 h. The sample was transferred to the top chamber of a 10,000 molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) filtration unit and spun in a microcentrifuge at 14,000 rcf for 10 min. An additional 200 µl of UA buffer was added and the filter unit was spun at 14,000 rcf for 15 to 20 min.  The cysteine residues were alkylated using 100 µl of 50 mM Iodoacetamide (IAM) in UA buffer.   IAM in UA buffer was added to the top chamber of the filtration unit.  The sample was gyrated at 550 rpm for 30 min in the dark at RT using a Thermomixer.  The filter was spun at 14,000 rcf for 15 min and the flow through discarded. Unreacted IAM was washed through the filter with two sequential additions of 200 µl of UA buffer, and centrifugation at 14,000 rcf for 15 to 20 min after each buffer addition. The flow through was discarded after each buffer exchange- centrifugation cycle. The UA buffer was exchanged with digestion buffer (DB), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8. Two sequential additions of DB (200 µl) with centrifugation after each addition to the top chamber was performed. The top filter units were transferred to a new collection tube and 100 µl DB containing 1 mAU of LysC was added and sample was incubated at 37 °C for 2 h.  Trypsin (1 µg) was added and sample was incubated overnight at 37 °C.  The filter was spun at 14,000 rcf for 15 min to recover the peptides in the lower chamber.  The filter was washed with 50 µl of DB buffer and the wash was combined with the peptides. The peptides were acidified to 1% (v/v) TFA in preparation for desalting using stage tips (C18). The peptides were eluted with 60 µl of 60% (v/v) Acetonitrile (MeCN) in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and dried in a SpeedVac.  The peptides were dissolved in 20 µl of 2% (v/v) MeCN in water. An aliquot (10%) was removed for quantification using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay kit. The remaining peptides were transferred to an autosampler vial, dried and stored at -80 °C.  Gel plugs were digested as previously described2 with minor modifications. Briefly, three 1mm diameter cores were cut from each Comassie stained gel band and transferred to separate wells in a 96 well PCR microplate. Gel plugs were de-stained in 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer containing 50% MeCN. Gel plugs were dehydrated by two incubations for 15 min at room temperature in 100% MeCN.  Dehydrated plugs were reduced in 100 µL 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 minutes. Excess reagent was aspirated, and plugs were alkylated with 100 µl of 100 mM ABC buffer containing 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark at room temperature. Excess reagent was aspirated, and plugs were dehydrated with 100% MeCN. Trypsin digestion was initiated by addition of trypsin in 50 mM ABC buffer containing 10% (v/v) MeCN. Enough volume was added to cover the dehydrated plug. Digestion was carried out for 30 min at 37 °C. A second aliquot of trypsin was added for overnight digestion at 37 °C. The next morning, peptides were extracted from the gel in 50% (v/v) MeCN in aqueous 5% (v/v) FA for 20 min at 37°C. Extraction buffer was aspirated and transferred to an autosampler vial. Extraction step was repeated once, and extraction buffer was combined with the first aspirate into the same autosampler vial. Peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS analysis The samples were analyzed using ultra-high performance mass spectrometry using a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap LC-MS System, Q-Exactive PLUS interfaced to an EASY-nanoLC 1000. A 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 RSLC column was equilibrated with 100% solvent A (1%FA) on the nano-LC for a total of 11 microL at 700 bar pressure.  Samples in FA 1% (v/v) were loaded at a constant pressure of 700 bar.  Peptide chromatography was initiated with mobile phase A (1% FA) containing 2% solvent B (100%ACN, 1%FA) for 5 min, then increased to 20% B over 100 min, to 32% B over 20 min, to 95% B over 1 min and held at 95% B for 19 min, with a flow rate of 250 nl/min.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data were acquired in data-dependent mode.  Full-scan mass spectra were acquired with the Orbitrap mass analyzer using a scan range of m/z = 325 to 1500 and a mass resolving power set to 70,000.  Ten data-dependent high-energy collisional dissociations were performed with a mass resolving power set to 17,500, a fixed lower value of m/z 100, an isolation width of 2 Da, and a normalized collision energy setting of 27. The maximum injection time was 60 ms for parent-ion analysis and product-ion analysis. The target ions that were selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 sec. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at a target value of 1e6 ions for full MS scans and 1e5 ions for MS2. Peptide ions with charge states of one or > 8 were excluded for HCD acquisition. The MS2 spectra from peptides with +2, +3 and +4 charge states were analyzed using Mascot software (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search against a UniProt database of human proteins (ver July 2019; 20,667 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages allowed. The searches were performed with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a parent ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine, deamidation of glutamine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, pyro-glutamate formation from n-terminal glutamine residues and oxidation of methionine were specified as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered at 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) by searching against a reversed protein sequence database and protein identification requires observation of a minimum of 2 peptides.

METHODS:
Experimental procedures
Cloning and stable cell line generation
N-terminal FLAG tag and TQT deletions were introduced to GFP-tagged Kir4.1 complementary DNA in p-EGFP vector by high-fidelity PCR and then subcloned into the attB recombination plasmid. Constructs were stably transfected into human embryonic kidney 293 cells using the Landing Pad system and selected through multiple rounds of subculturing in the presence of 10 μM puromycin or 10 nM Rimiducid (MedChemExpress) that activates inducible caspase-9. Stable cells in adherent mode were then converted to suspension cultures by switching to serum-free medium. Suspension cultures were started at around 0.5 × 106 cells/ml and cultured at 145 rpm and 37 °C in 8% CO2 and then subcultured at cell density ∼3 × 10 cells/ml.
Overexpression and purification
Details are provided in the Supporting Information. Briefly, stably transfected cells in suspension were induced by doxycycline for 3 days and then harvested. Cells were lysed by sonication, and membrane solubilization was achieved by 1% lauryl maltose neopentyl glycol and 0.12% cholesterol hemisuccinate. Affinity purification was performed using FLAG resin (Sigma; catalog no.: A2220) with exchange to a glyco-diosgenin containing buffer during the washing step. Proteins were eluted by overnight cleavage by human rhinovirus 3C proteases and further purified by SEC using a Superose 6 column in glyco-diosgenin-containing buffer. Tetramer fractions were collected and concentrated to approximately 7 to 8 mg/ml for peptide mass spectrometry and vitrification.
Peptide mass spectrometry
Details are provided in the Supporting Information. Briefly, peptides were prepared using a modified filter-aided sample preparation method. Samples from the top two Kir4.1 bands and the ∼10 kDa band were prepared using in-gel digestion with minor modifications. Samples were analyzed using ultra–high performance mass spectrometry using a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap LC-MS System, Q-Exactive PLUS interfaced to an EASY-nanoLC 1000, and MS2 spectra were analyzed using Mascot software (Matrix Science; version 2.5.1). Each of these experiments was performed once, and the raw and processed data are deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD060340 and provided as Supporting Information.
In vitro pulldown assay
Details are provided in the Supporting Information. Briefly, GST-conjugated LC8 (GST-LC8) clone was obtained from Addgene, and the overexpressed proteins in Escherichia coli were purified through one-step affinity purification with glutathione resins (Cytiva; catalog no.: 17075605). GST and LC8 were separated by human rhinovirus 3C protease overnight and separately purified. PBS was used in all steps. Pulldown of Kir4.1 proteins was visualized by GFP signals or immunoblotting with anti-FLAG antibodies (Invitrogen; catalog no.: MA1-918878-HRP) or anti-Kir4.1 antibodies (Alomone Lab; catalog no.: APC-035).
In vitro peptide binding assay
GFP- or GST-tagged N-terminal peptides as well as LC8 proteins were overexpressed in E. coli BL21 and purified with nickel–nitrilotriacetic acid resins (Thermo Scientific; catalog no.: 88222) via N-terminal 6xHis tag and subsequent SEC (Superdex 200) equilibrated with PBS. Fluorescence SEC (Shimadzu) through a Superdex 200 column was used to detect the size change of GFP-tagged N-terminal peptides or LC8 proteins through interaction with GST-tagged LC8 or N-terminal peptides, respectively.
In vitro 9-amino-6-chloro-2-methoxyacridine flux assay
Details are provided in the Supporting Information. Briefly, purified proteins were reconstituted in synthetic liposomes composed of POPE:POPG in an 8:2 ratio, with or without 1% (w/w) brain PIP2. The activity of the protein was inferred from the fluorescence change of 9-amino-6-chloro-2-methoxyacridine; a greater fluorescence change indicates higher activity.
Single-particle cryo-EM
Details for single-particle EM imaging and analysis can be found in the Supporting Information. Briefly, the grids were prepared using FEI Vitrobot Mark IV with purified Kir4.1 supplemented with diC8 PIP2. Movies were recorded with a pixel size of 0.657 Å and analyzed using CryoSPARC (Structura Biotechnology Inc), version 4.5.3. Three (blob and template-based picking and Topaz picking) approaches were employed to detect single particles from motion-corrected and contrast transfer function–estimated micrographs, identifying more than 900,000 particles. From these, approximately 300,000 particles isolated from heterogeneous refinement resulted in the best electron density map at a resolution of 6.69 Å, which was deposited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank (EMD-48154). Further 3D classification of the 300,000 particles identified a subgroup (149,671 particles) with additional density at the crevice. Nonuniform refinement of this subgroup yielded a map with lower global resolution of 6.93 Å but with finer details of the additional density, to which a rigid body fit was manually applied, as shown in Figure 5. Protein coordinates are provided as Supporting Information (Kir4.1_LC8_complex.pdb). Structural illustrations were prepared using UCSF ChimeraX-1.8.
Multiple sequence alignment
Multiple sequence alignments were made using the Clustal Omega web server, and the sequence logo was generated by WebLogo server, version 2.8.2.
Statistical analysis
Statistical significance was analyzed using two-way ANOVA. Statistical significance of p < 0.05, p < 0.01, and p < 0.001 is indicated by single, double, and triple asterisks, respectively.

RESULTS:
Results
N-terminal FLAG-GFP-tagged full-length Kir4.1 was stably expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 cells (Fig. 1A). Tetramer peaks of purified Kir4.1 proteins overlapped for pH 8.0 and pH 6.0 buffer conditions, indicating that the complexes were stable in detergent micelles over the physiologically relevant pH range (Fig. 1B) in which the channel goes from physiologically active (pH 8.0) to inhibited state (pH 6.0). Even though Kir4.1 protein (at molecular weights near 150 kDa after the N-terminal tags were cleaved off) was predominant, some additional bands were present in the purified proteins, particularly proteins of ∼10 kDa. These ∼10 kDa proteins were as abundant as Kir4.1 (Fig. 1C), at both pH 8.0 and pH 6.0, and their abundance was not substantially reduced even at high ionic strength (500 mM KCl) (Fig. 1C). To identify these copurified proteins, purified Kir4.1 solution samples were subject to peptide mass fingerprinting, which identified >2000 different proteins (Supporting Information (SI) SF1 and ST1). After Kir4.1 itself, the second most highly populated protein was dynein light chain 1 (DYNLL1) (SI SF 1,2 and Fig. 1D), and the paralog dynein light chain 2, which can form a heterodimer with DYNLL1 (SI SF 1,2 and Fig. 1D). The high abundance of these two small proteins (collectively referred to as LC8 proteins) matched the 1D gel image of the protein sample (Fig. 1C), in which bands at ∼10 kDa were most abundant next to the top two bands of Kir4.1 proteins.
The small size but high abundance suggested LC8 proteins might directly interact with Kir4.1. To test this directly, pull down of Kir4.1 was performed (Fig. 2A). First, glutathione-S-transferase (GST)-LC8, but not free GST, pulled down F-GFP-Kir4.1 from detergent-solubilized membrane fractions, and this effect was attenuated in the presence of added free LC8 (Fig. 2B). To exclude the possibility that the interaction was indirect, via mediating proteins, the same experiment was repeated with purified F-GFP-Kir4.1 (Fig. 2B), with essentially the same results, indicating that the two proteins directly interact. Finally, to test whether LC8 could interact with native Kir4.1 proteins, detergent-solubilized mouse brain membrane fractions were incubated with GST-LC8 or free GST, and native Kir4.1 was detected by immunoblotting with anti-Kir4.1 antibodies, for which specificity was confirmed (SI SF 4A) (Fig. 2C). Again, essentially the same results were obtained as with recombinant F-GFP-Kir4.1 proteins. Other abundant membrane proteins, including Na+/K+ ATPase I and SWELL1, were not pulled down by GST-LC8 (Fig. 2C). Together, these results strongly support a direct interaction between LC8 and Kir4.1 that is physiologically relevant.
To identify the site of LC8 binding, we used LC8Pred, a web server that performs sequence-based predictions of LC8 binding site(s). This analysis identified a potential LC8 binding motif comprised of eight amino acids (9-YSQTTQTE-16) at the N-terminal loop of Kir4.1 (Fig. 3A) that includes the key phosphorylatable Tyr9. The motif is absent in other Kir channels (Fig. 3A) but completely conserved between Kir4.1 orthologs (Fig. 3B), except in one species (vampire fish). The highly conserved anchoring sequence of three amino acids (13-Tyr-Gln-Tyr (TQT)-15) is crucial for LC8 interaction. To test the veracity of the predicted binding site, WT and ΔTQT (deletion of the three TQT residues) Kir4.1 N-term peptides (residues 1–38), as well as the strong LC8 binding motif of SPAG5 protein, were generated (Fig. 3C), and each of these peptides was tagged to the C terminus of either GFP or GST (Fig. 3D); the former forces the peptides to be monomeric, whereas the latter allows dimerization of the peptides. None of the GFP-tagged peptides showed a molecular weight shift after incubation with GST-LC8 (Fig. 3E). In contrast, GFP-LC8 eluted earlier after incubation with GST-SPAG5 or GST-WT peptides, indicating complex formation, but there was no shift with GST-ΔTQT peptide (Fig. 3E). The results indicate that the dimeric state of the peptides allowed binding to the Kir4.1 and SPAGS5 LC8-binding domains and that the TQT anchoring sequence is required for their interactions.
To probe the role of the predicted binding site in LC8 interaction with the channel, full-length Kir4.1 protein with the ΔTQT deletion was overexpressed and purified (Fig. 4A). Kir4.1-ΔTQT purified as tetramers; the tetramer peak was broader and right-shifted, indicating that the mutant in solution is smaller than the WT (Fig. 4A). That this is due to loss of LC8 interaction (loss of 4 LC8 dimers would reduce the size by ∼80 kDa) is evident in Coomassie-stained gels and confirmed by immunoblot with anti-LC8 antibodies (Fig. 4B). The results demonstrate that the anchoring sequence is necessary for the interaction and hence that the predicted site is indeed a bona fide LC8 binding motif.
To probe the functional consequences of LC8 interaction, channel activity of purified WT and ΔTQT proteins was assessed using a liposome flux assay (Fig. 4, C and D). The ΔTQT proteins exhibited normal behavior, wherein the channel was inactive but became activated by PIP2, strongly supporting that the ΔTQT proteins are properly folded. On the other hand, WT proteins exhibited abnormal behaviors, showing basal activity in the absence of PIP2 but becoming inhibited by PIP2, suggesting that the WT proteins potentially are in deformed conformations.
Single-particle cryo-EM was then attempted to determine the structural basis of LC8 interaction with WT Kir4.1. Despite the monodispersed tetramer peak observed with size-exclusion chromatography (SEC, Fig. 1C) and a large number of particles (over 900,000), particles were highly heterogeneous, particularly in the cytoplasmic domain (SI SF 7). At the achieved resolution (6.7 Å), it is clear that fourfold symmetry is lost in the cytoplasmic region, with one additional density associated with each tetramer, and located at the crevice between the transmembrane domain (TMD) and the cytoplasmic domain of one pair of subunits (SI SF 7 and Fig. 5A). The size of the additional density is comparable to the LC8 dimer density seen in dynein complexes when both maps are contoured at the same density level (SI SF 8). Although the available resolution precludes formal model building, rigid body fitting of an LC8 dimer (Protein Data Bank code: 3E2B), guided by continuous densities connecting the putative LC8 density to the Kir4.1 protein density (Fig. 5B), positions the dimer such that the Kir4.1 N-terminal LC8 binding motifs, now adopting a β-strand (Fig. 5, C and D, left, green and right, orange), point toward Kir4.1. The continuous densities suggest that the LC8 dimer forms an interaction with two neighboring Kir4.1 subunits. The interaction pulls the two interacting subunits closer to the TMD and into tight engagement with each other but conversely causes the other two subunits to disengage from the TMD and from each other (Fig. 5A), potentially underlying the abnormal channel activity of the purified WT proteins.

INTRODUCTION:
Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) 4.1 channels, prominently regulated by phosphoinositide-(4,5)-phosphate (PIP2) and intracellular pH, are highly expressed in glial cells in the central nervous system and kidney epithelial cells. They play critical roles in regulation of local and whole-body potassium levels, and hence, electrolyte homeostasis, and Kir4.1 loss-of-function mutations cause Seizures, Sensorineural deafness, Ataxia, intellectual (Mental) disability, and Electrolyte imbalance (SeSAME) syndrome, also known as EAST syndrome.
Interestingly, both Kir4.1 channel activity and channel surface expression are directly affected by phosphorylation of N-terminal Tyr9, which is located far beyond the structured part of the protein. KATP channel cryo-EM structures determined with full-length Kir6.2 and SUR2 proteins reveal strikingly unique interactions of the “unstructured” N-terminal and intervening loops with the rest of the complex that are critical in KATP gating. Determined with both N and C termini truncated, a recent Kir4.1 cryo-EM structure (Protein Data Bank code: 8I5M) was structurally similar to the previously determined Kir6.2 PIP2-bound structure and provides no information regarding flexible parts. In the present study, we purified full-length Kir4.1 proteins and carried out biochemical, functional, and structural characterization. Full-length Kir4.1 proteins show structurally unique features and reveal a novel and direct interaction of dynein light chain 1 (and 2), so called LC8, to the unstructured N terminus of Kir4.1. LC8 interaction had significant effects on channel activity of Kir4.1 proteins, indicating LC8 is a bona fide Kir4.1 auxiliary protein.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
The authors declare that the data underlying the findings of this study are available within the article and its Supporting Information and are available upon request.
Supporting information
This article contains supporting information.
Supporting information