PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Micro proteomics; Extracellular vesicles; Pancreatic cancer

ABSTRACT:
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) is a well-established method for the isolation of extracellular vesicles (EVs), but the large elution volumes necessitate a concentration step prior to proteomics analysis. This concentration step can lead to significant EV loss. Here we report an EV proteomics approach that enables the isolation of EVs into just 80 µL, which is directly compatible with proteomics analysis without the need for prior concentration. EVs were characterized by transmission electron microscopy, Western blot, and nanoparticle tracking analysis, all of which confirmed the presence of small EVs. Proteomics analysis of the EVs was performed and benchmarked against those isolated using an automated UHPLC-SEC platform. The novel workflow identified more proteins and more EV markers, including 96 of the 100 top exosomal proteins from the ExoCarta database, compared to 91 identified using EV samples isolated by UHPLC-SEC. When applied to EVs isolated from pancreatic cancer cell lines the workflow demonstrated higher sensitivity for previously reported EV markers of pancreatic cancer.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Novel PPT+SEC Workflow for High-Sensitivity Extracellular Vesicle Proteomics from Cell Media

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
EVs were lysed with a 10% SDS solution (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) containing Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (F. Hoffmann–La Roche SA, Basel, Switzerland). The solution was then sonicated for 10 minutes using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode, Belgium) with 10 cycles of 30 seconds on and off. Proteins were reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) at 45°C for 30 minutes and subsequently carbamidomethylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Protein digestion was performed using S-TrapTM Micro (ProtiFi, Fairport, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions (https://protifi.com/pages/protocols) with slight modifications. The protein samples were acidified with 2.5% phosphoric acid and then diluted with a solution of 90% methanol/100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), to ensure efficient trapping of proteins within the matrix of the S-Trap. Protein digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade (Promega, Walldorf, Germany). After digestion, peptides were eluted with a combination of 40µL of 50 mM TEAB, 40µL of 0.2% formic acid (FA) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and 40µL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) mass-grade (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)/0.2% FA. Eluted peptides were evaporated to dryness and subsequently resuspended in a 10% FA solution for LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
nLC-MS/MS analysis and label-free quantification: Samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY spray ion source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a PepMap C18 precolumn (2 cm x 75 µm i.d., 3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and separated on a PepMap C18 analytical column (50 cm x 75 µm i.d., 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size,  Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) heated at 35 °C and with a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptide separation was carried out using a segmented gradient with the mobile phases 0.1% FA (mobile phase A) and ACN/0.1% FA (mobile phase B) as follows: from 5% to 22% mobile phase B in 104 min, from 22% to 32% in 15 min and from 32% to 90% in 10 min. MS data were acquired in positive ion mode using a spray voltage of 2.0 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. The MS1 survey scan was acquired with the OrbitrapTM (OT) mass analyzer with a mass range of 375–1200 m/z, a resolving power of 120 000 FWHM (at 200 m/z), an RF lens value of 60%, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a maximum ion count of 4x105. The MS2 scans used the TopSpeed method in which the most intense precursor ions (2+ to 7+ charge states and a minimum intensity threshold of 5000) were isolated using the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and then fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, and using a total cycle of 3 s. Fragment ion detection was performed in the dual-pressure ion trap (IT) with a maximum intensity of 2000, a maximum injection time of 300 ms, and a dynamic exclusion of 60 s.  - Proteomics data analysis: The Raw files produced by the LC-MS/MS analysis were uploaded into Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and queried against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot TrEMBL database using the SEQUEST search algorithm. Peptide identification was performed using a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da for precursor and fragment ions respectively, trypsin/Lys-C as endoproteases, and up to 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a static modification (+57.021464 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da) and protein N-Terminal acetylation (+42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were determined with q values set to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator module