PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Extracellular vesicle; Bronchoalveolar lavage
diseases: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Copd; Bronchoalveolar lavage; Proteomics; Inflammation; Extracellular vesicles; Mirna

ABSTRACT:
Abstract: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a progressive lung disease for which there is no cure. Accumulating research results suggest a role for extracellular vesicles (EVs) in the pathogenesis of COPD. This study aimed to uncover the involvement of EVs and their molecular cargo in the progression of COPD by identification of EV-associated protein and microRNA (miRNA) profiles. We isolated EVs from bronchial alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of 18 patients with COPD and 11 healthy controls by size exclusion chromatography. EV isolates were characterized by Nnanoparticle tracking analysis and protein content.  Proteomic analysis revealed higher abundance of 284 proteins (log2FC > 1) and lower abun-dance of 3 proteins (log2FC <-1) in EVs derived from patients with COPD. Ingenuity pathway analysis showed that proteins enriched in COPD-associated EVs trigger inflammatory responses including neutrophil degranulation. Variances in surface receptors and ligands associated with COPD EVs suggested preferential interaction with alveolar cells. Small RNAseq analysis iden-tified higher abundance of ten miRNAs and lower abundance of one in EVs from COPD versus controls (Basemean >100, FDR<0.05). Our data indicate that the molecular composition of EVs in BALF of patients with COPD is altered compared to healthy control EVs. Several components in COPD EVs were identified that may perpetuate inflammation and alveolar tissue destruction.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Altered Extracellular Vesicle-derived protein and microRNA signatures in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from COPD patients

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
EVs were isolated from 8 mL of each sample using different steps of centrifugation, ultra-filtration, and size exclusion chromatography (SEC). Protein levels were determined using discovery-based proteomics (using label free quanti-fication) for relative protein concentrations as described previously [PMID: 32160399], but with alterations in the LC-MS detection method and subsequent data analyses.  In short, in-gel digestion was performed on 30 μL isolated EV material, containing an equivalent of the EV isolation from 4 mL of BALF of each sample. Tryptic digestion (1:100 g/g sequencing grade modified trypsin V5111; Promega) was performed after reduction with 10 mmol/L dithiothreitol and alkylation with 55 mmol/L iodoacetamide proteins, before the peptides were eluted from the gel for mass spectrometric analyses.  Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex) using a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMapC100 C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex, buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in acetonitrile). In gen-eral, an equivalent of 60% of the digested starting material from the isolated EVs was in-jected using the µL-pickup method with buffer A as a transport liquid from a cooled au-tosampler (5 ˚C) and loaded onto a trap column (µPrecolumn cartridge, Acclaim Pep-Map100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm x 5 mm, Dionex). Peptides were separated on the nano-LC column using a linear gradient from 2-45% buffer B in 117 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and da-ta-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using isolation windows of 12 m/z with a precur-sor mass range of 300-1200

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS raw data were processed with Spectronaut (version 15.1.210713.50606) (Biogno-sys) using the standard settings of the directDIA workflow, with a human SwissProt da-tabase (www.uniprot.org, 20.350 entries).  For the quantification the Q-value filtering was set to the classic setting without imputing, which includes unpaired t-testing for the calculation of the differential abundances be-tween the groups. Raw data with FDR values were exported from the Spectronaut soft-ware, and for downstream processing, we only included proteins that were detected in >70% of all samples (20/29).

METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Study Population
All study participants were included in a clinical study performed in the UMCG, as described earlier. Briefly, the study included 11 healthy controls without a history of pulmonary disease and healthy lung function, and 18 patients with moderate COPD (GOLD stage II). All participants were free of asthma and atopy, and all but three non-smoking individuals were ex-smokers with a median of 26.5 pack years (Table 1). Patients were not on medication. Thirteen subjects who had received maintenance treatment with inhaled corticosteroids discontinued this one month prior to the study. Exclusion criteria were treatment with oral corticosteroids and antibiotics or a respiratory tract infection in the month prior to the study. The protocol was approved by the hospital ethics committee. All patients gave their informed consent.
2.2. Collection and Processing of Bronchoalveolar Lavage
The collection and processing of BALF has been described previously. Briefly, BALF was collected during a bronchoscopy with a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope (Olympus B1 IT10; Olympus Optical, Tokyo, Japan) in a subsegmental bronchus of the middle lobe. For lavage, four 50 mL aliquots of normal saline pre-warmed to 37 °C were inserted and immediately recovered using a negative pressure of <2.7 kPa (<20 mmHg). 
BALF was filtered through a 48 mm nylon gauze (Curapharm249.1 filter; Maxxim Medical Europe, ’s-Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands) and recovery and aspect were assessed. After centrifuging for 5 min at 400× g at 4 °C, supernatants were decanted and immediately stored in aliquots at −80 °C.
2.3. Isolation of EVs from BAL Fluid
EVs were isolated from 8 mL of each sample using different steps of centrifugation, ultrafiltration, and size exclusion chromatography (SEC), as shown in Figure 1. In short, preliminary cellular debris and large vesicles were removed using centrifugation at 1500× g for 10 min (Multifuge X pro Thermo Scientific centrifuge, TX-1000 (7500317). The BALF was further concentrated and purified using an Amicon filter, filter type 10 kDa (Merck Milipore, Darmstadt, Germany), which was centrifuged at 3000× g for 20 min to concentrate the BALF to 0.5 mL, and this was added to a size SEC qEV original column (35 nm, serial #: 1001659, Izon, Christchurch, New Zealand). Subsequently, 5 × 0.5 mL Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS, Lonza Bioscience, Walkersville, MD, USA) was added to the column. These 3 mL was referred to as void volume, which was discarded. Consequently, 6 times 0.5 mL HBSS was added to the column, and the first 3 fractions (1.5 mL) were collected in an Eppendorf (EV-enriched fraction) and the last 3 fractions (1.5 mL) were collected in an Eppendorf (protein-enriched fraction). Of the EV-enriched fraction, 1.4 mL was put in an Amicon filter and centrifuged at 3000× g for 40 min to concentrate and purify the EV fraction. After centrifugation, approximately 80 μL was collected and stored at −80 °C until untargeted proteomics, small RNAseq analysis, and Cryo-transmission electron microscopy (Cryo-TEM). The remaining of the EV-enriched fraction and the protein-enriched fraction of the samples were stored at −20 °C until microBCA and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA). To assess the concentration of EVs in the isolated SEC fractions, we measured all samples with NTA using a Nanosight camera device (version NTA 3.0 0060, Nanosight, Malvern, UK). The NTA is a powerful technique for characterizing nanoparticles based on their Brownian motion and light-scattering properties, providing valuable insights into the size distribution and concentration of nanoparticles in BALF. All samples were applied to the machine in 1 mL of PBS (1:100 dilution), and three videos of 1 min each were taken and combined for the analysis. The dilution was adjusted individually to achieve between 10–100 particles/frame during the measurement. 
2.4. Cryo-TEM Imaging
Cryo-TEM was employed to directly visualize vesicle integrity. Initially, a 50 μL EV-enriched sample from a patient with COPD was concentrated to 5 μL using a 500 μL Amicon Ultra Centrifugal filter with a 10 kDa MWCO (Merck, UFC5010BK). Subsequently, a 3 μL aliquot of the concentrated sample was deposited onto glow-discharged holey carbon-coated grids (3.5/1 Quantifoil Micro Tools, Jena, Germany). After the excess liquid was blotted, the grids were vitrified in liquid ethane utilizing a Vitrobot (FEI, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) and then transferred to a FEI Tecnai T20 electron microscope equipped with a Gatan model 626 cryo-stage operating at 200 keV. Micrographs were captured under low-dose conditions using a slow-scan CCD camera. Images are shown in Supplementary Figure S1.
2.5. Protein Concentration Measurement
Protein measurement was performed with a microBCA kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, 5 μL of the isolated EV or protein fractions was diluted with 95 μL of PBS in a 96-well microplate and was incubated with BCA reagent for 1 h at 37 °C. Each plate contained a standard row of declining BSA concentrations in duplicates (200 μg/mL; 50 μg/mL; 25 μg/mL; 12.5 μg/mL, 6.25 μg/mL, 3.125 μg/mL; 1.56 μg/mL and 0 μg/mL). Absorbance at 562 nm was assessed using a plate reader (ClarioStart Plus, BMG Labtech, Ortenberg, Germany).
2.6. Untargeted Proteomics Analysis 
Protein levels were determined using discovery-based proteomics (using label-free quantification) for relative protein concentrations as described previously, but with alterations in the LC-MS detection method and subsequent data analyses. 
In short, in-gel digestion was performed on 30 μL isolated EV material containing an equivalent of the EV isolation from 4 mL of BALF of each sample. Tryptic digestion (1:100 g/g sequencing grade modified trypsin V5111; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was performed after reduction with 10 mmol/L dithiothreitol and alkylation with 55 mmol/L iodoacetamide proteins before the peptides were eluted from the gel for mass spectrometric analyses. 
Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed using liquid chromatography (LC) on a nano-HPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using a nano-LC column (Acclaim PepMapC100 C18, 75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å, Dionex, buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1%, v/v formic acid, dissolved in acetonitrile). In general, an equivalent of 60% of the digested starting material from the isolated EVs was injected using the µL-pickup method with buffer A as a transport liquid from a cooled autosampler (5 °C) and loaded onto a trap column (µPrecolumn cartridge, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm × 5 mm, Dionex). Peptides were separated on the nano-LC column using a linear gradient from 2–45% buffer B in 117 min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using isolation windows of 12 m/z with a precursor mass range of 300–1200. LC-MS raw data were processed with Spectronaut (version 15.1.210713.50606) (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) using the standard settings of the directDIA workflow, with a human SwissProt database (, 20.350 entries, accessed 15 November 2019). 
2.7. RNA Isolation
After SEC isolation, half of the concentrated EV fraction (30 μL) was directly added to 700 μL of Qiazol (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands). Isolation of small RNAs was performed with the miRNeasy micro kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. RNA was eluted in 14 μL water and stored at −80 °C until the entire sample was subjected to small RNA sequencing.
2.8. Small RNA Sequencing
Sequencing of small RNAs, including miRNAs, was performed as previously described using the NEBNext Multiplex Small RNA Library Prep Set for Illumina (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) on a HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) with minor modifications to the manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, all samples were reduced to a minimal volume using a vacuum centrifuge and were resuspended in 8 µL water. In total, 6 µL thereof was used for NGS library preparation using the NEBNext Multiplex Small RNA Library Prep Set for Illumina (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) with minor modifications to the manufacturer’s protocol. Adaptors were ligated to RNA, reverse transcription was performed, and the product was barcoded and amplified using PCR. The size distribution and quantity of resulting cDNA was assessed using a DNA 1000 Kit on a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) before size selection with high-resolution agarose gel electrophoresis. The size range of miRNA-containing cDNA fragments was cut from the gel and purified. After verifying the final library by capillary gel electrophoresis (DNA High Sensitivity Kit, Agilent Technologies), 50 cycles of single-end sequencing were performed on a HiSeq 2500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).
2.9. Statistical Analysis
2.9.1. Proteomics Analysis 
For the quantification, the Q-value filtering was set to the classic setting without imputing, which included unpaired t-testing for the calculation of the differential abundances between the groups. Raw data with FDR values were exported from the Spectronaut software (version 15.1.210713.50606), and for downstream processing, we only included proteins that were detected in >70% of all samples (20/29). Although a disparity in smoking status between the two groups, due to the small sample size and the predominance of ex-smokers, we did not control for smoking. However, we conducted a correlation analysis on the Foldchange of significant proteins, comparing all samples, with and without the three non-smoking COPD patients. This analysis demonstrated a high degree of correlation, indicating that the inclusion of non-smoking patients did not significantly impact our findings (see Supplementary Figure S2).
2.9.2. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA, Qiagen) was performed on proteins and/or miRNAs with a log2FC < −1 or >1 and false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05) in EVs from COPD patients vs. controls. To this end, we used the IPA function “core analysis”. Selected candidate pathways were chosen according to the level of activation (z-score), significance (p < 0.05, Fisher’s exact t-test), and biological relevance to the research question.
2.9.3. Protein Clustering and Functional Annotation 
Two-way hierarchical clustering was employed on the top 50 proteins, focusing on their divergence in abundance from control subjects, but independent of both the False Discovery Rate (FDR) and log2 fold change (log2FC). This method categorized proteins into different groups based on their expression patterns, facilitated by ranking proteins based on their standard deviation, ensuring robustness in the selection process, resulting in the creation of condensed heatmaps. The ComplexHeatmap R/Bioconductor package (Gu 2016) was employed to create heatmaps using scaled log-expression values (z-score), applying Euclidean distance and Ward linkage. The standard deviation for ranking and subsequent functional annotation of protein clusters was carried out using the bigOmics analytics tool.
To explore the potential involvement in immune pathways, the correlation between protein clusters and functional annotations from immune-related reference sets, available in the Gene Ontology (GO) databases, was examined. The Fisher test for weighting was used to determine the robustness of these correlations.
2.9.4. Correlations of Protein Abundance with Macrophage and Neutrophil Cell Number in BALF
Protein abundance from each of the four clusters were correlated with the number of macrophages and neutrophils per 1 mL of BALF of patients with COPD and controls, as well as the lung function parameter FEV1/FVC using Spearman’s test. The quantification of macrophages and neutrophils in BALF was performed using the methods previously described in reference. 
2.9.5. microRNA Expression Profiling
Raw sequencing data were trimmed of tailing adapter sequences with Btrim prior to discarding reads with less than 16 nt in length. To avoid false positive findings, reads mapping to human rRNA, tRNA, snRNA, or snoRNA sequences were filtered from the data set, and remaining reads were directly aligned to mature miRNA sequences obtained from iRbase (v21,) using a Bowtie short read aligner. Differential expression analysis, including the normalization and multiple testing correction using the Benjamini–Hochberg approach, was performed using the DESeq2 package in R.
All statistical comparisons (besides the proteomics or miRNAseq analysis) between the two groups were conducted using a Mann–Whitney U test with a threshold of significance of p < 0.05. All analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism 8. 

RESULTS:
3. Results
3.1. Small EVs Can Successfully Be Isolated from Frozen BALF Samples
Small EVs were isolated from 8 mL of never-thawed BALF aliquots using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) (Figure 1A). Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) of the EV-enriched SEC fractions revealed a median particle count of 3.42 × 109 particles/mL for healthy controls and 3.92 × 109 particles/mL for COPD samples (Figure 1B). The median size of isolated particles was similar for controls (248 nm) and for COPD BALF (249 nm) (Figure 1C). Protein quantities were sufficient to proceed to proteomics (Figure 1D). EV-containing fractions were concentrated using ultrafiltration, and equal volumes were subjected to both RNA isolations for small RNA-sequencing and an untargeted proteomics analysis (Figure 1A). Cryo-TEM images of isolated EVs showed that EVs were intact and had a round shape (Figure S1).
3.2. Proteomics Analysis of BALF EVs
Unbiased proteomics analysis using LC/MS identified more unique peptides in BALF EVs derived from patients with COPD (median = 1234) compared to healthy controls (median = 531) (Figure 2A). According to the guidelines for minimal information essential for studies of EVs (MISEV), several protein markers need to be present and/or absent from the isolated EVs to judge their integrity and purity. Table 2 lists all markers of the MISEV2018 guidelines and their detection intensity in our samples. Accordingly, we were able to detect the majority of proteins that are frequently found to be present in EVs (i.e., category 1 and 2, Table 2), suggesting that we indeed enriched EVs from our BALF samples. We also detected a contamination with lipoproteins (category 3a, Table 2), as expected by a purely SEC-based isolation. Interestingly, the intensity of most EV-specific markers (Table 2) was higher in COPD samples, indicating a clear enrichment of BALF EVs in COPD.
To compare different EV-associated protein signatures between COPD and control samples, we focused on the 596 proteins that were detected in at least 70% of all samples (20/29). This approach identified 370 proteins that were significantly (FDR < 0.05) altered in COPD-derived BALF EVs. Thereby, three proteins were down-regulated in COPD EVs compared to controls (log2FC < −1) and 284 proteins were up-regulated (log2FC > 1) (Top10 listed in Figure 2C, see Table S1 in the online supplement for the complete list). The top three up-regulated proteins in COPD BALF EVs were Lactotransferrin (LTF, log2FC = 4.67, FDR = 1.57 × 10−13), Deleted In Malignant Brain Tumors 1 (DMBT1, log2FC = 4.45, FDR = 7.03 × 10−6), and Apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1, log2FC = 4.41, FDR = 2.75 × 10−10). UDP-Glucose-4-Epimerase (GALE, log2FC = −5.68, FDR = 2.78 × 10−2), Inter-Alpha-Trypsin Inhibitor Heavy Chain 1 (ITIH1, log2FC = −3.91, FDR = 7.19 × 10−5), and Glycoprotein M6A (GPM6A, log2FC = −1.23, FDR = 2.08 × 10−3) were the top three down-regulated proteins in COPD BALF EVs. We also detected the previously described protein Neutrophil Elastase, important in emphysema development, in all samples of COPD patients, but only in few controls (Figure 2B).
To gain insight into the biological effects of the altered protein content of COPD EVs, we performed Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). As shown in Figure 3A, IPA analysis revealed proteins associated with COPD-derived BALF EVs most significantly involved in the canonical pathways clathrin-mediated endocytosis signaling, epithelial adherens junction signaling, and integrin signaling. The latter two were predicted to be higher in COPD EVs, while Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor (RHOGDI) signaling was predicted to be lower in COPD EVs compared to healthy controls. The IPA annotation ‘diseases and functions’ showed that the protein content of COPD BALF EVs is associated with cellular compromise, inflammatory response, and cellular movement (Figure 3B). Subsections of these annotations are listed in Figure 3C and show that IPA predicts the activation of, for example, the degranulation and immune response of cells, indicating that EVs in the lung might be functionally involved in COPD pathogenesis. 
To identify proteins potentially associated with the destructive-immune response in COPD, we conducted a two-way hierarchical clustering analysis focusing on the top 50 proteins ranked by a standard deviation metric. This analysis generated a clustered heatmap displaying protein abundance, with annotated protein groups categorized into four distinct clusters based on their functionalities (Figure 4). Next, we cross-referenced the significantly differentially abundant proteins from our dataset with immune-related datasets to identify correlations (Table 3), showing that the second and third cluster proteins contain the main clusters with a positive correlation to immune-related responses, whereas cluster 4 proteins were negatively correlated to one of the immune-related pathways. Additionally, proteins from each of the four clusters were correlated with both the count of macrophages and neutrophils per mL of BALF from the identical samples used for EV isolation, as well as the lung function parameter FEV1/FVC. 
The results presented in Table 4 reveal significant correlations between the abundance of specific proteins with macrophage and neutrophil numbers in BALF. In controls, both lectin galactoside-binding soluble 3-binding protein (LGALS3BP) and BAIAP2L1 encoding insulin-responsive protein of mass 53 kD (IRSp53) correlated negatively with BALF macrophage numbers (r = −0.60, p = 0.03 and r = −0.67, p = 0.02, respectively). Conversely, in COPD EVs, Apolipoprotein E (APOE) exhibited a negative correlation with macrophage numbers (r = −0.49, p = 0.04), while Aquaporin1 (AQP1) showed a positive correlation (r = 0.51, p = 0.03) with macrophage numbers. Notably, the abundance of proteins from these four clusters did not display significant correlations with neutrophil numbers in BALF from the same individuals. 
In relation to lung function, noteworthy correlations emerged between specific proteins in EVs and the FEV1/FVC parameter. In control EVs, abundance of Lipocalin-2 (LCN2) correlated positively to FEV1/FVC (r = 0.60, p = 0.03), whereas abundance of Apolipoprotein E (APOE) and the neutrophil granule protein Lactoferrin (LTF) correlated negatively to FEV1/FVC (r = −0.45, p = 0.05 and r = −0.50, p = 0.04, respectively) in COPD EVs.
3.3. Altered Receptor/Ligand Pattern on BALF EVs in COPD
Identification of receptors on EVs can potentially be used to delineate the cells of EV origin, while characterization of ligands may identify target cell types with which EVs can interact. We screened the proteins detected in >70% of samples of each group for all identified human receptors and ligands (derived from CellTalkDB). Of the 35 identified receptors, 11 were found on COPD EVs but not in controls (Figure 5A, Table S2 of online supplement). Our BALF EV dataset contained 96 ligands, of which 51 ligands were enriched in COPD EVs (Figure 5B, Table S3 in online supplement). By using the EV analysis tool Funrich, we were able to associate the receptors on our BALF EVs to their cellular origin. Figure 5C shows that BALF EVs derived from COPD patients seem to be derived relatively more from immune cells, such as neutrophils, eosinophils, or macrophages. To identify the potential target cells, we listed the respective receptors that are paired to the ligands on the BALF EVs (Figure 5D) and the number of ligands in our dataset that are able to interact with these receptors according to CellTalkDB. Accordingly, the receptors for which ligands are present on control BALF EVs from healthy individuals are Integrin beta 2 (ITGB2, 8 interactions), LDL receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1, 7 interactions), and Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4, 7 interactions). COPD BALF EVs are enriched in ligands that can interact with LRP1 (12 interactions), LRP2 (12 interactions), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR, 11 interactions) (Figure 5D). 
A Funrich site of expression analysis revealed an almost 100-fold enrichment of interactions between the EVs in COPD and the alveolus (Figure 5E), and interactions with endothelial cells were predicted to be enriched 50-fold.
3.4. miRNAseq Analysis of BALF EVs
To identify miRNAs associated with EVs in COPD, we performed an unbiased RNA-seq analysis of isolated BALF EVs. In general, sequencing was successful in all 29 samples, with high quality scores. The mapping distribution revealed a relatively small yet expected percentage of miRNAs in the sequencing reads (~10%), which still reached 1 million reads (Figure 6A,B) and a large percentage of unmapped reads (which might include truncated RNAs). Of the 1400 detected miRNAs, 96 miRNAs had a base mean expression value of >100, ensuring sufficient expression across both COPD and control EVs (see Supplementary Table S4 for the full list). Eleven miRNAs showed differential abundance between COPD and controls with an FDR < 0.05 (Figure 6C). Ten miRNAs showed higher abundance (miR-122-5p, miR-449c-5p, miR-10a-5p, miR-155-5p, miR-425-5p, miR-320a-3p, miR-378a-3p, miR-7-5p, miR-191-5p, and miR-128-3p), whereas one miRNA was detected in lower abundance (miR-101-3p) compared to healthy controls (Figure 6C). Due to the low number of differentially abundant miRNAs, we did not perform an IPA analysis. Abundance of miRNAs was also not correlated with immune cell numbers and lung function. 

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
COPD is characterized by persistent airway inflammation, destruction of the extracellular matrix in the lung (emphysema), and chronic mucus hypersecretion, all contributing to irreversible airway obstruction. Current treatments provide symptomatic relief, but do not address the progression of emphysema. Understanding the molecular mechanisms behind these processes is crucial to develop effective therapies or preventative strategies. 
Recent research indicates the involvement of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in various lung diseases. In addition, circulating plasma-derived EVs have been shown to have great potential to be used for the diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutics of lung diseases such as COPD. EVs, released by virtually all cells in the body, are categorized based on the size and origin into exosomes (<150 nm) derived from multivesicular bodies in endosomes, and microvesicles (~100 nm → 1 μm) shed from the cell surface. EVs functionally transfer various content, including miRNAs, between cells. It is believed that the uptake of EVs is in part regulated by the receptor/ligand interaction with the target cells, but relevant receptor/ligand pairs for the interaction of EVs with distinct lung cells are not yet well understood. 
Substantial research has linked EVs and their cargo to lung disease (reviewed in), but there are a lack of data regarding their role in COPD. EVs from activated human neutrophils containing neutrophil elastase have been shown to be present in lavage fluid of patients with COPD and to cause tissue destruction resembling emphysema when applied to mice. In contrast, EVs released by mesenchymal stem/stromal cells aid tissue regeneration and dampen inflammation, underscoring the varied roles of different EV types in the development and progression of COPD.
Here, we aimed to decipher the distinct molecular signature of EVs in the lungs of patients with COPD. EV-enriched fractions from bronchial alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were isolated from 11 healthy controls and 18 patients with COPD, and subsequently subjected to untargeted proteomics and small RNA sequencing. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) and a hierarchical clustering analysis of protein abundance revealed that COPD EVs exhibit a different protein and miRNA content, which may enhance the inflammatory responses and degranulation of cells. Specifically, among other proteins, we identified a different presence of surface receptor and ligands on the COPD EVs that could indicate a different cellular origin and an enhanced targeting of alveolar cells of the EVs in COPD compared to controls.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: , Figure S1: Images of COPD-EVs using cryo-TEM. Figure S2: Correlation analysis on significant protein abundances comparing all samples with and without non-smoking COPD patients. Table S1: Complete list of detected proteins in >70% of all samples; Table S2: Receptors on BALF EVs; Table S3: Ligands on BALF EVs; Table S4: List of detected miRNAs in BALF EVs.
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD049998.