PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Embryo; Limb bud; Liver; Forebrain
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Acquity uplc m-class system; Embryo; Orbitrap elite; Forebrain; Liver; Ribosome; Tmt ms; Ribosome-associated proteins; Mouse; Limbs

ABSTRACT:
Ribosomes are emerging as direct regulators of gene expression, with ribosome-associated proteins (RAPs) allowing ribosomes to modulate translation. Nevertheless, a lack of technologies to enrich RAPs across sample types has prevented systematic analysis of RAP identities, dynamics, and functions. We have developed a label-free methodology called RAPIDASH to enrich ribosomes and RAPs from any sample. We applied RAPIDASH to mouse embryonic tissues and identified hundreds of potential RAPs, including DHX30 and LLPH, two forebrain RAPs important for neurodevelopment. We identified a critical role of LLPH in neural development linked to the translation of genes with long coding sequences. In addition, we showed RAPIDASH can identify ribosome changes in cancer cells. Finally, we characterized ribosome composition remodeling during immune cell activation and observed extensive changes post-stimulation. RAPIDASH has therefore enabled the discovery of RAPs in multiple cell types, tissues, and stimuli and is adaptable to characterize ribosome remodeling in several contexts. This dataset refers to relative quantification of RAPs enriched by RAPIDASH from E12.5 mouse limbs, forebrain, and liver, as elaborated in Figure 4B.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
RAPIDASH: Tag-free enrichment of ribosome-associated proteins reveals compositional dynamics in embryonic tissues, cancer cells, and macrophages - TMT MS RAPIDASH of E12.5 mouse limbs, forebrain, and liver

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Each protein sample was solubilized by pipetting with a low retention pipette tip 50 µL denaturing buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 6 M urea in HPLC water). The protein concentration was then quantified using Bradford assay. Protein was denatured and reduced by adding 0.5 µL 500 mM DTT to each sample for a final concentration of 5 mM and incubating in a thermomixer at 37 °C for 1 hr at 500 rpm. The samples were alkylated by adding 1 µL 500 mM iodoacetamide to each 50 µL sample for a final concentration of 15 mM and incubating them in the dark at room temperature (RT) for 30 mins. A 0.2 µg/µL Trypsin/Lys-C stock solution in Resuspension Buffer was subsequently added to each sample at a 1:50 Trypsin/Lys-C:sample ratio by mass to digest the protein into tryptic peptides. The samples were mixed and then shaken at 500 rpm for 4 hrs in a thermocycler at 37 °C for the initial digestion by Lys-C. Afterwards, each sample was diluted by adding 250 µL 50 mM NH4HCO3 to reduce the urea concentration to 1 M. The samples were then incubated for another 12 hrs in a 37 °C water bath. Trypsinization was then quenched by adding 3 µL 50% (v/v) heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA) in HPLC water to each sample. The samples were then either stored at -80 °C or immediately desalted. Each sample was desalted using an OMIX C18 pipette tip attached to a P200 pipette set to 150 µL. Each OMIX C18 pipette tip was conditioned by pipetting 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) up and down three times. No air was allowed to pass through the sorbent after it was conditioned. The OMIX C18 pipette tip was then equilibrated with 1% (v/v) HFBA by pipetting up and down three times. Acidified peptides were bound to the OMIX C18 sorbent by pipetting up and down for seven times carefully. After the peptides were bound, each tip was rinsed with 0.1% (v/v) HFBA by pipetting up and down three times. To elute the peptides, 7 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 50% (v/v) ACN by carefully pipetting up and down five times. A second elution was performed by pipetting up and down with 7 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 75% (v/v) ACN five times. The two elutions were then pooled together and dried completely using a speed-vac (~45 mins). The dried peptide samples were stored at -80 °C. TMTsixplex™ Isobaric Label Reagents were freshly prepared for each experiment by resuspending the entire 0.8 mg of labelling reagent in the tube with 100 µL 100% ethanol. For every 1 µg of peptide, 0.5 µL 8 µg/µL of freshly resuspended TMT label reagent was used. To do this, the peptides were first resuspended in 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0. The volume of HEPES buffer used was three times the volume of the TMT label that would be added. TMT label reagents were then added into the resuspended peptides, and the samples were incubated for 1 hr at RT in the dark. The labeling reaction was subsequently quenched by adding a volume of 5% (v/v) hydroxylamine equal to 1/20 of the sample volume at RT for 15 mins. The samples for a single injection for relative quantification with different TMT labels were then mixed according to Table 1. The combined sample was then acidified by adding 50% HFBA to a final concentration of ~0.5% (v/v) and 100% formic acid to a final concentration of 5% (v/v). Then, the combined samples were desalted and dried as described earlier. Peptides were resuspended in 8 µL 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid in 5% (v/v) ACN and subjected to ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis using an Acquity UPLC M-class system coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite. Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography a Self-Pack PicoFrit column with a 360 µm outer diameter, 75 µm inner diameter, and a tip size of 15 µm packed to approximately 22 cm with HALO Peptide ES-C18 Bulk Packing 2.7 µm beads. UPLC solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and UPLC solvent B was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/100% ACN, respectively. For each sample, 3 µL was injected and loaded for 30 mins at 1% B at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. Peptides were separated at the same flow rate over a linear gradient of 5% B to 40% B for 180 mins, followed by a linear ramp to 100% B for 10 mins, followed by constant flow at 100% B for 10 mins. Finally, there was a ramp down to 1% B over 1 min, where it was held for 9 mins at constant flow. The Orbitrap Elite was operated in a data-dependent mode using Xcalibur v3.0. HCD MS/MS scans (R = 15,000) were recorded after each MS1 scan (R = 60,000) for the top 15 most abundant precursor ions in the Orbitrap. The following HCD parameters were used: an isolation width of 1.6 m/z, a normalized collision energy of 40%, and an activation time of 0.1 milliseconds. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set as follows: a repeat count 1 with a 30 second repeat duration, an exclusion list size of 500, an exclusion duration of 60 seconds, and a +/- 10 ppm exclusion mass width. Charge state rejection was enabled for charge states that were less than 2 or unassigned.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (v2.4.2.0) against Mus musculus SwissProt reviewed proteome database downloaded on June 7, 2024 with the following parameters: a maximum of 2 missed trypsin enzyme cleavage sites, first search mass tolerance of 20 ppm, main search mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm, and MS/MS match tolerance of 20 ppm. Deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), and N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) was searched as a fixed modification. For TMT quantification, a minimum of two razor + unique peptides present was required instead. For the TMT mass spectrometry data, contaminants, reverse hits, and peptides only identified by site were filtered out, and reporter intensity for each protein was Log2 transformed and median-normalized. For the data related to Figure 4B (Table S7), proteins that were detected in three out of four replicates were selected, the missing values were imputed by random numbers from a  normal distribution, and the reporter intensity values between each pair of tissues were analyzed with a paired Welch’s t-test using Perseus (v2.0.11) Proteins with a fold change ≥ 2 and a permutation-based FDR < 10% were deemed to be significantly enriched in one E12.5 mouse embryo tissue over another.