PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Macrophage; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Gel plugs; Nanoplastic particle; Macrophage; Mouse; Nanolc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Plastics are emerging pollutants of great concern. Macroplastics degrade into microplastics and nanoplastics, which can accumulate in living organisms with still poorly known consequences.  Nanoplastics being particulate pollutants, they are handled in animal organisms by scavenger cells such as macrophages, which are important players in the immune system. Polyethylene terephthalate is one of these plastics of concern, as it is widely used in food packaging where it releases nanoparticles. We have thus undertaken a study on the effects of true-to-life polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles prepared from water bottles on macrophages. To this purpose, we used a combination of proteomics and targeted validation experiments. Proteomics showed important adaptive changes in the proteome in response to exposure to polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles. These changes affected for example mitochondrial, cytoskeletal and lysosomal proteins, but also proteins implicated in immune functions.  Validation experiments showed that many of these changes were homeostatic, with no induced oxidative stress and no gross perturbation of the mitochondrial function. However, polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles induced endoplasmic reticulum stress and disturbed the immune functions of macrophages. We indeed observed a slight pro-inflammatory response (1.5-fold increase in TNF secretion). We also observed a decrease in the response to bacterial stimulation (1.6 decrease in IL-6 secretion).  We also observed a 20 percent decrease in the expression of important proteins involved in immune responses such as TLR2, TLR7 or collectin 12, and a two-fold decrease in the production of lysozyme. This suggests that macrophages having ingested polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles are less efficient in their immune functions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
About the effects of true to life polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles on macrophages

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
After exposure to the PET nanoplastics (50µg/ml, 24 hours), the medium was removed and the cell layer rinsed twice with PBS. The cells were then collected by fusing in PBS containing 1mM EDTA.  The cell suspensions were then centrifuged (200g, 5 minutes) and lysed in 15 µl of extraction buffer (4M urea, 2.5% cetyltrimethylammonium chloride, 100mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 3, 150µM methylene blue). The extraction was let to proceed at room temperature for 1 hour, after which the lysate was centrifuged (15,000g, 30 minutes) to pellet the nucleic acids. The supernatant were then stored at -20°C until use. For the shotgun proteomic analysis, the samples were included in polyacrylamide plugs according to Muller et al. with some modifications to downscale the process. To this purpose, the photopolymerization system using methylene blue, toluene sulfinate and diphenyliodonium chloride was used 49. As mentioned above, the methylene blue was included in the cell lysis buffer.The other initiator solutions consisted in a 1 M solution of sodium toluene sulfinate in water and in a saturated water solution of diphenyliodonium chloride. The ready-to-use polyacrylamide solution consisted of 1.2 ml of a commercial 40% acrylamide/bis solution (37.5/1) to which 100 µl of diphenyliodonium chloride solution, 100 µl of sodium toluene sulfinate solution and 100 µl of water were added. To the protein samples (15 µl), 5 µl of acrylamide solution were added and mixed by pipetting in a 500µl conical polypropylene microtube. 100 µl of water-saturated butanol were then layered on top of the samples, and polymerization was carried out under a 1500 lumen 2700K LED lamp for 2 hours, during which the initially blue gel solution discolored. At the end of the polymerization period, the butanol was removed, and the gel plugs were fixed for 2x1 hr with 200 µl of 30% ethanol 2 % phosphoric acid, followed by a 30 minutes wash in 30% ethanol. The fixed gel plugs were then stored at -20°C until use. Gel plug processing, digestion, peptide extraction and nanoLC-MS/MS was performed as previously described 48, without the robotic protein handling system and using a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

DATA PROCESSING:
For protein identification, the MS/MS data were interpreted using a local Mascot server with MASCOT 2.6.2 algorithm (Matrix Science, London, UK) against an in-house database containing all Mus musculus and Rattus norvegicus entries from UniProtKB/SwissProt (version 2019_10, 50,313 sequences) and the corresponding 50,313 reverse entries. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS and 0.07 Da for MS/MS data, allowing a maximum of one trypsin missed cleavage. Trypsin was specified as enzyme. Acetylation of protein n-termini, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were specified as variable modifications. Identification results were imported into Proline software version 2.1 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for validation. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with pretty rank equal to one were retained. False Discovery Rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using Mascot Adjusted E-value and below 1% at Protein Level using Mascot Mudpit score.