PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Nerve cord
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Proteomics; Gene expression; Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy; complement profiles; sural nerve

ABSTRACT:
Overall, 55 sural nerve biopsies from patients with CIDP (n=36) and CIDP-variants (n=18) were included into the study. Immunohistochemical analysis of the sural nerve specimens showed an aberrant deposition of terminal complement complex C5b-9 on endoneural capillaries in 52 (94%) of patients in addition to endoneural CD8+ T cell- and CD68+ macrophage infiltration. Gene expression studies showed an increase of factors C3 and C6 compared to NDCs with no difference in regard to clinical phenotype, whereas levels of IL6 or TNF-alpha were not significantly elevated. Our proteomic profiling approach revealed the statistically significant dysregulation of 50 proteins, which based on their respective functions suggest altered mitochondrial activity, perturbed cytoskeleton, and increased oxidative stress. The majority of patients with high to moderate complement deposition presented with a progressive disease course, however without any correlation with disease severity as measured by INCAT or MRC at baseline and follow-up.  Our combined data supports the role of complement in CIDP pathogenesis. Based on these findings, we propose to further evaluate complement inhibition therapies as new targeted treatment option for patients with CIDP.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Complement profiling on sural nerves of patients with chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The entire nerve sample was lysed in 200 µl of 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.8), containing 5% SDS and cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor (Roche), using the Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 10 minutes with 30-second on/off cycles for a total of 10 cycles at 4°C. To ensure thorough lysis, an additional sonication step was performed with an ultrasonic probe (30 seconds, alternating 1 second on and 1 second off, amplitude 40%). This was followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The protein concentration in the resulting supernatant was measured using a BCA assay following the manufacturer's instructions. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 10 mM TCEP at 37°C for 30 minutes, and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated using 15 mM IAA at room temperature, in the dark, for 30 minutes. For proteolysis, 100 µg of protein from each sample was processed using the S-Trap protocol (Protifi) with a 20:1 protein-to-trypsin ratio. The trypsin digestion step was carried out for 2 hours at 42°C and stopped by acidifying the sample with formic acid to achieve a pH below 3.0. Samples were dried using a Speedvac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and dissolved in 0.1 % TFA to achieve a concentration of 0.5 µg/µl.

DATA PROCESSING:
A shortlist of the protein output was created by demanding protein assignment by at least two peptides, a fold value of at least 2, and analysis of variance (ANOVA) p ≤ 0.05. Quality controls (profile plots) were generated with Perseus v1.6.14.0. Statistical analyses were performed with R version 4.3.2 (2023-10-31 ucrt), and protein LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Proteins with only one unique peptide were excluded and the remaining dataset was filtered for at least 20% valid values in at least one condition. Random values were used to impute missing data drawn from normal distributions with a 1.8 standard deviation downshift and 0.3 standard deviation spread for each sample. After normalization of data, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to see if the samples of diseased patients and NDCs differ from each other. Significantly differentially expressed proteins were identified by Welch’s two-sample t-tests (significance: false discovery rate < 0.05, fudge factor S0 = 0.1). Benjamini Hochberg correction for multiple testing was performed. Corresponding results were visualized with a volcano plot.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Patient recruitment and clinical data
Patients who received a sural nerve biopsy were recruited from January 2006 to May 2023 at the CIDP outpatient Department and Department of Neuropathology at the Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany. Study inclusion required patients above the age of 18 years, independent of disease duration and severity, to meet the national and European guidelines for diagnosis of CIDP according to EAN/PNS criteria. In accordance with these criteria, patients with confirmed paranodal auto-antibodies (anti-NF155, anti-CNTN1, and anti-Caspr1) were excluded, as such cases are classified as autoimmune nodopathies rather than CIDP. Due to diagnostic doubts or refractory status, patients received a sural nerve biopsy. To minimize treatment-related effects on complement deposition, we excluded patients who had received corticosteroids or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) within 6 weeks prior to sural nerve biopsy. This interval was chosen based on published recommendations for the assessment of complement activity in serum and plasma, as it allows for normalization of transient complement suppression following these treatments. The treatment-free interval was verified through detailed review of medical records.
DC served a total of 8 sural nerves with a morphological diagnosis of chronic mildly active axonal damage without overt signs of any inflammatory alterations. These patients were classified as idiopathic neuropathy (IPN) as an extended diagnostic approach according to the EAN/PNS guidelines, which did not reveal any underlying cause for the neuropathy. In addition, one sural nerve biopsy with clinical manifestation of hereditary neuropathy (HNP) and a genetic test confirming the diagnosis was also examined for complement deposition. Moreover, we included two non-disease control (NDC), which received a sural nerve biopsy to exclude potential somatic cause of neuropathic symptoms. One NDC was recruited from the Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur Institute, LMU Munich, Germany.
Patients were examined by a team of peripheral nerve specialists. Socio-demographics and current medication were documented. The medical research council sum scale (MRC-SS) was assessed to measure muscle strength at the impairment level. For the MRC-SS the following muscles were tested on both sides: shoulder abduction, elbow flexion, wrist extension, index finger extension, hip flexion, knee extension, ankle dorsiflexion, and extension of the big toe. A sum score of 80 indicates normal muscle strength. The adjusted inflammatory neuropathy cause and treatment disability score (INCAT-DS) was used to assess the clinical disability in daily arm and leg mobility, which has evolved as the most established primary outcome in clinical trials. In addition, we assessed CSF parameters, comorbidities, treatment regime (corticosteroids, IVIg, plasmapheresis, and immunosuppressive therapies) and treatment response and further categorized the patients according to their CIDP disease activity status (CDAS) into active disease status with relapsing or chronic progressive disease course or remission.
Sural nerve specimens
After shock cryofixation and diagnostic processing all sural nerve specimens had been cryopreserved at − 80 °C before analysis according to the predefined standard operating procedure of the Department of Neuropathology at the Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. For mass spectrometry-based analysis, sural nerve samples were transferred on dry ice to the Leibniz-Institute for Analytical Sciences–ISAS–e.V. and stored at − 80 °C prior to sample processing. Sural nerve biopsies without any evidence of pathological alterations by histology, semithin studies, fiber teasing, and ultrastructural analysis were defined as non-diseased control.
Histological and immunohistochemical analysis
Routine stains, immunohistochemical-, and double-immunofluorescence reactions were performed as previously described. The following antibodies were used for staining procedures: C5b-9 (Dako, aE11, 1:200), CD8 (Dako, C8/144B, 1:100), CD45 (Dako, 2B11, 1:400), CD68 (Dako, EBM11, 1:100). The presence of C5b-9 was further visually quantified in high, medium and low staining intensity (examples given in eFigure 1). CD8 + T cells were graded for none (0–4 cells/10 HPF), few (5–12 cells/10 HPF) or multiple (> 12 cells/10 HPF). HPFs, based on the microscope used and the respective oculars (Olympus WH10x-H/22) ≙ 0.16 mm2. CD68 + macrophages were graded semi-quantitatively for few and diffusely distributed (endoneurium); grade 1, multiple and increased but diffusely distributed; grade 2, or many and clustering with T cell accumulation; grade 3. HPFs, based on the microscope used and the respective oculars (Olympus WH10x-H/22) ≙ 0.16 mm2. Antibodies were detected with the immunoperoxidase method. All staining procedures were performed in the same laboratory on a Benchmark XT immunostainer (Ventana, Tucson, AZ).
Real-time qPCR
RNA extraction from the nerve tissue samples, reverse transcription, and quantitative PCR reactions were performed as previously described. In short, total RNA was extracted from sural nerve specimens, and cDNA was synthesized using the High-Capacity cDNA Archive kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). For qPCR reactions, 10 ng of cDNA was used. For subsequent analysis, the QuantStudio 6 Flex System (Applied Biosystems) was used with the following running conditions: 95 °C 0:20, 95 °C 0:01, and 60 °C 0:20, 45 cycles (values above 40 cycles were defined as not expressed). All targeted transcripts were run as triplicates. The TaqMan® Gene Exp Assay (Life Technologies/ThermoFisher) are as follows: APRIL/TNFS13 Hs00182565_m1, BAFF/TNFSF13B Hs00198106_m1, C1QA Hs00706358_s1, C3 Hs00163811_m1, C4A Hs00246758_m1, C5 Hs01004342_m1, C6 Hs01110040_m1, C8A Hs00175098_m1, C9 Hs01036216_g1, TNFA Hs00174128_m1.
PGK1 Hs99999906_m1 was included as an internal control to normalize the relative expression of the targeted transcripts. Gene expression was illustrated by the fold-change values compared with that in NDCs.
Lysate generation and processing for proteomic deep mapping
The entire nerve sample was lysed in 200 µl of 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 7.8), containing 5% SDS and cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor (Roche), using the Bioruptor® (Diagenode) for 10 min with 30-s on/off cycles for a total of 10 cycles at 4 °C. An additional sonication step was performed with an ultrasonic probe (30 s, alternating 1 s on and 1 s off, amplitude 40%) to ensure thorough lysis. This was followed by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The protein concentration in the resulting supernatant was measured using a BCA assay following the manufacturer's instructions. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding 10 mM TCEP at 37 °C for 30 min, and free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated using 15 mM IAA at room temperature, in the dark, for 30 min. For proteolysis, 100 µg of protein from each sample was processed using the S-Trap protocol (Protifi) with a 20:1 protein-to-trypsin ratio. The trypsin digestion step was carried out for 2 h at 42 °C and stopped by acidifying the sample with formic acid to achieve a pH below 3.0. Samples were dried using a Speedvac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and dissolved in 0.1% TFA to achieve a 0.5 µg/µl concentration.
All hydrolyzed samples were checked for completeness of digestion after desalting through monolithic column separation (PepSwift monolithic PS-DVB PL-CAP200-PM, Dionex) on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) via direct injection of 0.5 μg of sample. A binary gradient (solvent A: 0.1% TFA, solvent B: 0.08% TFA, 84% ACN) was applied, transitioning from 5% to 12% B over 5 min, followed by 12–50% B over 15 min, at a flow rate of 2.2 μL/min and 60 °C. UV detection was performed at 214 nm (doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2011.11.016).
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling
All samples were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-UHPLC system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, with 1 µg of peptide used for each analysis. Initially, the samples were transferred to a 75 µm × 2 cm, 100 Å, C18 pre-column at a 10 µl/min flow rate for 20 min. Separation was then performed on a 75 µm × 50 cm, 100 Å, C18 main column at a 250 nl/min flow rate. The separation utilized a linear gradient composed of solution A (99.9% water, 0.1% formic acid) and solution B (84% acetonitrile, 15.9% water, 0.1% formic acid), with a pure gradient length of 120 min, transitioning from 3% to 45% solution B. The gradient profile was as follows: 3% solution B for the first 20 min, 3–35% over 120 min, followed by three washing steps at 95% solution B, each lasting 3 min. After the final wash, the system was equilibrated for 20 min. For MS survey scans, the following settings were used: MS was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA) with full MS scans from 300 to 1600 m/z (resolution 60,000) with the polysiloxane ion at 371.10124 m/z as lock mass. Maximum injection time was set to 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6. For fragmentation, the 15 most intense ions (above the threshold ion count of 5E3) were chosen at a normalized collision energy (nCE) of 27% in each cycle, following each survey scan. Fragment ions were acquired (resolution 15,000) with an AGC of 5E4 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s.
Bioinformatic analysis of protein data
Z-scoring was performed with the raw abundance values obtained and normalized by the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo Scientific) to create and visualize the heatmap. Subsequently, the received data were filtered for complement proteins. Only proteins that could be identified with at least two unique peptides were considered reliable identifications and retained. After filtering the data, the visualization was displayed in a heatmap using orange data mining software. Clustering was performed based on similarity with hierarchical clustering on Euclidean distances and with average linkage of the individual samples. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD056286.
Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics are reported as means and standard deviations (SDs), medians and interquartile ranges (IQRs) for continuous variables, and absolute and relative frequencies for nominal data. All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism V10.2.2.
Mann–Whitney tests were performed to compare levels of complement components between patients and controls. Their correlations with clinical disease parameters were analyzed using Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. A two-tailed p value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS:
Results
Demographics and characteristics of CIDP patients
In this study, we included 55 patients with CIDP, of which a typical disease course was observed in 36 (65%) patients (Table 1). The median age at manifestation of symptoms was 62.0 years (IQR 50.0–69.0) and at diagnosis 65.0 years (IQR 55.0–69.0), with no relevant difference between the group of patients with typical course and CIDP variant. The majority of patients were of male sex (n = 35, 64%). The time between first manifestation and diagnosis was quite comparable between the two groups, with 34.7 months (SD 38.9) in typical CIDP and 38.9 (SD 41.6) months in patients with a CIDP variant, which may be the reason for the slightly higher disability in this subgroup at time of sural nerve biopsy (median inflammatory neuropathy cause and treatment sensory sum score (INCAT) score in typical CIDP 0 (IQR 0.0–2.0) for arm, 1.0 (IQR 1.0–2.0) for leg; median INCAT score in CIDP variant 1 (IQR 0.0–2.0) for arm, 1.0 (IQR 1.0–1.0) for leg. Regarding diagnostic criteria, all patients had albumin cytological dissociation in CSF with a mean protein level of 678.5 mg/dl (SD 346.4), without relevant difference between the groups. One-third of patients with typical CIDP (n = 19, 35%) and 19% (n = 6) in the CIDP variant had purely demyelinating neurography at diagnosis. There was a therapeutic delay in the CIDP variant group with 10.2 months (SD 11.6) compared to 5.7 months (SD 7.6) in the typical CIDP group. The majority of patients presented with a progressive disease course (n = 40, 73%), with a higher percentage in the CIDP variant group (84%, n = 16 vs. 66%, n = 24 in typical CIDP). All patients had a treatment history with IVIg and corticosteroids and were treatment refractory, which was why a sural nerve biopsy was performed. The mean time from the last treatment (steroids or IVIG) until nerve biopsy was 7.9 weeks (SD 1.1). 
Immunohistochemical characteristics and gene expression levels of CIDP patients’ sural nerve biopsies
All sural nerve specimens were analyzed immunohistochemically and stained for C5b-9, CD8+ T cells, myelin loss (by trichrome staining) and CD68+ macrophages (see Fig. 1). Most CIDP patients presented with a marked endoneurial capillary staining of C5b-9 (n = 52/55, 95%; Fig. 1e, Table 2). We did not observe complement deposition on Schwann cells. Interestingly, those three patients with only minor complement deposition all showed clinical sensory symptoms and neuropathic pain and did not present with a progressive disease course. There was no significant difference in amounts of complement deposition when stratified by disease subtypes (classical CIDP, CIDP variant; p = 0.704, Mann–Whitney test). Moreover, in almost all patients endoneurial CD8+ T cells clustering with groups of CD68+ macrophages in the endoneurium in addition to marked myelin loss and active phagocytosis as illustrated by acid phosphatase-positive endoneurial monocytes could be observed (see Figs. 1a–d, ). Co-staining of macrophage markers (CD11b, CD68 or Siglec1/CD169) and complement deposition (C5b-9) also clearly visualize proximity of macrophages and complement positive capillaries (eFigure 2). Furthermore, semithin sections, fiber teasing, and electron microscopy showed hypomyelination, loss of myelinated and unmyelinated axons, and onion bulb formation (see Fig. 1g, h). Exemplary staining of healthy nerve is shown in eFigure 3. Enlargement of capillary walls due to basement membrane duplications within sural nerve fascicles demonstrates capillary degeneration and regeneration (see Fig. 1i). The DC group of patients with IPN and HNP showed either no or faintly detectable little (+; see semiquantitative scale) C5b-9 deposits on endoneurial capillaries. An example of such a biopsy is in eFigures 4 and 5, respectively.
In addition to chronic de- and remyelinating pathology that was documented in the sural nerve specimens of CIDP, variable axonal loss could be found in all specimens. This axonal loss was moderate in 78% and mild in 22% of the cases as evaluated on methylene-blue stained semithin sections (eFigure 6; a = mild and b = moderate). Acute axonal damage was only occasionally identified (see arrowhead in eFigure 6a). In comparison, abundant acute axonal damage is shown exemplarily in a case of ANCA-associated vasculitis of the peripheral nervous system involving the sural nerve (eFigure 6c). There were no cases of end-stage axonal loss in this series and there were no noticeable differences between typical CIDP and variant CIDP specimens.
Sural nerve specimens from 27 patients (n = 22 with typical CIDP, n = 5 with CIDP variant) were available for RNA extraction and subsequent qPCR studies. Expression levels of complement- and inflammation-induced genes were studied to elucidate the complement-induced tissue destruction. We observed a slight up-regulation of complement factors C6, and in the majority of patients (64%, n = 17) an expression of C9 (Fig. 2a, b), the remaining 36% showed no gene expression of C9. There were no significant differences in expression levels of complement factors between sural nerve specimens from patients with typical CIDP and CIDP variants (see eFigure 7).
Proteomic profiling to decipher complement factors in sural nerve specimens of CIDP patients
Unbiased label-free proteomic profiling was performed exploratively on ten sural nerve specimens: seven from typical CIDP patients, two from atypical CIDP patients and two from NDC (Fig. 3a). Of the CIDP patients, five were classified having prominent complement deposition on capillaries, and four having weak. Data obtained by our data-dependent-acquisition approach filtered the quantified 1,411 proteins for factors belonging to the complement system (24 proteins) to decipher their neurodegenerative impact in CIDP further. Volcano plots of typical and atypical CIDP vs. NDC visualizes changes in abundant proteins (Fig. 3b) and the heat-map-based analysis of these 24 proteins revealed that all CIDP patients show an increase of C1R, C1S, C1QA, C1QC, C3, C4A, C4B, C5, C8A, C8B, C8G, C9, CFB and CFH compared to the abundance of these respective proteins in the control nerves (Fig. 3c). However, these protein increases vary across the nine patients.
Notably, patients #6 and #9, who had the highest complement deposition, also displayed greater clinical severity as reflected by higher INCAT scores. Other clinical characteristics, including disease subtype, age, sex or CDAS, did not differ between these groups. The two nerve biopsies derived from the patients presenting with atypical CIDP (patients #4 and #5) did not show striking differences in the complement signature or HLA proteins A and B (antigen-presenting major histocompatibility complex class I [MHCI] molecules) compared to the biopsies derived from the patients presenting with classical CIDP (Fig. 3).
Correlation analysis of complement profiles with clinical characteristics
Levels of complement deposition showed no correlation with age at biopsy (r = −0.07, p = 0.57), sex (r = −0.19, p = 0.17), or disease duration (r = 0.19, p = 0.18). Most patients (70%, n = 44) with high to moderate complement deposition on sural nerve specimens showed a progressive disease course according to CDAS. With regard to clinical severity, there was no correlation with the INCAT-score and MRC-SS at diagnosis and 3 years after biopsy nor with treatment modality (steroids vs. IVIG). However, there was a significant positive correlation between the number of infiltrating immune cells (CD8, as well as CD68) and INCAT score (p < 0.001, see Fig. 4), but not with number of infiltrating CD68 + macrophages (r = −0.13, p = 0.378) or CD8 + T cells (r = −0.21, p = 0.156). CSF protein levels (r = 0.28, p = 0.062) and clinical symptoms (presence of sensory problems, weakness, neuropathic pain, tremor, ataxia, and cranial–nerve involvement) did not correlate with complement levels.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Chronic-inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) is an autoimmune disease affecting the peripheral nervous system. This most frequent autoimmune polyneuropathy is characterized by the predominant demyelination of motor and sensory nerves. CIDP follows a relapsing–remitting or progressive disease course and is classified according to its clinical manifestation into “typical” CIDP, characterized by proximal and distal symmetric and predominant weakness, and “atypical” CIDP, currently redefined as CIDP variants.
Current treatment strategies for CIDP include corticosteroids, intravenous (IVIg) or subcutaneous immunoglobulins, and plasma exchange, which are effective in the majority of patients. Recently, the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) inhibitor efgartigimod has demonstrated clinically proven efficacy in a phase III trial and has been approved for the treatment of CIDP, thereby expanding the range of available therapeutic options. However, the response to these treatments remains heterogeneous and often requires long-term therapy leading to substantial burden of disease and disability in a subgroup of patients over time.
Differences in clinical presentation and therapeutic response are probably due to different pathophysiological mechanisms but thus far remain poorly understood. In addition to autoreactive T cells, auto-antibodies (Abs) directed against ganglioside Abs and paranodal structures are thought to play a crucial role in the etiology. However, these antibodies are detectable only in a small subset of patients and, according to the current EAN/PNS guidelines, define distinct autoimmune nodopathies characterized by therapy-refractory disease courses and pathognomonic clinical features. In the vast majority of CIDP cases, a specific target antigen remains unidentified. Although the primary mechanism of efgartigimod is the depletion of circulating IgG via FcRn blockade, its clinical efficacy in CIDP—where no specific target antibody has been defined—suggests that indirect downstream effects, such as reduced immune complex-mediated complement activation or modulation of proinflammatory cytokine pathways, may contribute to its therapeutic action. The rapid clinical response to both plasmapheresis and efgartigimod supports the involvement of a circulating factor, potentially including noncompact myelin-specific antibodies, cytokines, or components of the complement cascade. Nevertheless, direct evidence for complement involvement in CIDP remains scarce.
The complement system is a complex cascade that modulates tissue homeostasis and contributes to immune surveillance by interacting with the innate and adaptive immune systems. If disrupted, it is crucial for triggering several autoimmune neurological disorders. Complement activation can result from the classical (via C1q), lectin, and alternative (via C3) pathways. Subsequently, the effector proteins C3a, C3b, and C5a and the membrane attack complex (C5b-9) are generated leading to target cell lysis.
In earlier studies, sural nerve specimens from patients with CIDP showed deposition of complement factor C3 on the myelin sheath. However, these studies included only few patients (n = 4 resp. n = 7). Moreover, complement inhibition therapy has improved muscle weakness in an experimental rat model of CIDP. Apart from complement deposition on the myelin sheath, increased serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of C5a and the soluble terminal complement complex C5b-9 have also been reported in newly diagnosed, treatment-naïve CIDP patients compared to controls. Moreover, recently presented results from the C1s-inhibitor riliprubart, show a clinically meaningful improvement in clinical disability scores and support the crucial involvement of complement in the pathogenesis of CIDP.
Considering the current emergence and success of complement-targeted therapies, it is, therefore, crucial to examine the role of the complement system in CIDP to potentially tackle the unmet needs of more targeted therapeutic strategies and improve patient care.
Hence, in this study, we examine complement profiles on sural nerve specimens in a large cohort of CIDP patients compared to non-diseased controls (NDC) and diseased controls (DC) with non-inflammatory neuropathies using immunohistochemistry, quantitative PCR (qPCR), and proteomic analysis in an explorative manner to further unravel its pathophysiological role in CIDP.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material. 
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Andreas Roos and Christina B. Schroeter have contributed equally to this work.
Data availability
All the data and materials supporting the conclusions of this article are included in this article. Still, individual-level data can only be released under a suitable data-sharing agreement due to informed consent restrictions. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD056286. This study did not generate new unique reagents or codes.
Declarations