PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Top-down proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Intact mass; De novo sequencing; Top-down; Bottom-up; Polyclonal antibody sequencing

ABSTRACT:
Antibodies are specialized proteins produced by the adaptive immune system to identify and neutralize harmful antigens. Antibody-based diagnostics and therapeutics have advanced rapidly, with recombinant antibodies derived from monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) becoming the preferred standard due to their high reproducibility and effectiveness. However, mAbs are limited to binding a single antigen epitope. Polyclonal antibodies (pAbs), on the other hand, are produced by multiple B cells and can target multiple epitopes, making them more robust against antigen variations. Despite their advantages, pAbs are notoriously challenging to sequence due to their high complexity. Current de novo sequencing methods based on mass spectrometry have shown limitations when applied to pAb mixtures, often requiring germline databases or yielding incomplete or inaccurate sequences. Here we propose PolySeq, a fully de novo sequencing workflow that integrates bottom-up, top-down, and intact mass spectrometry data to accurately sequence pAb samples without relying on external databases. Our workflow automates the entire sequencing process from peptides to full proteins, achieving complete and accurate antibody profiles. Evaluation results on a mixture of four known mAbs and a pAb sample derived from mouse myeloma demonstrate that our de novo antibody sequences achieved up to 100% coverage and accuracy, with strong supporting evidence from bottom-up, top-down, and intact mass data. Furthermore, antibodies recombinantly expressed using de novo sequencing results showed expected properties, such as binding affinity and antigen neutralization, thus confirming the accuracy and efficacy of our pAb de novo sequencing workflow.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
De Novo Sequencing of Polyclonal Antibodies by Integrating Intact Mass, Top-Down and Bottom-Up Mass Spectrometry

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The purified mAb mixture and HB-95 samples were used for the fragmentation experiments. Take 20ug antibody mixture and dilute it to a final concentration of 1 μg/μL with 50mM final concentration Tris pH8.0 buffer. The N-linked glycans on the antibody constant region were removed by adding 0.2ul PNGaseF (NEB, 15000U, P0705S) at 37 ℃ over night. 20U SpeB enzyme (Genovis, FabULOUS) were used for cleavage of antibody to Fab and Fc, after 1 hour in 37℃, final concentration of 5mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, sigma) was added for reduction to Fc, Fd and LC subunits. Samples were acidified with FA (Sigma, 0.1% final concentration) before LC -MS/MS analysis. LC–MS/MS analysis was performed using an U3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) fitted with a H-ESI source. About 1 μg of LC, Fc and Fd were separated with a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN) at 200 μL/min, from 25% to 65% in 10 min. For all experiments spray voltage was set to 3.8 kV, sheath gas settings was 20, auxiliary gas settings was 10, sweep gas settings was 0, vaporizer temperature was 100℃, ion transfer tube temperature was 320℃, and source fragmentation energy was 35 V. A first LC–MS experiment was acquired at 120,000 resolving power (at m/z 200) with a scan range set to m/z 1000–1600, an automatic  gain control (AGC) target value of 4X105, and a maximum injection time of 246 ms. Fragmentation data were recorded using DDA LC–MS/MS experiments between 0 and 15 min for the antibody LC, Fc and Fd. MS/MS scans were acquired at 120,000 resolving power (at m/z 200), an AGC target value of 1X105, and maximum injection time of 500 ms. All experiments were conducted using the Intact Protein mode with a pressure set to 1 mTorr in the ion-routing multipole (IRM).

DATA PROCESSING:
Intact mass data collection and deconvolution We began by denaturing and deglycosylating the antibody sample, followed by reduction to break disulfide bonds and separate the light and heavy chains. Next, we used the proteases IdeS or SpeB to cleave the heavy chain at the hinge region, generating Fd and Fc subunits. At various stages of sample preparation, we performed LC-MS to collect intact (or middle-up) data from: (1) deglycosylated antibodies, (2) separated light and heavy chains, and (3) Lc, Fd, and Fc subunits. For each intact LC-MS run, we applied intact deconvolution to determine the masses and relative abundances of the major proteoforms. We used UniDEC19 to assign charges to MS peaks and convert the MS spectrum into a neutral mass distribution. We applied a sliding-window approach to merge multiple scans within a retention time (RT) range and deconvoluting each merged scan using UniDEC. For high-resolution data, the deconvoluted peaks contained isotopic distributions for each mass, which we consolidated by accumulating isotopes to the most abundant mass. We then selected deconvoluted masses above 1% relative intensity and associated each neutral mass with multiple raw spectrum peaks at different charges, forming a “feature vector” for each mass. In this vector, each feature represents a proteoform mass at a specific charge and RT.  Since relative abundances are not directly comparable across scans over RT, we adjusted for this by multiplying the relative abundance of each deconvoluted mass peak by the highest peak ion count from the corresponding input scan. Additionally, we grouped the same mass within a continuous RT range into a mass trail, allowing for some isotopic shifts, and accumulated mass intensities along the trail. The feature vector of a mass trail was then determined by the feature vector of the mass in the apex scan of the trail. Top-down data collection and analysis Top-down LC-MS/MS was performed on the subunit samples using ETD fragmentation. Once the top-down spectra have been obtained, we used TopFD20 to deconvolute MS/MS scans and generate fragment ion masses. Specifically, scans from the same precursor were grouped and deconvoluted in batches, and the resulting data for precursors of the same mass were merged. For each subunit mass, we generated two top-down mass lists: one assuming all fragment ion masses are c-ions, which are then converted to neutral prefix residue masses (PRMs); and the other assuming all fragment ion masses are z-ions, which are converted to neutral suffix residue masses (SRMs). Bottom-up data analysis using de novo sequencing We collected bottom-up LC-MS/MS data from the reduced sample using multiple enzymes and both HCD and EThcD fragmentation methods. Using multiple enzymes allows us to detect overlapping peptides when reconstructing protein sequences, while EThcD enhances resolution for I/L differentiation. The raw bottom-up LC-MS/MS data were then imported into PEAKS AB 3.09 for de novo sequencing. The resulting de novo peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered based on ALC score and continuous unconfident tag length. For each de novo PSM, we retained the local confidence scores at each residue. Using the de novo peptides, we constructed an overlapping bidirectional graph, preserving post-translational modifications (PTMs) identified during the de novo search.