PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Necs; Endothelial cells; Tecs; Secretome

ABSTRACT:
The aim of the project was to compare the secretomes of normal endothelial cells (NECs) and tumor endothelial cells (TECs). Cells were grown in full growth media up to 80-90% confluence. After washing with PBS, cells were incubated for 24 hours in serum free medium to collect conditioned medium, which was filtered and processed for LC-MS/MS analysis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
LC-MS/MS analysis of murine endothelial cell lines: normal brain microvascular cell line vs tumor endothelial cell line (b.End5)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We precipitated 2 ml of each sample using 80% ice-cold acetone and incubated them at -20°C overnight. The samples were then centrifuged at 4600 rcf for 20 minutes. The pellets were resuspended in 50µl Lysis buffer (6 M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, and 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and sonicated on high for 5x60 sec on/30sec off using the bioruptor picosonication waterbath and 20 µg of protein was digested with 200 ng LysC at 37°C for 3 hours. Digestion buffer was added to a final dilution of 1:10 along with 100 ng trypsin, and samples were digested overnight at 37°C. The peptides were desalted on a SOLAµ SPE plate and then eluted into clean 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes using 40% Acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The eluted peptides were concentrated in an Eppendorf Speedvac, and re-constituted in 12 µl 2% Acetonitrile, 1% TFA. We analyzed 500 ng of peptide mixture from each sample by online nano-scale LC-MS/MS. Peptides were separated on a 15cm C18-column (Thermo EasySpray ES804A) using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). The column temperature was maintained at 30 °C. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B of 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate of the gradient was kept at 250 nl/min, and started at 6% Buffer B, going to 23% buffer B in 43 minutes. This was followed by a 12-minute step going to 38% buffer B, increasing to 60% Buffer B in 5 minutes, and finally ramping up to 95% buffer B in 3 minutes, holding it for 7 minutes to wash the column. The Q-Exactive Classic instrument (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was run in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a top 10 Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS method with the following settings. The scan range was limited to 350-1750 m/z. The full scan resolution was set to 70,000 m/z, with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time (IT) value of 20 milliseconds. Peptides were fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 25, having a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds, excluding unassigned ions and those with a charge state of 1. MS/MS resolution was set at 17,500 m/z, with an AGC target of 1e6 and a maximum IT of 60 milliseconds.

DATA PROCESSING:
All raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed together using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) with the use of Label-free quantitation (LFQ) in both the processing and consensus steps. In the processing step, Oxidation (M), and protein N-termini acetylation and met-loss were set as dynamic modifications, with cysteine carbamidomethyl set as static modification. All results were filtered with percolator using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and Minora Feature Detector was used for quantitation. SequestHT was used as a database, matching spectra against the Mus musculus database from UniProt. Intensity normalization was performed in the total peptide amount mode. This involves summing the peptide group abundances for each sample and determining the maximum for all files, then using it as a normalization factor. The dataset proteins were sorted for identification based on two or more unique peptides in addition to being quantified among three biological replicates. To identify differentially expressed proteins, we used the LIMMA package (v 3.58.0). Proteins with detected intensities in at least two biological replicates were included in the analysis. Data was fit to linear model including the sample condition as covariate. Differential gene usage was assessed with the eBayes function and adjusted for multiple comparisons with false discovery rate (FDR). Only proteins with a log2 FC of ±1 and FDR < 0.05 were considered as significantly dysregulated. Further data analysis and visualization was done using GraphPad Prism (v 10.2.1), SR Plot and R packages including ggplot2 (v 3.4.4) and heatmap3 (v 1.1.9). Protein-protein networks and functional enrichment analysis were performed using STRING (v 12.0).

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell lines
The KPC cell line was isolated from a PDAC tumor and was a gift from the Tuveson Laboratory (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, United States). The 4T1 cell line was a kind gift from Fred Miller (Wayne State University). Both cells were cultured in DMEM GlutaMAX, supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. The b.End5 cell line, herein referred to as the tumor endothelial cells (TEC), derived from brain endothelioma of BALB/c mouse, was a gift from the depositor (#96091930, Culture Collections UK) to the University of Copenhagen. BALB-5023, derived from BALB/c mouse primary brain microvascular endothelial cells, herein referred to as a normal endothelial cell (NEC), was purchased from Cell Biologics (Cat. BALB-5023). TEC was cultured in DMEM GlutaMAX with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. NEC was cultured in an endothelial cell basal medium containing 5% FBS, VEGF, heparin, EGF, ECGS, hydrocortisone, and antibiotic–antimycotic (Cell Biologics, Cat. M1168). All cell Lines were cultured at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 and routinely tested for mycoplasma.
Endothelial cell assays
Cell proliferation assay
Proliferation was determined using the CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (G7572, Promega) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. For endothelial cell proliferation, 1000 cells were plated in a 96-well plate in 100 µl of their respective Full growth media. Cells were allowed to settle overnight, and the 0-h time point was assessed at this time. Proliferation was monitored every 24 h by adding 100 µl CellTiter-Glo® reagent in each well, incubating for 10 min, and recording the luminescence in a plate reader. Proliferation was monitored for five days, and subsequent time points were normalized to 0-h values to assess proliferation.
Cell migration assays
Migration was investigated using the gap closure assay and the chemotactic transwell migration assay. A 2-well silicone insert (#81176, Ibidi) that produces a well-defined, reproducible gap was used for the gap closure assay. Before the gap closure assay, cells were starved for 18 h in 1% FBS growth medium. We seeded 5 × 104 cells per insert and cultured overnight to allow them to settle. Afterward, the inserts were gently removed, and the cells were washed once with PBS and subcultured in their respective Full growth medium. The defined scratch areas were photographed at 0 and 16 h after removing the inserts. The area of the scratch was quantified using ImageJ software (NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).
For chemotactic migration assay was conducted using the QCM Endothelial Cell Migration Kit (ECM200, Sigma Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Before the assay, endothelial cells were starved for 18 h in 1% FBS growth medium. Afterward, they were harvested and subcultured in a fibronectin-coated transwell insert in serum-free media, with 10% FBS growth medium used as a chemoattractant. After 14 h, migrated cells were stained, washed twice in distilled water, and dried at room temperature for 10 min. Images of stained cells were captured using a light microscope. Tumor chemotaxis was subsequently evaluated by colorimetric analysis at OD 560 nm using a microplate reader.
Vascular permeability
Endothelial cell monolayer integrity was assessed using the in vitro vascular permeability assay kit (ECM644, Sigma Millipore) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, cells were cultured in their complete growth medium in a transwell insert for 48 h to form a continuous monolayer. Next, the endothelial monolayer was activated by two permeability factors: recombinant mouse TNF-α (#654245, Millipore) and VEGFA (#78102, Stem Cell Technologies) for 24 h. Respective serum-free culture media were used as controls. The inserts were washed twice with PBS, followed by the addition of 150 µl of FITC-Dextran solution (Diluted 1:40 in PBS) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Vascular permeability was evaluated by quantifying the amount of FITC-Dextran that passed through the endothelial monolayer by fluorescence (485 nm/535 nm). Vascular permeability of NEC and TEC was calculated relative to the permeability of the inactivated NEC monolayer.
Angiogenesis assays
The angiogenic properties of endothelial cells were assessed using the tube formation assay and the 3D spheroid sprouting assay. For the tube formation assay, 50 µl of chilled ECMatrix™ Solution (ECM625, Sigma Millipore) was added to multiple wells of a 96-well plate and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min to polymerize. Endothelial cells were trypsinized and counted, and 8000 cells in their respective serum-free medium were added to each well. Tube formation was assessed using 1 µg/ml recombinant mouse VEGFA used as a stimulant with respective serum-free medium as a control. Tube formation was evaluated by microscopy after 8 h, and the number of complete meshes, junctions, and tube length was quantified using ImageJ.
For spheroid sprouting assays, endothelial cell spheroids were generated using the hanging drop method. After 24 h, spheroids were harvested and embedded in a collagen matrix containing 1:1 20% FCS-methylcellulose and rat-tail type I collagen matrix (#3447-020-01, R&D Systems) in a low attachment 24-well plate. Spheroid sprouting was investigated in the presence of 1 µg/ml recombinant mouse VEGFA with respective serum-free medium as a control. After 24 h, sprouting was assessed microscopically, and the spheroid area was quantified using ImageJ.
Tumor cell assays
Preparation of endothelial cell conditioned medium
NEC and TEC conditioned medium were prepared by culturing 2 × 106 cells in 10 cm dishes in their complete growth medium. At 80-90% confluence, endothelial cells were washed thrice with PBS and subcultured in 1% FBS + DMEM for 24 h. Endothelial cell conditioned medium was collected, filtered through 0.2 µm sterile filters, and used for subsequent functional assays. Fresh endothelial cell conditioned medium was used for all functional assays on tumor cells.
Cell proliferation
To determine the effect of endothelial cell secreted factors on cancer cell proliferation, KPC and 4T1 cells (1000 cells/well) were seeded in a 96-well plate in complete growth medium and allowed to settle overnight. Cell viability was assessed at this time point and assigned 0 h, and subsequent time points were normalized to 0-h values to assess proliferation. The complete growth medium was replaced by 100 µl fresh endothelial cell conditioned medium, and cell proliferation was assessed every 24 h (for five days) by adding 100 µl CellTiter-Glo® reagent in each well, incubating for 10 min, and recording the luminescence in a plate reader. Fresh endothelial cell conditioned medium was added every two days. 1% FBS-DMEM was used as a control.
Chemotaxis
KPC and 4T1 chemotactic migration were assessed using the colorimetric chemotaxis assay (ECM508, Millipore), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Before the assay, tumor cells were starved for 18 h in serum-free medium. Afterward, starved tumor cells were harvested, counted, and 5 × 104 cells were seeded in a transwell insert in serum-free medium. Fresh endothelial cell-conditioned medium was used as a chemoattractant, and 1% FBS-DMEM as a control. After 14 h, migrated cells were stained, washed twice in distilled water, and dried at room temperature for 10 min. Stained cells were imaged by alight microscope, and chemotaxis was subsequently quantified by colorimetric analysis at 560 nm using a microplate reader.
Tumor 3D invasion assay
KPC and 4T1 invasion were assessed using the spheroid invasion assay. As an initial step, tumor spheroids were generated using the hanging drop method. Spheroids were collected by washing in 10 ml PBS and centrifugation at 200 × g for 5 min. The supernatants were discarded, and spheroids were resuspended in 3 mg/ml rat-tail collagen I matrix and cultured in a low attachment 24-well plate. Fresh endothelial cell-conditioned medium was used as a stimulant, with 1% FBS-DMEM as a control. Spheroid invasion was assessed by microscopy after 24 h, and the invasion area was quantified using ImageJ.
Cell–cell adhesion assay
The adhesion of 4T1 and KPC cells to endothelial cell monolayers was assessed by microscopy and manual counting. TEC, KPC, and 4T1 reporter cells containing either GFP or RFP were generated using the CRISPR Knock-in system as previously described. Full details are in the supplementary methods. We used the Cell Tracking Red Dye Kit (AB269446, Abcam) to label NEC because we were unable to tag them as was done for TEC, KPC, and 4T1 cells. For adhesion assays, 1 × 105 labeled endothelial cells were seeded in a 6-well plate and cultured for 72 h to form a monolayer. GFP-labeled tumor cells were trypsinized, counted, and 1 × 105 cells were seeded on the endothelial cell monolayer and incubated for one hour. Afterwards, wells were washed off three times using PBS to remove unattached cells. Cells were imaged (5 fields per group) using a fluorescent microscope, and tumor-endothelial cell adhesion was subsequently quantified by ImageJ.
Mass spectrometry secretome analysis
For sample preparation, NEC and TEC (1.5 × 106 cells) were seeded in 10 cm cell culture dishes and cultured to 80% confluence. Afterwards, cells were washed twice with PBS to remove traces of FBS and then subcultured for 24 h in serum-free DMEM (Phenol red free). The medium was collected, filtered, and subjected to LC/MS analysis. Full details are in the supplementary methods.
Data analysis was conducted as previously described. All raw LC-MS/MS data files were processed together using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) with the use of label-free quantitation (LFQ) in both the processing and consensus steps. In the processing step, Oxidation (M), protein N-termini acetylation, and met-loss were set as dynamic modifications, with cysteine carbamidomethyl set as a static modification. All results were filtered with percolator using a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), and Minora Feature Detector was used for quantification. SequestHT was used as a database, matching spectra against the Mus musculus database from UniProt. Intensity normalization was performed in the total peptide amount mode. This involves summing the peptide group abundances for each sample, determining the maximum for all files, and then using it as a normalization factor. The dataset proteins were sorted for identification based on two or more unique peptides. To identify differentially expressed proteins, we used the LIMMA package (v 3.58.0). Proteins with detected intensities in at least two biological replicates were included in the analysis. Data was fit to the linear model, including the sample condition as a covariate. Differential gene usage was assessed with the eBayes function and adjusted for multiple comparisons with false discovery rate (FDR). Only proteins with a log2 FC of ± 1 and FDR < 0.05 were considered as significantly dysregulated. Further data analysis and visualization were done using GraphPad Prism (v 10.2.1), SR Plot and R packages including ggplot2 (v 3.4.4) and heatmap3 (v 1.1.9). Protein-protein networks and functional enrichment analysis were performed using STRING (v 12.0).
Functional assays using recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C
For all Functional assays, 100 ng/ml of either recombinant mouse PDGF-AA (SRP3228, Sigma) or mouse PDGF-C (#1447-PC-025, R&D Systems) was used to investigate their effect on tumor cell proliferation, invasion, and chemotaxis. In addition, the effect of recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C on endothelial cell tube formation and vascular permeability was evaluated as previously described. Next, the signaling pathways activated by recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C in KPC and 4T1 cells were investigated by western blotting. Full details are in the supplementary methods.
In vivo mouse models
All mouse experiments were conducted under authorization and guidelines approved by the Danish Inspectorate for Animal Experiments (License No. 2020-15-0201-00596). Aged-matched female Balb/c mice (6-12 weeks old) were used for orthotopic and experimental liver metastasis models. Orthotopic breast tumors were established by surgical implantation as previously described.. Mice were randomly assigned to three groups (n = 5 for each group, repeated twice) and injected with 1 × 105 4T1 cells, a mixture of 1 × 105 4T1 cells and 2.5 × 104 NEC or TEC (4:1) in 50 µl PBS in the left lower mammary fat pad. Tumor growth was monitored by palpation every 2 days for 28 days or a maximum volume of 1cm3. Tumor volume was calculated using the following formula: volume (mm3) = (length (mm) * width (mm)2 × π)/6. The disease burden was assessed by measuring the weight of mice during the experiment. At the study endpoint, tumors were resected and weighed, and lungs and livers were collected and processed for immunohistochemistry analysis. Some mice (n = 2 for 4T1, n = 1 for 4T1 + NEC, and n = 2 for 4T1 + TEC) were excluded from subsequent data analysis as they had no visible tumors at the study endpoint. An additional mouse (n = 1 for 4T1) was also eliminated from subsequent data analysis by outlier analysis (ROUT method, GraphPad Prism). The final data analysis used n = 7 for 4T1, n = 9 for 4T1 + NEC, and n = 8 for 4T1 + TEC. Liver and lung metastatic burden was quantified by counting and averaging the number of all metastatic foci in three non-consecutive H&E liver or lung sections.
Experimental liver metastasis was done using intrasplenic injection as previously described. Briefly, mice were randomly assigned to three groups (n = 5 per group, repeated twice). Briefly, 5 × 105 4T1 cells, a 4:1 mixture of 5 × 105 4T1 cells and 1 × 105 NEC or TEC in PBS, were injected into the spleen of immunocompetent Balb/c mice using a Hamilton 29-G syringe. Mice were monitored by weighing every 4 days up to 21 days. At the study endpoint, mice were euthanized, and livers and lungs were collected, weighed, and processed for immunohistochemical analysis. Metastatic burden was assessed by quantifying the size of all metastatic foci (in three non-consecutive H&E liver sections) as a percentage of the entire liver section. Lung metastatic burden was assessed by counting and averaging the number of all metastatic foci in three non-consecutive H&E lung sections.
Statistical analysis
GraphPad Prism version 10.4.1(627) was used for statistical analysis. All in vitro data were performed in biological triplicates, and error bars on bar plots indicate mean + SD unless stated otherwise. For all in vitro proliferation and in vivo tumor growth assays, growth differences were estimated by calculating the area under the curve (AUC) method, followed by significance analysis. For analyses of two groups, an unpaired Student’s t-test with Welch's correction was used. For comparisons involving more than two groups, one-way ANOVA paired with Tukey’s multiple comparison test was used. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered significant, and p-values were denoted as follows: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001.

RESULTS:
Results
TEC have an aggressive phenotype compared to NEC
In this study, we evaluated the differences between normal and tumor endothelial cells. We used the well-characterized cell line b.End5 as a tumor endothelial cell line and herein referred to as TEC. BALB-5023 cells are derived from brain vasculature and considered normal endothelial cells, and are referred to as NEC for simplicity. We characterized NEC and TEC (Supplementary Fig. 1A) by evaluating their proliferation, migration, vascular integrity, and angiogenic potential. By immunoblotting, we showed that both cells express known endothelial-specific markers such as CD31, VCAM1, and Endomucin (Fig. 1A). Using qPCR, we also showed that both NEC and TEC express Vegfr1, Vegfr2, and Vegfr3 (Supplementary Fig. 1B). These receptors mediate VEGF signaling, which is vital for physiological and pathological vascularization. Next, we assessed the proliferation differences of these cells using the luminescence assay for five days. While all the cells had a similar growth profile in the first 72 h, afterwards, TEC had a significantly higher proliferation than NEC (Fig. 1B). We then investigated the motility differences of these endothelial cells using chemotactic migration and gap closure assays. While there was no difference in their chemotactic migration capacity (Supplementary Fig. 1C), TEC migrated significantly faster compared to NEC (Fig. 1C-D). This difference in motility between TEC and NEC is consistent with previous reports that showed glioblastoma-derived ECs having a higher motility than their normal counterparts.
As vascular permeability is indispensable for tumor metastasis, we evaluated endothelial cell permeability using the FITC-Dextran transwell assay. We reasoned that tumor cells secrete factors that communicate with the endothelial barrier through paracrine signaling to facilitate extravasation and metastatic dissemination. There was no difference in the baseline permeability of both cell lines without activation. However, when either endothelial cell monolayer was activated using recombinant TNF-α or VEGFA, we reported an increase in the permeability of TEC compared to NEC (Fig. 1E). This higher permeability of TEC post-activation points towards a metastatic dissemination role.
The development and sprouting of new capillaries from resident endothelial cells are the hallmarks of angiogenesis. We evaluated the angiogenic potential of these endothelial cells using the tube formation and the spheroid sprouting assays. Even in the absence of an angiogenic stimulant, TEC showed a significantly higher tube formation potential than NEC, a phenotype enhanced by the addition of recombinant VEGFA (Fig. 1F). We reported a significant increase in tube length as well as the number of meshes and junctions in TEC than NEC (Fig. 1G, Supplementary Fig. 1E-F). Similarly, TEC had a significantly higher sprouting capacity than NEC, which was also amplified in the presence of recombinant VEGFA (Fig. 1H-I).
Given these differences between NEC and TEC, we were curious whether activation of NEC using tumor-conditioned medium would alter their phenotype and assume TEC characteristics. We investigated changes in chemotaxis and vascular permeability of activated endothelial cells, as there were no differences between NEC and TEC at baseline. Additionally, we also characterized the proliferation of activated endothelial cells relative to the inactivated ones. Our findings showed that activated NEC had a significantly higher chemotactic migration capacity and was more permeable than inactivated NEC. Nevertheless, the chemotactic and permeability capacity of activated NEC were still lower than those of activated TEC (Supplementary Fig. 1G-H). Additionally, we compared the short-term proliferation of activated and inactivated EC. We observed that activated EC proliferated faster than their inactivated counterparts. Interestingly, activated TECs were still highly proliferative compared to activated NEC (Supplementary Fig. 1I).
TEC-conditioned medium promotes cancer cell proliferation, chemotaxis, and invasion
To understand the role of angiocrine factors on KPC and 4T1 cells, we used NEC- and TEC-conditioned media to investigate tumor cell proliferation, chemotaxis, and invasion in vitro. First, we evaluated the effect of endothelial cell conditioned media on tumor cell proliferation. Conditioned medium from both endothelial cell lines stimulated tumor proliferation compared to the control. However, TEC-conditioned medium induced significantly more proliferation than NEC-conditioned medium in both cancer cells (Fig. 2A, B). Next, we evaluated the effect of endothelial conditioned medium on the chemotaxis and invasion of KPC and 4T1 cells. Chemotaxis of tumor cells in the TME and invasion through local ECM are critical steps during metastatic initiation. Both endothelial cell conditioned media stimulated the chemotactic migration of KPC and 4T1 cells compared to the control, with TEC-conditioned medium having the greatest chemotaxis effect (Fig. 2C-D). Similarly, TEC-conditioned medium significantly upregulated the invasion capacity of 4T1 and KPC cells compared to NEC-conditioned medium (Fig. 2E, F). These findings are in line with a recent study that showed conditioned medium from glioblastoma-derived endothelial cells promoted the proliferation and migration of patient-derived gliomaspheres in vitro.
Therefore, the adhesion of tumor cells to the endothelium is a critical rate-limiting step in metastasis initiation. We investigated the adhesion of KPC and 4T1 cells to both endothelial cell monolayers. Briefly, GFP-labeled cancer cells were added to a monolayer of growing RFP-labeled endothelial cells and cultured for an hour. Our results showed that TEC monolayers significantly promoted cell-cell adhesion of tumor cells compared to NEC monolayers (Fig. 2G-H). Notably, KPC and 4T1 cells displayed a similar adhesion profile to each endothelial cell line. Taken together, our results demonstrate that TEC-conditioned medium contains factors that significantly promote the aggressiveness of KPC and 4T1 cells. 
Secretome profiling of NEC and TEC 
We conducted a secretome analysis of NEC and TEC conditioned media using label-free quantitative proteomics to gain insight into the angiocrine factors and molecular mechanisms via which endothelial cells influence tumor cell properties. We identified more than 2300 proteins across each of the three replicates per endothelial cell line (Fig. 3A, Supplementary Table 1), with 2280 proteins commonly identified in both endothelial cell lines (Supplementary Fig. 2B-C). By hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis, we showed that NEC and TEC samples cluster separately, confirming their differential secretome composition despite a common organ of origin (Fig. 3B, Supplementary Fig. 2C).
To determine the differentially secreted proteins in the extracellular space, we focused on common proteins identified in both endothelial cell secretomes. As an initial step, we characterized the subcellular location of the commonly identified proteins using Uniprot ID mapping. Approximately 318 proteins (14%) of all commonly identified proteins were in the extracellular space (Supplementary Fig. 2D). Using a cut-off of p < 0.05 and FC ± 2.0, we identified 154 differentially regulated proteins (62 upregulated and 92 downregulated) in TEC vs NEC (Fig. 3C, Supplementary Table 2). Next, we analyzed enriched molecular functions and KEGG pathways associated with proteins significantly secreted by NEC and TEC. For TEC, among the relevant and significantly enriched molecular functions were PDGF binding, lysyl oxidase activity, chemoattractant activity, growth factor/receptor activity, ECM structural constituents, proteoglycans, laminin, and collagen binding. For NEC, the relevant enriched molecular functions include chemorepellent activity, endopeptidase activity, endopeptidase inhibitor activity, and the binding of IGF receptors, semaphorin receptors, and integrins (Supplementary Fig. 2E, Supplementary Table 3). For KEGG pathways, we found an enrichment of multiple cancer-associated pathways in TEC, including ECM-receptor interaction, focal adhesion, amoebiasis, proteoglycans in cancer, resistance to EGFR inhibitors, and different signaling pathways, such as PI3K-AKT, MAPK, and Relaxin pathways (Supplementary Fig. 2 F, Supplementary Table 3). The most prominent KEGG pathway for NEC was the complement and coagulation cascade, alongside some cancer-associated pathways such as PI3K-AKT signaling, focal adhesion, and ECM-receptor interaction.
Some macromolecules comprising the secretome include ECM molecules and secreted factors that collectively make up the matrisome. A previous report by Naba and colleagues predicted the in silico matrisome by characterizing the composition of ECM molecules and associated factors in humans and mice, which is currently referred to as the NABA matrisome. The NABA matrisome is divided into two major groups, namely the core matrisome consisting of collagens, proteoglycans, and ECM glycoproteins, and matrisome-associated proteins composed of secreted factors, ECM regulators, and ECM-affiliated proteins. As NEC and TEC have a common biological origin, we compared their secretome to characterize their matrisome differences. We focused on the 318 proteins in the extracellular space (Supplementary Fig. 2D) and found that 172 proteins were members of the NABA matrisome (Fig. 3D, Supplementary Table 4-Sheet 1). Of these, 44.8% were core matrisome proteins, including collagen (20), proteoglycans (7), and ECM glycoproteins (50), while 55.2% were matrisome-affiliated proteins, including ECM regulators (46), ECM-affiliated proteins (17), and secreted factors (32). However, of the 154 differentially regulated proteins identified in our study, 96 were members of the Naba matrisome, with 58 being non-NABA members (Supplementary Table 4-Sheet 2).
Secreted factors are the largest component of the NABA matrisome and constitute growth factors, cytokines, metabolites, chemokines, and hormones. Crosstalk between tumor cells and stromal cells in the TME is mediated via some of these secreted factors, which promote aggressive malignancy. Our results showed 32 secreted factors, based on the Naba matrisome nomenclature, with nine members highly secreted by TEC and 10 members overly secreted by NEC (Fig. 3E-F). An in-depth analysis of the 32 secreted proteins revealed the presence of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) family members in the endothelial secretome. PDGF-C and PDGF-AA were significantly secreted by TEC, PDGF-D was significantly secreted by NEC, with no difference in PDGF-BB secretion (Supplementary Table 5). Protein-protein interaction and functional enrichment analyses of the differentially secreted proteins showed an enrichment of different cancer-associated signaling networks. Focal adhesion, chemokine signaling, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, Rap1 signaling, and pathways in cancer were uniquely enriched in TEC with PDGF-AA, PDGF-C, and VEGFA as the dominant factors involved. In NEC, TGF-β signaling was the only uniquely enriched signaling pathway (Fig. 3G, Supplementary Table 6). In both NEC and TEC, MAPK signaling, PI3K-AKT signaling, resistance to EGFR inhibitors, RAS signaling, and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction were examples of commonly enriched pathways. We concluded that these differences in NEC and TEC secretomes are partly responsible for their inherent phenotypic differences and the observed functional effect they exert on cancer cells.
PDGF-AA and PDGF-C promote tumor chemotaxis and invasion
For further downstream analysis, we selected factors significantly elevated in TEC, as conditioned medium from this endothelial cell line induced significant biological differences in tumor cells in vitro. We focused on PDGF-C and PDGF-AA as they belong to the same family, and both were highly secreted by TEC. First, we assessed the expression of PDGFRA, the principal receptor for PDGF-AA and PDGF-C, in tumor cells. Our immunoblot results showed that KPC cells did not express PDGFRA but expressed EphA2 and NRP1 (Fig. 4A), receptors that have been previously been shown to interact with PDGF-AA and PDGF-C, respectively. Using ELISA, we quantified the levels of PDGF-AA and PDGF-C in the conditioned medium of NEC and TEC. Our results showed that TEC significantly secreted more PDGF-AA and PDGF-C than NEC (Fig. 4B, C), validating our mass spectrometry findings.
First, we investigated the effect of these recombinant proteins on cell proliferation. In both cell lines, neither PDGF-AA nor PDGF-C promoted cell proliferation (Fig. 4D-E). As chemotaxis and invasion are essential steps in metastasis initiation, we investigated the effect of recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C on these steps in vitro. We showed that recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C significantly promoted tumor cell chemotaxis (Fig. 4F-G) and invasion (Fig. 4H-I). Additionally, we characterized the autocrine role of recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C on endothelial cells. Neither recombinant protein affected the vascular permeability of either NEC or TEC (Supplementary Fig. 3A), suggesting that other secreted factors like VEGFA play this role as described in Fig. 1E. Moreover, as sustained angiogenesis is a hallmark of cancer and vital in metastasis initiation, we evaluated whether recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C could stimulate TEC tube formation. We showed that these recombinant proteins did not promote TEC tube formation (Supplementary Fig. 3B-C). These results suggest PDGF-AA and PDGF-C, significantly abundant in TEC-conditioned medium, act in a paracrine manner and are partly responsible for increased tumor cell chemotaxis and invasion.
We evaluated the possible intracellular signaling pathways induced by recombinant PDGF-AA and PDGF-C based on their effect in promoting tumor cell invasion and chemotaxis. Based on our secretome analysis, AKT and MAPK pathways were some of the enriched pathways regulated by these two factors. Treatment of KPC and 4T1 cells with these recombinant proteins increased the levels of active pP38 (T180/Y182), pAKT (S473), and pERK1/2 (T202/Y204). Interestingly, we also observed an increased pEphA2 (S897) in 4T1 cells when treated with both recombinant proteins (Fig. 5A). Next, we investigated whether inhibiting EphA2 and PDGFRA receptors with ALW-II-41-27 (An Eph family tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which has been demonstrated to block EphA2 signaling) and Cediranib (a VEGFR and PDGFR inhibitor), would block downstream EphA2/P38/AKT/ERK signaling. As an initial step, we evaluated whether these drugs would inhibit tumor chemotaxis. While ALW-II-41-27 inhibited chemotaxis in both cancer cells, Cediranib only inhibited 4T1 chemotaxis with no effect in KPC cells (Fig. 5B-C). Inhibition of 4T1 cells by ALW-II-41-27, an EphA2 inhibitor, was associated with decreased activation of pEphA2 (S897), pP38 (T180/Y182), pAKT (S473), and pERK1/2 (T202/Y204) phosphorylation in the presence of either PDGF-AA or PDGF-C (Fig. 5D-E, Supplementary Fig. 3D-E). While Cediranib treatment had a similar inhibitory effect in 4T1 cells, it generally did not affect PDGF-C mediated pP38 (T180/Y182) phosphorylation (Supplementary Fig. 3E). For KPC cells, a consistent observation across the biological replicates conducted was the decreased PDGF-activated pP38 (T180/Y182) phosphorylation in the presence of ALW-II-41-27, as well as a decrease in PDGF-C mediated pP38 (T180/Y182) activation in the presence of Cediranib (Supplementary Fig. 3F-G). This may partly explain the decreased chemotaxis of KPC cells in the presence of this inhibitor. Surprisingly, there was also a consistent increase in phosphorylation of pEphA2 and pERK1/2 in KPC cells after treatment with ALW-II-41-27, in the presence of either PDGF ligand (Supplementary Fig. 3F-G).
As Cediranib inhibits VEGFRs as well as PDGFRs, we investigated its effect on tumor vascularization in the presence of tumor-conditioned medium. We reasoned that tumor-conditioned medium contains high levels of VEGFA and blocking VEGFA-VEGFR signaling would inhibit endothelial functions. ELISA analysis showed that tumor cells secreted more VEGFA than endothelial cells (Supplementary Fig. 3H), and that pre-treatment of either KPC or 4T1 cells with recombinant PDGFs did not elevate VEGFA secretion (Supplementary Fig. 3I). While tumor-conditioned medium promoted endothelial permeability and proliferation, treatment with 10 nM Cediranib significantly attenuated both processes (Fig. 5F-G). Both KPC and 4T1 conditioned medium significantly increased TEC tube formation, which was partially inhibited by 10 nM Cediranib treatment (Fig. 5H-I).
Neutralization of PDGF-C inhibits tumor chemotaxis and invasion
To further validate the effect of PDGFs secreted by TEC, we investigated the effect of TEC-conditioned medium on tumor cells in the presence of neutralizing antibodies against PDGF-AA and PDGF-C. As an initial step, we investigated the effect of TEC-derived PDGF-AA or PDGF-C on tumor chemotaxis and invasion in the presence of their respective neutralizing antibodies. PDGF-C neutralization significantly inhibited tumor chemotaxis and invasion in both KPC and 4T1 cells (Fig. 6A-D). On the contrary, PDGF-AA neutralization marginally but significantly reduced chemotaxis and invasion in 4T1 cells without affecting KPC cells. Next, we evaluated the effect of PDGF neutralization on intracellular signaling using immunoblotting. In both cell lines, neutralization of TEC-derived PDGF-C inhibited EphA2 (S897) phosphorylation, which subsequently led to decreased AKT/P38/ERK signaling compared to the IgG control (Fig. 6E-F). Interestingly, while PDGF-AA neutralization did not affect these signaling pathways in KPC cells, there was a consistent marginal decrease in the levels of pEphA2 (S897) and pP38 (T180/Y182) in 4T1 cells (Supplementary Fig. 3J-K). These findings suggest that TEC-derived PDGF-C is a key mediator of chemotaxis and invasion in this setting.
TEC promote primary tumor growth and spontaneous liver metastasis in an orthotopic breast model
We evaluated the in vivo effects of the co-injection of 4T1 and endothelial cells on tumor growth and metastasis using an orthotopic and liver metastasis models. In the orthotopic model, no significant differences were reported in endpoint tumor weight, endpoint tumor volume, as well as liver/lung/spleen weight between the three groups (Supplementary Fig. 4A-C). However, four weeks after orthotopic injection, we observed striking differences in the tumor growth between the 4T1, 4T1 + NEC, and 4T1 + TEC mice. Notably, we found that mice injected with 4T1 + TEC had a significantly higher tumor growth rate than mice injected with either 4T1 + NEC or 4T1 cells only (Fig. 7A). This higher growth rate of 4T1 + TEC tumors was also associated with an increased KI67 immunostaining (Fig. 7B-C). One of the objectives of this study was to determine whether the co-injection of endothelial cells with 4T1 would modulate the angiogenic potential of the developing tumors in vivo. While there was no significant difference in the number of CD31+ vessels between the mice groups co-injected with endothelial cells, 4T1 + TEC tumors had significantly more vessels than 4T1 only tumors (Fig. 7B, D). Further, immunohistochemical analysis of orthotopic tumors showed significantly increased expression of PDGF-AA and PDGF-C in the 4T1 + TEC group compared to the 4T1 group only (Fig. 7E-F). While there was no significant difference in the expression levels of PDGF-AA and PDGF-C between the mice co-injected with either endothelial cell line, 4T1 + TEC tumors had higher levels of PDGF-AA and PDGF-C than 4T1 + NEC tumors (Fig. 7E-F). In addition, 4T1 + TEC tumors had significantly higher expression levels of pEphA2 (S897), pAKT (S473), and pP38 (T180/Y182) compared to 4T1 + NEC or 4T1 only tumors. (Fig. 7E-F). However, there was no difference in the expression of pERK1/2 (T202/Y204) across these three groups.
Aggressive breast cancer is associated with liver metastasis, a phenotype commonly recapitulated in orthotopic mouse models. To this end, we evaluated the liver metastatic burden between the three groups. 4T1 + TEC mice had a higher liver metastasis burden than 4T1 + NEC and 4T1 mice based on the average number of metastatic lesions counted in three non-consecutive H&E liver sections (Fig. 7G-H). However, this was not the case for experimental liver metastasis, as all groups had similar areas of liver metastasis foci post-intrasplenic injection (Supplementary Fig. 4D-E). These findings demonstrate that TEC at the primary tumor site are essential mediators of liver metastasis. Further, we evaluated the lungs of mice at endpoint for both experimental models, as the lung is also a common site of breast cancer metastasis. For the orthotopic model, there were no differences between the three groups with regard to the number of metastatic foci in the lungs (Supplementary Fig. 4F-G). In the intrasplenic injection model, no differences in the lung metastasis burden were observed between the 4T1 + NEC and the 4T1 + TEC groups. Surprisingly, the co-injection of 4T1 + NEC led to a significantly higher number of metastatic lung foci compared to the 4T1 group. Nevertheless, on average, 4T1 + TEC mice had more metastatic foci than the 4T1 group, albeit not statistically significant (Supplementary Fig. 4H-I).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Metastasis is the main cause of cancer-related mortality, accounting for the majority of all cancer deaths. Our ability to treat cancer effectively largely depends on our capacity to halt or eliminate metastasis. To develop effective diagnoses and therapies, it is essential to understand the molecular mechanisms within the tumor microenvironment (TME) that regulate metastasis initiation. Metastasis initiation involves several rate-limiting steps, including tumor cell invasion through the local extracellular matrix (ECM), chemotactic migration toward blood vessels, and adhesion to endothelium before intravasation and traveling to secondary organs. The vascular endothelium plays a crucial role at both the primary and metastatic sites by facilitating angiogenesis, a phenomenon extensively regulated by a milieu of extracellular signals, including cancer cell-derived pro-angiogenic factors, cytokines, hypoxia, and ECM remodeling. While the role of endothelial cells during angiogenesis has been well-characterized, emerging evidence suggests their function extends beyond the static vessel networks that deliver nutrients and oxygen.
Instead, endothelial cells assume a regulatory phenotype with privileged access to the tumor, orchestrating a unique cellular microenvironment by secreting tissue-specific paracrine factors, hereby termed ‘angiocrine factors’ that actively shape their local microenvironment and contribute to malignancy. This is supported by multiple studies where direct co-culture of endothelial and cancer cells led to increased invasion, migration, and proliferation of tumor cells. However, whether the observed effects are due to angiocrine signaling or direct contact between tumor and endothelial cells is unclear. Furthermore, most co-culture studies involving endothelial cells focus on either their angiogenic role or tumor-endothelial crosstalk at metastatic sites with limited information about the contribution of endothelial cells in metastasis initiation. Therefore, it is fundamental to study the direct effects of angiocrine factors on tumor cells and their contribution to metastasis initiation.
It is currently appreciated that the endothelium performs additional roles beyond its core angiogenic function. Endothelial cells are heterogeneous between tissues and organs, performing distinct physiological and pathophysiological functions. Presumably, this heterogeneity is meant to serve the needs of each organ. However, most cancer research has relied on human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) as in vitro cellular models of the endothelium and angiogenesis. However, these cells reflect neither organo-specificity nor endothelial cell heterogeneity in the TME. There are now reported distinct biological differences between normal endothelial cells (NEC) and tumor endothelial cells (TEC), all of which reside in the TME and have distinct angiocrine signatures. TEC are considered irregular and abnormal and exhibit altered metabolic, secretomics, and transcriptomic profiles than their normal counterparts, based on the results of different single-cell transcriptomic studies. These studies have laid the framework for comparative in vitro and in vivo studies of the different endothelial cells and their distinct functions in the TME, specifically the effects of their para-angiocrine signaling networks. Therefore, developing an understanding of the molecular mechanisms of endothelial cells in metastasis initiation beyond their role in malignant vascularization will provide an opportunity for the discovery of novel drug targets.
Here, we first provide an in-depth functional characterization of NEC and TEC and their subsequent regulation of the rate-limiting steps of metastasis initiation. Using in vitro functional assays and in vivo mouse models, we also describe their paracrine effect on tumor cells. Our results showed that TEC have a more proliferative, invasive, and angiogenic phenotype than NEC. Through their secretome, TEC actively drive an aggressive tumor phenotype by promoting the proliferation, chemotactic migration, invasion, and tumor-endothelial cell adhesion. We identified PDGF-AA and PDGF-C, two angiocrine factors highly secreted by TEC, as likely actors promoting tumor cell chemotaxis and invasion, important rate-limiting steps of metastasis initiation. In vivo, we found that TEC significantly promoted primary breast tumor growth and liver metastasis. These findings suggest that TEC establish a permissive microenvironment supporting metastasis initiation.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Data availability
All data generated during this study are included in the article or supplementary figures. All data from the corresponding authors is available upon request. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD062200 (Reviewer username: reviewer_pxd062200@ebi.ac.uk, Password: v0G1asgj6bFv).
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All mouse experiments were conducted under authorization and guidelines approved by the Danish Inspectorate for Animal Experiments (License No. 2020-15-0201-00596).
Consent for publication
Not applicable.