PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Uterine cervix; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Hela cells; Orbitrap; Lysate; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Mass spectrometry-based chemical proteomic approaches using limited proteolysis for analysis of the interactions between a small molecule and its protein target(s). DARTS (Drug Affinity Responsive Target Stability) has been used in this study on Hela cell lysate. Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 5 (USP5) was identified as one of the targets of the studied small molecule.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
identification of the protein targets of a small molecule

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The cell lysate was diluted to 3 μg/μL and divided into four equal aliquots; three of those were treated with different concentrations of the small molecule while the fourth aliquot served as a control and was treated with an equal volume of DMSO. After an hour of incubation under continuous shaking, the limited proteolysis was carried out treating samples with different amount of subtilisin for 30 minutes at 25°C under continuous shaking. Protease was then quenched by adding PMSF (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) to each sample.  20 µg of each sample were then boiled in Laemmli buffer (60 mM Tris–HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 0.001% bromophenol blue, 1% glycerol, and 2% ß-mercaptoethanol), and loaded on a 4-12% Bis–Tris Criterion™ XT Precast Gel. After the electrophoretic separation, proteins were stained by Coomassie solution and gel bands were cut out from the gels and submitted to an in situ tryptic digestion protocol. Briefly, proteins disulphide bonds were reduced with 6.5 mM 1,4- dithiothreitol (DTT) and thiols were then carboxyamidomethylated adding 54 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). After hydration/dehydration cycles, 12 ng/µL trypsin/LysC solution was added on ice for 1h. After the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (30 µL, 50 mM, pH 8.5), bands were incubated overnight at 37°C to allow protein digestion. After this incubation peptides were extracted from the slices using 100% CH3CN twice, and the peptides samples were dried under vacuum and dissolved in formic acid (10%) before the MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were extracted from each gel slice and the obtained peptides mixtures were dried under vacuum and dissolved in formic acid for the LC-MS-MS analysis.  A nano-flow RP-UPLC MS/MS was used to inject 1 µL of each sample which was then analyzed with the Orbitrap Q-Exactive Classic Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 Ultra-High Pressure Liquid Chroma-tography (UPLC) system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen), equipped with an EASY-Spray PepMAPTM RSLC C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, Ther-moFisher Scientific, Bremen). Gradient ranged from 1 min at 3% B up to 28% of B in 40 min (A: 95% H2O, 5% CH3CN, 0.1% AcOH; B: 95% CH3CN, 5% H2O, 0.1% AcOH), then from 28 to 49 min isocratic at 70% of B and at 49 min back to 3% of B for other 10min before the starting of next run. MS analysis was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data analysis was carried out with Proteome Discoverer (Proteome Discoverer 2.4TM Software, ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) which used in silico SwissProt data for the protein’s identification and performs a relative-quantitative analysis compar-ing the protein abundance in each sample treated with the small molecule compared to the control sample (digested without the small molecule). Proteome Discoverer, using the SwissProt database and the following parameters: maximum of two missed cleavages, trypsin digestion, and carbamidomethyl (C) as the fixed modification; oxidization (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and using Sequest HT with multi peptide search and percolator valida-tion.