PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; carbamoylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Proteomics; Mrna-seq; Protien isoforms; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
In this study, we make used of mRNA-seq and its ability to reliably quantify isoforms, integrating this data with ribosome profiling and LC-MS/MS, to assign ribosome footprints and peptides at the isoform level.  We leverage the principle that most cell types, and even tissues, predominantly express a single principal isoform to set isoform-level mRNA-seq quantifications as priors to guide and improve allocation of footprints or peptides to isoforms.  Through tightly integrated mRNAseq, ribosome footprinting and/or LC-MS/MS proteomics we demonstrate that a principal isoform can be identified in over 80% of gene products in homogenous HEK293 cell culture and over 70% of proteins detected in complex human brain tissue.  Defining isoforms in experiments with matched RNA-seq and translatomic/proteomic data increases the functional relevance of such datasets and will further broaden our understanding of multi-level control of gene expression.     In this PRIDE submission you will find the raw files for the HEK293 cell proteomics.  Files for the human brain proteomics can be found at PXD005445.  We have also uploaded a zip file that contains the input files for our HEK293 cell analysis, and the isoform level output files – there is a separate folder within the zip files for these.  The data used to create the manuscript figures is in the Rdata file.  Code for assigning peptides and footprints to isoforms can be found on Github here: https://github.com/rkitchen/EMpire

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
EMpire: Deep isoform level integration of the transcriptome, translatome, and proteome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mass-spectrometry (MS) proteomics Frozen pellets of HEK293-L10a cells were lysed by sonication in RIPA buffer plus protease inhibitors.  Protein was precipitated from the lysate to remove detergents by chloroform/methanol precipitation.  Protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate, reduced for 30 min at 37oC with 4 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated by incubating for 30 min with 8 mM iodoacetamide, before dilution to 2 M urea and addition of trypsin at a ratio of 1 μg:20 μg total protein.  Samples were digested overnight at 37oC, then acidified and desalted on a C18 Macro Spin Column (The Nest Group).  Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), then dried by Speedvac.  The dried pellet was resuspended in 10 mM potassium phosphate in 25% acetonitrile solution (pH 3.0) and separated in the first dimension by Strong Cation Exchange on a 2.1 x 200 mm PolySULFOETHYL ATM column (PolyLC Inc.) via an HP 1090 HPLC.  Separation was carried out over a linear 118 min gradient with increasing Buffer B (10 mM potassium phosphate, 25% acetonitrile pH 3.0, 1 M potassium chloride) at a flow rate of 200 μL/min.  Twenty fractions were collected, pooled into 10 tubes, and each tube desalted using a Ultra-Microspin C18 column (The Nest Group) prior to LC MS/MS.  Analysis was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Elite equipped with a Waters NanoACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system using a Waters Symmetry C18 180 µm by 20 mm trap and a 1.7 µm (75 µm-inner-diameter by 250 mm) NanoACQUITY UPLC column (at 35°C) for peptide separation.    RNA-seq read alignment and transcript quantification Due to our IP of ribosomes, and the decision not to deplete footprint samples of rRNA, we carried out an explicit alignment of the reads to known human rRNA before alignment to the genome.  TotalRNA- and raRNA-seq reads were mapped to the annotated 5S and 45S (chrUn_gl000220) rRNAs using STAR to remove any remaining rRNA contamination. Based on this alignment we observed that residual rRNA could explain on average ~20% of the sequence reads across all totalRNA and raRNA samples. We mapped the remaining ~80% of the RNA-seq reads to the human genome (hg38) and annotated transcriptome (gencode v21) again using the STAR aligner, following roughly the ENCODE alignment parameters (github.com/ENCODE-DCC/long-rna-seq-pipeline/blob/master/DAC/STAR_RSEM.sh).  Of the non-default options in STAR, the following are the most important to ensure compatibility with our method: ‘--outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate’ for visualisation in IGV ‘--quantMode TranscriptomeSAM’ for alignments in transcriptome coordinates for eXpress ‘--outFilterMismatchNoverLmax  0.05’ to ensure # mismatches to <5% of the # of mapped bases Transcript aligned reads were quantified using eXpress.  Ribosome footprint reads were clipped of their 3’ adapter and aligned, like the totalRNA- and raRNA-seq samples above, to the annotated 5S and 45S (chrUn_gl000220) ribosomal RNAs. Removal of rRNA reads was very important to reduce the effect of spurious alignments to the genome.  Non-rRNA reads were aligned to the human genome (hg38) and annotated transcriptome (gencode v21) again using the STAR aligner.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass-spectrometry spectra alignment The entire human transcriptome (as defined in gencode21) was in-silico translated, in three frames, to amino acid sequences using the transseq function within the EMBOSS42 software library.  Also included in this ‘target’ database were CRAPome43 sequences of likely contaminants (such as Bovine Albumin). Spectra obtained from the Orbitrap Elite, in proprietary ThermoFisher ‘.raw’ files, were processed using MaxQuant44 (v1.5.2.1).  Peptides were searched using “trypsin/P” as the digestion enzyme, with a tolerance for up to 2 missed cleavages.  This search included a fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and two variable modifications, N-acetylation and methionine oxidation.  MaxQuant default options were used for mass tolerance; 20 ppm for precursor ions, and 0.5 Da for fragment ions.  MaxQuant defaults of FDR corrected p of 0.01 was used for both peptide spectral match and protein identification. The standard peptides.txt output file from MaxQuant was used as input. Spectra were searched against these transcriptome-derived protein sequences, common contaminant sequences, and a library of reverse ‘decoy’ sequences45.   The distribution of expectation values for spectra with legitimate database hits was compared to the equivalent distribution for spectra assigned to the reverse ‘decoy’ database and a [maximum] expectation threshold was selected for each sample that limited the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%.  I.e. 1% of spectra below this expectation value mapped to the reverse database while 99% mapped to the real database. Peptides that mapped to more than one distinct genomic locus or to contaminant sequences were discarded from further analysis, however this is not to be confused with peptides assigned to multiple potential isoforms of the same gene which were retained. It is worth noting that many of the peptides identified using the SWISS-Prot reference could be assigned to multiple distinct genes and thus constituted much of the data loss attributed with the use of this reference (data not shown). The transcriptome-derived reference did not suffer as much from multi-mapping, due mainly to less ambiguous gene-isoform relationships. The analysis described below performs a second round of FDR correction based on decoy mappings and discards multi-locus mapping sequences. Software implementation and testing The code for the modified expectation-maximization algorithm is freely available and can be found at the Github repo: https://github.com/rkitchen/EMpire  Required inputs to the software are all in common data formats, examples are available in the GitHub repo: footprinting: gencode/ENSEMBL genome annotation (.gtf) footprint read -> transcript alignments (.bam) [optional] eXpress RNA-seq transcript quants (.xprs) mass-spec: gencode/ENSEMBL genome annotation (.gtf) translated amino-acid sequences for each transcript (.fasta) spectra -> either transcript X!Tandem output (.xml) or MaxQuant peptides file (.txt) [optional] spectra MS1 intensities for quantification (.mzXML) [optional] eXpress RNA-seq transcript quants (.xprs) [OR] footprint EM output (.exprs) Ribosome footprint frame analysis Here, we calculated the frame using the offset of the mid-point of the footprint read to the start of the middle-nucleotide of the closest codon triplet.  Using this metric and the resulting position-weight-matrix (PWM) of the footprint size vs. codon offset we can infer that the result of incomplete RNase digestion, which will likely differ between footprint preparations, tends to leave additional nucleotides at the 3’ end of the footprint (Figure S4a).  We can also use the PWM of read-mids to codon-offsets from single isoform genes to allow the reads to decide for themselves the optimal translation frame for each coding sequence and then ask, as a function of the number of reads mapped to a transcript, what fraction of transcripts are called in the correct frame.  Other bioinformatic & statistical analysis All RNA-seq statistical analyses, pre-processing, and normalization was performed within the R/Bioconductor scripting environment46.  Gene clustering for Figure 3/Figure S8 was performed using the dynamicTreeCut package, with default parameters except for the minimum module sizes which were adjusted for aesthetics (250 genes for footprints, and 200 genes for peptides).  Cluster profiles were computed from the median major isoform fractions of the genes within each cluster.

METHODS:
Experimental Methods
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
Each of the HEK293 cell assays was carried out over three biological replicate samples. In all of the HEK cell experimental modalities, a biological replicate consisted of one large 15 cm diameter cell culture dish with HEK cells grown to 75–85% confluence (this equated to approximately 80–100 μL packed cell volume). This sample number was considered appropriate for the exploratory, proof of principle experiments presented here. For the human brain experiment, 5 biological replicates were used; this sample number was based on a previous proteomic study of mouse brain. No technical replicates were used, as previous experiments showed good consistency across technical replicates.
HEK293 cell culture – Generation of a stable cell line expressing eGFP-L10a
HEK293 cells were transiently transfected with pCMV-EGFP-L10a using Effectene transfection reagent (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Stably expressing colonies were selected by growth in media containing G418. The pCMV-EGFP-L10a contains the mouse L10a coding sequence, which diverges from the human coding sequence at 71 out of 653 bases, despite ultimately producing the same 100% conserved protein product. This enabled us to assess the ratio of exogenous GFP-L10a to endogenous L10a from our RNA-seq data, which was approximately 1:5 (data not shown) in the cell line (HEK293-L10a) used to produce all data.
Obtaining ribosome-associated RNA (raRNA) by eGFP-L10a immunoprecipitation
raRNAs were obtained according to a modified version of the original bacTRAP immunoprecipitation (IP) protocol. HEK293-L10a cells were lysed by rotor homogenisation in bacTRAP lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, 5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol, 100 μg/ml cycloheximide, protease inhibitors, and recombinant RNase inhibitors) plus 2% n-dodecyl-beta-maltoside (n-dodec, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Addition of 2% n-dodec ensures capture of ribosome footprints from both cytosolic and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) associated ribosomes, which in the latter case are otherwise depleted in these preparations (and data not shown).
Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13,400 × g for 10 min at 4°C, then subjected to IP. For EGFP-L10a IP, 450 μL of BSA blocked MyOne Streptavidin T1 Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were coated with 180 μL biotinylated Protein L, and pre-conjugated to a combination of 75 μg each of the mouse monoclonal antibodies 19F7 and 19C8 (Sloan Kettering Memorial Hospital). Dynabead-antibody complexes were added to the cell lysate and immunoprecipitated overnight. The next day beads were washed 4 times with a high salt wash buffer (10 mM HEPES [pH 7.4], 350 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 0.5 mM dithiothreitol, 100 μg/ml cycloheximide). Bound mRNAs were eluted by resuspending the beads into 700 μL Qiazol and following the manufacturer’s instructions for RNA purification using the miRNeasy kit (Qiagen). Full length total RNA was also prepared by lysing a pellet of HEK293-L10a cells in 700 μL of Qiazol, and using the miRNeasy kit.
Ribosome profiling sample preparation
Ribosome footprints were prepared as described, with some modifications. Briefly, HEK293-L10a cells were lysed as above in bacTRAP lysis buffer plus 2% n-dodec. Ribosomes were collected by IP with 20 μg of biotin conjugated eGFP monoclonal antibody (Sloan Kettering, as above) complexed with 160 μL Streptavidin Dynabeads. Bead-associated ribosomes were resuspended in 300 μL bacTRAP lysis buffer without RNase inhibitors, and treated with RNaseI as for cell lysates. Digestion was stopped by addition of 10 μL of Superasin (Ambion). Ribosomes were collected by reattachment to the magnet and resuspended in 700 μL Qiazol, and processed as per Qiagen miRNeasy kit instructions. Ribosome footprints were eluted from RNeasy columns in 30 μL RNase free water, then extracted overnight at −80°C following addition of a further 38.5 μL RNase free water, 1.5 μL GlycoBlue (ThermoFisher), 10 μM sodium acetate, and finally 150 μL isopropanol. Footprints were collected by centrifuging at maximum speed on a desktop centrifuge for 30 min at 4°C. Pelleted RNA was air-dried, then run on a 15% TBE Urea Gel (ThermoFisher). A band was cut containing nucleotides of 26–32 nt size. Overnight RNA extraction from the gel pieces, followed by T4 Polynucleotide Kinase (New England Biolabs Inc) treatment of fragments was performed as described.
RNA-seq library preparation and rRNA depletion
Full length RNA from total cells and raRNA underwent rRNA removal by RiboZero kit (EpiCentre, Illumina), to remove the ~90% of cellular RNA they represent. rRNA depleted RNA was prepared for sequencing according to TruSeq library preparation protocols (Illumina), using random primers to synthesize cDNA. Libraries were run on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 at the Yale Center for Genome Analysis, and paired end 75 nucleotide reads obtained.
Following T4 PNK treatment, ribosome footprints were prepared for sequencing using the NEBNext Small RNA Library Prep kit and the manufacturer’s instructions. This resulted in the use of a single gel extraction step, unlike previous protocols. After testing various rRNA depletion protocols, we made the decision not to remove rRNA, simplifying the workflow and decreasing the opportunity for investigator introduced variability or end bias.
Mass-spectrometry (MS) proteomics
Frozen pellets of HEK293-L10a cells were lysed by sonication in RIPA buffer plus protease inhibitors. Protein was precipitated from the lysate to remove detergents by chloroform/methanol precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in 90 μL of 70% formic acid, and then 360 μL 0.1% TFA was added. Protein was quantified by nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 200μg was aliquoted, dried and reconstituted in in 8 M urea, 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate, reduced for 30 min at 37°C with 4 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated by incubating for 30 min with 8 mM iodoacetamide, before dilution to 2 M urea and addition of trypsin at a ratio of 1 μg:20 μg total protein. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C, then acidified and desalted on a C18 Macro Spin Column (The Nest Group). Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), then dried by Speedvac. The dried pellet was resuspended in Buffer A (10 mM potassium phosphate in 25% acetonitrile solution (pH 3.0)) and separated in the first dimension by Strong Cation Exchange on a 2.1 × 200 mm PolySULFOETHYL A™ column (PolyLC Inc.) via an HP 1090 HPLC Hewlett Packard). Separation was carried out over a linear 118 min gradient with increasing Buffer B (10 mM potassium phosphate, 25% acetonitrile pH 3.0, 1 M potassium chloride) at a flow rate of 200 μL/min. Twenty fractions were collected, pooled into 10 tubes, and each tube desalted using a Ultra-Microspin C18 column (The Nest Group) prior to LC MS/MS. The desalted peptide mixture was reconstituted in Buffer A (Water with 0.1% formic acid) and quantified by Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were diluted to 0.05 μg/μl, and 5 μL were injection onto the column for each fraction to be analyzed by LCMS/MS. LCMS/MS analysis was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Waters NanoACQUITY ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system using a Waters Symmetry C18 180 μm by 20 mm trap and a 1.7 μm (75 μm-inner-diameter by 250 mm) NanoACQUITY UPLC column (at 35°C) for peptide separation. Trapping was carried out for 3 min at 5 μl/min in 97% Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and 3% Buffer B ((0.075% FA in acetonitrile (ACN)) prior to eluting with linear gradients that reached 6% B at 5 min, 35% B at 170 min, and 50% B at 175 min, and 97% B at 180 min for 5 min; then dropped down to 3% B at 186 min for 14 min. Three blanks (1st 100% ACN, 2nd and 3rd Buffer A) followed each injection to ensure against sample carry over.
Mass spectral data were collected over a 300–2000 m/z mass range, with a precursor ion isolation window of 2.0 Da. Data Dependent Acquisition of MS/MS fragmentation (Top 10 with minimum signal of 500 counts) was carried out via High-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with normalized collisional energy of 28 (and activation time of 0.1 sec) and default charge state of 2 for the precursor mass (with charge state rejection of unassigned charge states and 1). Additionally, dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count and duration of 1 and 30 seconds respectively. The size of the exclusion list was set at 500 ions for an exclusion duration of 60 seconds. MS1 data were collected in profile mode with 30,000 resolving power setting, while the MS/MS were collected in centroid mode with 15,000 resolving power settings.
RNA-seq read alignment and transcript quantification
Due to our IP of ribosomes, and the decision not to deplete footprint samples of rRNA, we carried out an explicit alignment of the reads to known human rRNA before alignment to the genome.
TotalRNA- and raRNA-seq reads were mapped to the annotated 5S and 45S (chrUn_gl000220) rRNAs using STAR to remove any remaining rRNA contamination. Based on this alignment we observed that residual rRNA could explain on average ~20% of the sequence reads across all totalRNA and raRNA samples. We mapped the remaining ~80% of the RNA-seq reads to the human genome (hg38) and annotated transcriptome (gencode v21) again using the STAR aligner, following roughly the ENCODE alignment parameters (github.com/ENCODE-DCC/long-rna-seq-pipeline/blob/master/DAC/STAR_RSEM.sh). Of the non-default options in STAR, the following are the most important to ensure compatibility with our method:
‘--outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate’ for visualisation in IGV
‘--quantMode TranscriptomeSAM’ for alignments in transcriptome coordinates for eXpress
‘--outFilterMismatchNoverLmax 0.05’ to ensure # mismatches to <5% of the # of mapped bases
Transcript aligned reads were quantified using eXpress.
Ribosome footprint reads were clipped of their 3’ adapter and aligned, like the totalRNA- and raRNA-seq samples above, to the annotated 5S and 45S (chrUn_gl000220) ribosomal RNAs. Removal of rRNA reads was very important to reduce the effect of spurious alignments to the genome. Non-rRNA reads were aligned to the human genome (hg38) and annotated transcriptome (gencode v21) again using the STAR aligner.
Mass-spectrometry spectra alignment
The entire human transcriptome (as defined in gencode21) was in-silico translated, in three frames, to amino acid sequences using the transseq function within the EMBOSS software library. Also included in this ‘target’ database were CRAPome sequences of likely contaminants (such as Bovine Albumin). For the fractionated HEK cell experiment, MSConvert was used to create a merged.mgf from the proprietary ThermoFisher .raw files from the Orbitrap Elite. The merged.mgf was input to X!Tandem for spectral assignment using default parameters including trypsin cleavage, maximum missed cleavages of 3, minimum ion count of 4, and mapping to the reverse sequence as a decoy.
For the brain experiment, spectra obtained from the Orbitrap Elite, in proprietary ThermoFisher ‘.raw’ files, were processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.1). Peptides were searched using “trypsin/P” as the digestion enzyme, with a tolerance for up to 2 missed cleavages. This search included a fixed modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and two variable modifications, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation. MaxQuant default options were used for mass tolerance; 20 ppm for precursor ions, and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. MaxQuant defaults of FDR corrected p of 0.01 was used for both peptide spectral match and protein identification.
The standard peptides.txt output file from MaxQuant was used as input. Spectra were searched against these transcriptome-derived protein sequences, common contaminant sequences, and a library of reverse ‘decoy’ sequences.
The distribution of expectation values for spectra with legitimate database hits was compared to the equivalent distribution for spectra assigned to the reverse ‘decoy’ database and a [maximum] expectation threshold was selected for each sample that limited the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%. I.e. 1% of spectra below this expectation value mapped to the reverse database while 99% mapped to the real database.
Peptides that mapped to more than one distinct genomic locus or to contaminant sequences were discarded from further analysis, however this is not to be confused with peptides assigned to multiple potential isoforms of the same gene which were retained. It is worth noting that many of the peptides identified using the SWISS-Prot reference could be assigned to multiple distinct genes and thus constituted much of the data loss attributed with the use of this reference (data not shown). The transcriptome-derived reference did not suffer as much from multi-mapping, due mainly to less ambiguous gene-isoform relationships.
The analysis described below performs a second round of FDR correction based on decoy mappings and discards multi-locus mapping sequences.
Software implementation and testing
The code for the EMpire expectation-maximization algorithm is freely available and can be found at the Github repo: https://github.com/rkitchen/EMpire
Required inputs to the software are all in common data formats, examples are available in the GitHub repo:
footprinting:
gencode/ENSEMBL genome annotation (.gtf)
footprint read -> transcript alignments (.bam)
[optional] eXpress RNA-seq transcript quants (.xprs)
mass-spec:
gencode/ENSEMBL genome annotation (.gtf)
translated amino-acid sequences for each transcript (.fasta)
spectra -> either transcript X!Tandem output (.xml) or MaxQuant peptides file (peptides.txt)
[optional] spectra MS1 intensities for quantification (.mzXML)
[optional] eXpress RNA-seq transcript quants (.xprs) [OR] footprint EM output (.exprs)
Modifications to an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm
Footprint reads or MS peptides are defined in terms of their binary compatibility to the set of isoforms of a given gene. If a read or peptide has a valid alignment to a transcript it is given a value of 1, or else it is assigned 0. Using this compatibility matrix, I, of all reads/peptides against all transcripts as well as the relative transcript abundances from RNA-seq we can write down the likelihood, P(R1:N|ψ), of observing all 1..N footprint reads, R, given the distribution of the abundances, ψ, of 1..K isoforms: 
In the simplest case of the naïve prior, we have no information about which isoform(s) may be responsible for generating the footprint reads and/or peptides so we define the initial distribution of isoform abundances as uniform: 
In the case of a non-uniform prior (i.e. from the RNA-seq expression data), ψ is set as the ratios of isoform expressions to the total (cumulative) expression of all transcripts in their parent gene.
Since at the same level of expression isoforms with longer open reading frames will produce more footprint reads (and below saturation longer proteins will produce more identifiable peptides) we also define the probability that the jth isoform will contribute a footprint or peptide based on the length of its coding sequence, l, and its abundance: 
For the peptide EM, the effective isoform length is calculated from an in-silico (Trypsin & LysC) digestion (allowing 2 missed cleavages) of the protein to the constituent peptides.
For each gene, we can update the isoform abundances (by Maximum Likelihood Estimation) from the original RNA-seq to new values that best explain the observed footprints. Sampling from these new isoform abundances allows us to assign footprint reads to specific isoforms and so on.
For the ribosome footprints, we further modify the compatibility matrix, I, to reflect the likelihood that a read of this length would be observed with its offset from the coding frame of the transcript. The calculation of this read-position weight matrix is described in the next section. Essentially if 90% of the reads of this read’s length have an observed frame offset of 0.5nt and this read has the same offset to the current transcript then the compatibility is set to 0.9. This allows for the down-weighting of reads that have a spurious frame-offset to the current transcript; in this example if only 2% of all reads of the same length have a frame offset of 1.5nt, which matches that of the current alignment to the current transcript, then the compatibility is set to just 0.02 and this read will have very little positive support for this isoform.
Ribosome footprint frame analysis
Here, we calculated the frame using the offset of the mid-point of the footprint read to the start of the middle-nucleotide of the closest codon triplet. Using this metric and the resulting position-weight-matrix (PWM) of the footprint size vs. codon offset we can infer that the result of incomplete RNase digestion, which will likely differ between footprint preparations, tends to leave additional nucleotides at the 3’ end of the footprint (Figure S4a). We can also use the PWM of read-mids to codon-offsets from single isoform genes to allow the reads to decide for themselves the optimal translation frame for each coding sequence and then ask, as a function of the number of reads mapped to a transcript, what fraction of transcripts are called in the correct frame.
Other bioinformatic & statistical analysis
All RNA-seq statistical analyses, pre-processing, and normalization was performed within the R/Bioconductor scripting environment. Gene clustering for Figure 4 / Figure S8 was performed using the dynamicTreeCut package, with default parameters except for the minimum cluster sizes which were adjusted for aesthetics. Cluster profiles were computed from the median major isoform fractions of the genes within each cluster. Where referred to explicity in the text, transcript IDs are taken from the October 2014 build of Ensembl: http://oct2014.archive.ensembl.org/index.html.
PCR confirmation of principal isoforms from RNA-seq
Total-RNA was extracted from a HEK293-L10a cell pellet as described previously. cDNA was synthesized using SuperScriptIII Reverse Transcriptase (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to Manufacturer’s instructions. PCR primers for selected genes where isoforms were defined by a skipped exon were designed according to the scheme below.
Primers for individual genes were:
Standard PCR was performed using Taq DNA polymerase (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific). cDNA was diluted 1:10, using 1 μL per 20 μL reaction. 30 PCR cycles were performed, before running the samples on a 1.5% agarose gel.
Data Availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data and files required to run the analysis described in the paper have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008693.

RESULTS:
Results
Integrated experiments for profiling the transcriptome, translatome, and proteome
In order to fully explore the possibilities for isoform-level integration of RNA, ribosome footprint, and proteomic data, we designed a series of assays to be run in parallel on the same cellular sample (Figure 1a). For this proof of principle we used a modified stable human cell-line (HEK293-L10a), collecting RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) data at two levels, total cellular RNA (‘totalRNA’) as well as immunoprecipitating (IP) only those transcripts engaged by the ribosome (ribosome associated RNA; ‘raRNA’), with the hypothesis that such transcripts may more closely reflect the abundance of protein. We obtained ribosome footprints (‘FP’) through the same (IP)-based approach. Finally, we obtained mass-spectrometry (LC-MS/MS; ‘MS’) proteomic data in ‘discovery’ mode, which relied on fractionating samples to be able to identify more peptides (Supporting Table 1).
These assays differed not only in their molecular target but also their sensitivity. The depth of coverage, in terms of genes detected at all levels of expression, was unsurprisingly by far the greatest in totalRNA (Figure 1b). In our dataset, we observe the vast majority (19,881) of protein-coding genes, of which 11,286 were expressed above 5 transcripts per million (TPM; Figure 1c). raRNA gene expression captured greater than 90% of the protein coding genes detected by total RNA-seq (Figure 1c), while depleting for lower abundance non-coding RNA biotypes, including lncRNAs and processed pseudogenes (Figure S1). We detected at least 5 ribosome footprints from 56.2% of these protein-coding genes, with fractionated ‘discovery’ proteomics identifying 2 or more peptides from 18.7% (Figure 1c).
Intronic reads in totalRNA may act as a confound to transcript quantification by RNA-seq, due to the presence of pre-spliced transcripts from the nucleus (Figure S2a). RNA-seq reads derived from raRNA indeed contained far fewer intronic reads than totalRNA (Figure S2b). We hypothesised that poly-A purification might bring a similar benefit over total RNA, but inspection of data from an ENCODE K562 cell-line (www.encodeproject.org) showed no such reduction in intronic reads (Figure S2c). Notably, the ‘cleaner’ exonic signal from raRNA data led to more consistent transcript quantification across all three biological replicates compared to totalRNA] (Figure S3a,b) This agreement was clearly dependent on both the expression of the gene and on the magnitude of the dominance of the principal isoform (Figure S3c,d). For genes expressed above 5 TPM and with a principal isoform that accounted for more than 50% of the mRNA produced by the gene, principal isoform agreement increased to 93% for totalRNA and to 97% for raRNA (Green lines, Figure S3e,f). While conservative in terms of excluding many non-coding genes, the 5 TPM threshold included 96% of protein coding genes for which we observed footprint reads and/or peptides (Figure 1c).
In the case of ribosome footprints, despite their short fragment size, they contain other useful information that can be leveraged when assigning them to isoforms. The “perfect” cycloheximide frozen ribosome footprint, (consisting of only those nucleotides directly physically protected from the RNase enzyme by the ribosome) is a 28 nucleotide fragment, with the read midpoint situated between nucleotide 1 and 2 of the nearest codon (zero offset, Figure S4a). This consistent fragmentation pattern allows identification of codons from ribosome footprints, and as a result prediction of the open reading frame (ORF). Due to variations in the ribosome profiling technique such as incomplete RNase digestion, a range of fragment lengths are obtained. Rather than discard these “imperfect reads,” reads from genes with a single ORF can be used to create a position-weight-matrix (PWM) of read-midpoints to codon-offsets (Figure S4b). The PWM shows the consistency of ORF prediction within each biological replicate, and could be used as a quality control metric to highlight samples with inconsistent RNase digestion. In our hands, consistently digested samples produce a majority of 29 nucleotide length fragments, which correctly predicted the transcript frame 90% of the time (Figure S4b). Incomplete RNase digestion usually resulted in a 3’ base overhang (Figure S4a). Given the consistency highlighted in the PWM, 3 footprints per transcript was sufficient to call the correct frame 75% of the time, rising to greater than 90% accuracy with at least 10 footprint reads (Figure S4c).
Isoform-level integration of RNA-seq, ribosome footprints, and MS peptides
Computational tools for RNA-seq transcript quantification, such as the eXpress algorithm used to assess isoform consistency in our data, typically employ an expectation maximization (EM) approach to determine the optimal abundances of each transcript so as to best explain the set of observed sequence reads. It is possible to employ a similar approach to quantifying isoforms based either on LC-MS/MS peptides or on ribosome footprint reads. Unfortunately, compared to RNA-seq, peptide and ribosome footprint data are much more limited in their capacity to identify specific isoforms due to their smaller size, lower yield, and confinement to the coding sequence (CDS) of the gene. Given that confident isoform discrimination relies largely on peptides or reads that span one or more exon-exon boundaries, identifying the correct isoform from footprints or peptides alone can be problematic. For protein analysis, a random 13 amino-acid peptide (the average observed peptide size in the HEK293 data set) has an average probability of 30% to cross an exon-exon boundary (Figure S5). Despite their increased number, ribosome footprints fare even worse due to their smaller size leading to an average probability of 23% to cross an exon:exon junction. RNA-seq fragments, however, are much longer (especially with paired-end data) and, as such, have a much higher probability (on average 85%) of spanning at least one junction. In principle, it is therefore strongly advantageous to inform an EM model by using totalRNA or raRNA transcript quantifications to set biologically informative priors.
To exploit the increased ability of RNA-seq to quantify the set of expressed transcripts in a sample, we sought to modify a standard EM algorithm to take RNA-seq transcript expression levels (as transcripts per million; TPM) as input to form biologically informative continuous prior likelihoods (priors). These priors represent a continuum of expression that accurately reflects mRNA expression in a sample. These priors were then used to assign short length peptides and/or footprints to isoforms (Figure S6). Unlike a naïve prior (which initially assumes an equal likelihood of any isoform) the RNA-seq derived priors can overcome a large amount of the ambiguity in the set of transcripts/isoforms likely responsible for the observed peptides and/or footprints. In our experiments we applied different combinations of priors depending on the data available. In the HEK293 cell study we assessed both allocation of ribosome footprints using RNA-seq priors (Figure S7), and LC-MS/MS peptides using RNA-seq and footprint isoform likelihood as priors (Figure 2, see methods for more detail on input file formats). This approach also incorporated modifications to the standard EM algorithm to assign more confidence to in-frame ribosome footprint reads, according to the values in the sample-specific PWM (Figure S4).
Using a naïve prior in the HEK293 cell dataset, in 58% of genes neither peptides (blue bars) nor footprints alone (grey bars) could distinguish the principal isoform, instead settling on two or more equally likely isoforms (Figure 3a). In multi-isoform genes for which the naive EM converged on a single principal isoform, this isoform was typically extremely dominant and at least 10-fold more likely than the ‘next-best’ isoform (Figure 3b,c). In the footprint dataset, use of a biologically informative RNA-seq prior established a minimum 2-fold dominant isoform for over 80% of genes. The choice of RNA-seq prior was not critical, as total-RNA and raRNA performed equivalently (Figure 3b). In the LC-MS/MS dataset, use of a biologically relevant raRNA-seq prior resolved a principal isoform for 70% of genes. Inclusion of footprint data in the RNA-seq prior resolved principal isoform ambiguity for a further 8% of proteins compared to raRNA alone (Figure 3c).
The EM algorithm has two components: the naïve or biologically informed prior, and the expectation maximization on the given data. Using an unsupervised hierarchical clustering and dynamic tree-cut we defined clusters of genes in each of the footprint EM and the proteomic EM that behaved similarly in terms of the ability to resolve a principal isoform on the basis of different priors and/or given data (Figure S8 and Figure 4a–b). These clusters could be generalized into genes for which the biological prior was necessary or beneficial for identification of a two-fold dominant (>66.6 % of gene expression) principal isoform (footprint EM: 57.1% of genes in clusters c3,4,5,7; proteomic EM: 54.7% in clusters c1,3,5,6,7), genes where identification of a dominant principal isoform was driven entirely by the given data (footprint EM: 41.3% of genes in clusters c2,6,8; proteomic EM: 33.7% in clusters c2 and c8), or was conflicting, picking a different principal isoform with different biological priors (footprint EM: 1.6% of genes in cluster c1; proteomic EM: 11.6% in cluster c4).
For further validation of the approach, we selected a variety of genes with isoforms containing a single skipped exon, for which the naive prior was unable to help identify a principal isoform but the biological priors appeared to resolve this ambiguity (Figure 5a). We designed PCR primers to amplify the region containing the prospective skipped exon, resulting in products of defined sizes dependent on the presence or absence of the exon. In the example gene highlighted in Figure S9 POLDIP3, use of the RNA-seq prior overwhelmingly suggested the presence of a 2-fold dominant transcript, POLDIP3–001, with a minor transcript of POLDIP3–002, an outcome which was fully consistent with both footprint read locations (Figure S9a), and peptide data (Figure S9a,b). Thus, PCR analysis showed a principal transcript at 563 bp, the product size for transcript POLDIP3–001, with a minor product at 476 bp (transcript POLDIP3–002). For the remaining four cases (ALDH2, PDHB, COPE, MOGS), there was only evidence for the proposed dominant transcript, as predicted by the RNA-seq (Figure 5b).
Finally, we showed that this approach was also highly effective when applied to a much more complex dataset with matched mRNA-seq and LC-MS/MS from our recent study of adult human brain regions. We analyzed 5,197 proteins detected by single-shot LC/MS-MS from the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) of 5 adult humans, using publicly available mRNA-seq data from the same samples to serve as a biologically informative prior. In these complex samples, use of the mRNA-seq prior both increased the number of genes where a principal isoform could be consistently defined across all 5 samples (Figure 6a, teal bars), and allowed for selection of a 2-fold dominant principal isoform in an extra 40.6% of proteins (Figure 6b). In 29.8% of proteins the peptide data alone were sufficient for selecting a principal isoform. By using the mRNA prior it was possible to call a 2-fold dominant principal isoform in 70.4% of proteins. Unsurprisingly, as we saw with the HEK293 data, the more dominant a principal isoform was, the more consistently it was called in all five samples (Figure 6b, teal bars).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
A major challenge in gene expression studies of mammalian systems is the splicing complexity of the transcriptome. Over 90% of human multi-exon protein coding genes can transcribe alternatively spliced mRNAs; the average gene has the potential to express 3–4 distinct mRNA transcripts, with complex genes potentially generating more than 10. However, several recent observations suggest that the majority of human cell-types and tissues tend to predominantly express a single ‘principal’ RNA transcript. Identification of principal isoforms can yield important biological insights because they dictate the sequence, structure, regulation, and function of the protein(s) produced by the gene. Confident discrimination of these principal isoforms is complicated as each modality of omic data suffers from different biases and confounds with regards to isoform identification. By integrating multiple modes of such data we can attempt to overcome some of these limitations to provide confident principal isoform identification.
Distinguishing between isoforms remains a major challenge for mass spectrometry analysis. Isoforms are most easily distinguished by unique peptide-to-protein identification from peptide spectral matches obtained from LC-MS/MS. Sequence similarity across isoforms limits the number of these unique peptides and corresponding enzymatic cleavage sites within the protein sequence. Current analytical approaches deal with ambiguous or redundant peptide-to-protein matches using a protein grouping feature, which organizes spectral counts into groups representing the entire isoform family. Protein grouping is beneficial because it retains spectral information, but does not provide a solution to isoform ambiguity. Top-down proteomics is a useful strategy for isoform identification, but analysis of intact proteins is often challenging. Targeted mass spectrometry approaches such as parallel and selected reaction monitoring (PRM/SRM) have also been employed to distinguish between isoforms. This method relies on targeting specific masses for peptide identification, and its sensitivity allows identification of low-abundance peptides. While targeted approaches are a promising advancement toward solving the problem of isoform ambiguity, they are still limited by the availability of unique peptides within the protein sequence, and cannot be used on a hypothesis-free basis.
Over the last two decades, genome-wide analysis of nucleic acids has rapidly advanced to the point where we can routinely survey the entire genome, epigenome, and RNA transcriptome of any cellular system. Transcriptome analysis remains the de-facto approach for a genome-wide survey of gene expression while incorporation of proteomic measurements has lagged despite improvements in mass-spectrometry technologies that have put analysis of complete cellular proteomes within reach. Methods for quantifying mRNA-seq at the isoform level have become extremely advanced, despite the challenges inherent in using relatively short reads with non-uniform coverage and a high propensity for multi-mapping. In a 2015 systematic review, 11 of the commonly used tools were found to have comparable consistency and accuracy in isoform quantification, particularly for higher abundance transcripts. Thus, the most recent improvements to these workflows have focussed on increasing processing speed, decreasing memory usage, and correcting for sequence- and/or position-based biases inherent in RNA-seq experiments.
Recently, studies of the translatome have started to bridge the gap between transcriptome and proteome. Ribosome footprinting measures the dynamic profiles of ribosomes as they are translating mRNA to protein and provides additional and often crucial insight into post-transcriptional regulation. Given that protein abundance and modification most closely reflects the biosynthetic state of the cell, it may be advantageous to incorporate translation level data when predicting protein isoforms. Packages for analysis of ribosome footprint data have proliferated in the last two years, but the majority do not explicitly address allocation of footprints to isoforms, instead focusing on improving sensitivity in analysis of translation efficiency. In these approaches, it is common to abstract to the gene-level by choosing a single ‘representative’ transcript; typically, one with either the longest coding sequence or the highest density of footprint reads. Given that calculation of translation efficiency depends on transcript length, mis-identification or naïve aggregation of multi-isoform genes could lead to incorrect quantification. Floor and Doudna used Cufflinks, a popular package for transcript quantification in an attempt to obtain transcript-level assignments of footprints, while the Ribomap package uses mRNA transcript abundance to fractionally assign footprints to isoforms. The Cufflinks approach is inherently limited by the coverage of the footprints and the Ribomap method does not allow for footprints to disagree with mRNA-seq data in the case of significant post-transcriptional regulation.
Here we show that in experiments with carefully matched multi-omic data the vastly greater transcript-resolving power of mRNA-seq can be exploited to enable isoform-level interrogation of the proteome and/or translatome. We adapted a basic expectation maximization technique, now the de-facto standard for mRNA-seq isoform quantification, for use with LC-MS/MS and/or ribosome footprint data. By identifying the principal isoform(s) for each gene using the RNA-seq transcriptome quantifications, the EMpire tool (Expectation Maximisation Propagation of Isoform abundance from RNA Expression) set biologically informed priors to guide the assignment of peptides or footprints towards these same isoforms. Use of continuous prior likelihoods represents a continuum of expression that more accurately reflects the underlying biology of a sample than an arbitrary inclusion/exclusion of transcript sequences in a database reference. Divergence from the RNA-seq prediction was allowed if there was sufficient evidence against a particular mRNA isoform due, for example, to substantial post-transcriptional regulation. In concordance with mRNA-seq data, we demonstrated that we can identify a principal isoform in over 80% of gene products in homogenous HEK293 cell culture and over 70% of proteins in complex human brain tissue. Use of these informed priors was beneficial for principal isoform selection in over half of the genes detected, and most, but not all, gene products agreed on the same principal isoform throughout all data modalities.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material