PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Esophageal adenocarcinoma cell
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Esophageal adenocarcinomas; Tumor microenvironment; Met signaling pathway; Oncology; Proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Background Esophageal adenocarcinomas (EACs) represent an evolving tumor entity with high mortality rates. MET amplification is a recurrent driver in EACs and is associated with decreased patient survival. However, the response to MET inhibitors is limited. Recent studies have identified several mechanisms that lead to resistance against MET inhibitors in different tumor entities. Nonetheless, a characterization of additional vulnerable targets beyond MET has not been conducted in MET-amplified EACs.  Methods In this study, we determined the MET amplification status in a cohort of more than 900 EACs using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and compared the proteomes of MET-amplified versus non-amplified tumors by mass spectrometry.  Results We identified a phenotype, present in almost all MET-amplified tumors, which shows an enrichment of alternative RNA splicing, and androgen receptor signaling proteins, as well as decreased patient survival. Additionally, our analyses revealed a negative correlation between MET expression and patient survival in MET-amplified EACs, indicating biological heterogeneity with clinical relevance despite the presence of MET amplification as the predominant oncogenic driver. Furthermore, quantitative immunohistochemical analysis of the inflammatory tumor microenvironment showed that an increased percentage of M2 macrophages is associated with lower overall survival in MET-amplified EACs.  Conclusions Our results provide valuable insights into possible new therapeutic approaches for MET-amplified EACs for further research.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Characterization of MET-Amplified Esophageal Adenocarcinomas Reveals Enrichment of Alternative Splicing- and Androgen Signaling-Related Proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We screened 953 patients with EACs who underwent resection of their primary tumors with curative intent for potential MET amplifications using FISH analysis. In this cohort, 20 EACs exhibited high MET amplification, corresponding to a prevalence of 2.1% high-level MET-amplified EAC. We then employed mass spectrometry-based proteomics to analyze these 20 MET-amplified (MET+) and 39 MET-non-amplified EACs (MET-) to delineate the proteomic landscape associated with MET amplification. Samples were arranged in a randomized order that was followed for the rest of the experiment including protein extraction, digestion, and LC–MS acquisition. Two hundred microliters of cooled phosphate-buffered saline containing 1 x Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was added to a mixture of 1.4 mm and 2.8 mm ceramic beads in 2 ml lysis tubes (Bertin Technologies SAS, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France). Two FFPE tumor sections per sample were deparaffinized and added to the vials, and homogenized with two 20 s cycles at 5,800 rpm in a precooled Precellys ball mill (Bertin Technologies). After homogenization, the tubes were centrifuged for 5 min at 20,000 x g, 4 °C. Then 190 μl of supernatant was transferred to a fresh 0.5 ml tube. After the addition of 50 µl of 20% SDS and 12 µl of dithiothreitol (DTT), the samples were heated to 95 °C for 60 min and sonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode, Denville, NJ, USA) with 10 x 30 s pulses and a 30 s delay between pulses. The heating and sonication sequence was repeated one more time, then 24.2 µl of 400 mM chloroacetamide in water was added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples of protein lysates (50 µl) were used for protein digestion according to the single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation protocol 1. After the final peptide clean up, the beads were reconstituted in 9 µl of 5% DMSO. After 10 min, the magnetic beads were trapped again, and supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes and acidified by the addition of 1 µl of 10% formic acid. Peptides were analyzed in a Q Exactive Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro differential ion mobility device that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 nano HPLC system (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). A pulled tip 75 µm x 300 mm column packed in house with Poroshell C18 2.7 μm (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was placed in a column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany) and operated at 50 °C and a flow rate of 300 nl/min. After pre-equilibration in buffer A (0.1% FA), 3 µl of the acidified protein digests was injected and peptides were separated using a gradient of 2–6% buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) for 1 min, followed by 6–30% buffer B for 72 min, 30–55% for 7 min, 55–95% for 2 min, and 8 min final column regeneration at 95%. The FAIMS Pro was operated at −50 V compensation voltage and electrode temperatures of 99.5 °C for the inner and 85 °C for the outer electrode. Identical HPLC settings were used for library generation and sample runs. Spectrum library generation by gas phase fractionation: Aliquots from each sample were pooled and the pool was used for spectrum library generation by narrow window DIA of six 100 m/z gas phase fractions (GPFs) covering the range from 400 m/z to 1000 m/z 2. The Orbitrap was operated in DIA mode. MS1 scans of the respective 100 m/z gas phase fraction were acquired at 30k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 50 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans of the corresponding 100 m/z region were acquired in 24 x 4 m/z staggered windows, resulting in 48 nominal 2 m/z windows after demultiplexing. MS2 settings were 15k resolution, 55 ms maximum injection time, and an AGC target of 1,000%. All scans were stored as a centroid.  Data independent acquisition of samples: MS1 scans were acquired from 390 m/z to 1010 m/z at 15k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 25 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans ranged from 300 m/z to 1500 m/z and were acquired at 15k resolution with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and an AGC target of 1,000%. DIA scans covering the precursor range from 400 to1000 m/z were acquired in 75 x 8 m/z staggered windows, resulting in 150 nominal 6 m/z windows after demultiplexing. All scans were stored as a centroid. To minimize batch effects, the acquisition was performed in a randomized order.

DATA PROCESSING:
Thermo raw files were demultiplexed and transformed to mzML files using the msConvert module in ProteoWizard 3. For spectral library generation, a human canonical Swiss-Prot fasta file was converted to a Prosit upload file using the convert tool in encyclopedia 0.9.0 with default settings 2. Trypsin, up to one missed cleavage, range 396–1004 m/z, charge states 2+ and 3+, default charge state 3, and NCE 33. The csv file was uploaded to the Prosit webserver and converted to a spectrum library in generic text format  4. The resulting library (20,374 proteins, 20,083 genes, and 1,626,266 precursors) was searched in DIA-NN 1.7.12 with the six GPF runs to generate the project specific library (9,634 proteins, 9,539 genes, and 57,711 precursors) 5. The applied settings were as follows: Output will be filtered at 0.01 FDR; N-terminal methionine excision enabled; Maximum number of missed cleavages set to 1; Min peptide length set to 7; Max peptide length set to 30; Min precursor m/z set to 400; Max precursor m/z set to 1,000; Cysteine carbamidomethylation enabled as a fixed modification. Sample files were searched using DIA-NN 1.7.12 with the project library. In addition to the settings used for library generation, grouping on protein names from fasta file and retention time-dependent normalization were used. Sample runs with precursor ID numbers outside the quartiles plus/minus the inter-quartile range were regarded as outliers and removed (7 out of 146). For quantitative analysis, precursor identifications were first filtered for at least four fragment ions, q values < 0.01, and library q values < 0.005. Normalized intensities of precursor ions corresponding to proteotypic peptides were selected for the calculation of protein intensities using the MaxLFQ algorithm implemented in the DIA-NN R-package. To analyze for potential processing or acquisition-related batch effects, principal component analysis of protein intensities was plotted and colored corresponding to technical features, such as digest batch, acquisition order, instrument calibration dates, FAIMS cleaning dates, and changes of chromatography columns. Proteins detected in at least 70% of samples in any SGC tumor subtype were included in further analyses. Imputation was carried out on log2 normalized intensities using the ‘Ensembl’ output of the DreamAI R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) package from imputations with methods ‘KNN’, ‘MissForest’, ‘Birnn’, ‘SpectroFM’, and ‘RegImpute’ (Preprint 6). Still a preprint, it has been used and featured in high-impact publications and has also been successfully applied using unlabelled LC–MS.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Patients and tumor samples
We included 953 patients with adenocarcinoma of the esophagus who underwent surgery between 2013 and 2019 at the Department of General, Visceral, Cancer, and Transplantation Surgery of the University Hospital Cologne with curative intent. Either a thoracoabdominal esophagectomy with a two-field lymphadenectomy or a transhiatal extended gastrectomy with a D2-lymphadenectomy was performed. The patients of the MET-non-amplified group were chosen randomly from the MET-non-amplified total patient cohort. Here, patients of the MET-amplified and MET-non-amplified group were balanced regarding neoadjuvant therapy and primary surgery. Overall survival was measured from the time of surgery until patient death or loss of follow-up. All included patient data were collected prospectively and analyzed retrospectively. The clinicopathologic assessment of the specimens was conducted following the 7th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control. The study protocol was approved by the local ethical committee (protocol code 20-1393) and conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent for inclusion in the databank and tissue bank was obtained from each patient.
To construct the tissue microarray, the tumor tissue was fixed with formalin and embedded in paraffin. Tissue cylinders, 1.2 mm in diameter, were punched from selected areas of the tumors using a semi-automated precision instrument and embedded in paraffin blocks.
Fluorescence-in-situ-hybridization
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on the constructed tissue microarray, as previously described. Sections of 4 μm from the paraffin blocks were hybridized overnight with the Zyto-Light SPEC MET/CEN7 Dual Color Probe (ZytoVision, Bremerhaven, Germany). The amplification level was analyzed using a 100x objective and appropriate filter sets (DM5500 fluorescent microscope; Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Twenty tumor cell nuclei were evaluated by counting green (MET) and orange (centromere 7) signals. High amplification was defined, as previously described, as a MET/CEN7 ratio ≥ 2.0, an average MET gene copy number per cell ≥ 6.0, or ≥ 10% of the cells containing ≥ 15 MET signals. Intermediate amplification was defined as ≥ 50% of the cells containing ≥ 5 MET signals, provided none of the criteria for high-level amplification were met. On-slide controls were conducted by screening normal epithelial tissue, fibroblasts, or lymphocytes.
Immunohistochemistry
We conducted immunohistochemical staining to characterize the tissue microenvironment on whole slide specimens in all included MET-amplified tumors. Staining was performed for the following markers: CD3 for T cells, CD4 for T helper cells, CD8 for cytotoxic T cells, CD20 for B-lymphocytes, CD66b for tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs), CD68 and CD163 for macrophages, mast cell tryptase for mast cells, MUM1 for activated B and T cells as well as plasma cells, and FOXP3 for T regulatory cells, following the manufacturers’ instructions. Additionally, we performed further staining for CD68 and CD163 on the TMAs, encompassing both MET-amplified and non-amplified EACs. Detailed antibody information is provided in Supplementary Table S1. Staining was conducted using the automatic staining system Leica BOND-MAX (Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany). For each whole slide specimen, twenty fields within the annotated intratumoral or peritumoral region, each measuring 250 × 250 μm, were selected through a randomization process. The peritumoral region was defined as a 300 μm wide radius around the tumor. In these selected fields, cell detection was performed using QuPath Version 0.4.4, allowing for the independent counting of positive and negative cells. For the TMAs, the entire 1.2 mm diameter tissue spot was analyzed. Due to the small size of the TMA cores, no distinction has been made between intratumoral and peritumoral regions. The following metrics were extracted for analysis in our study: number of cell detections, number of negative cells, number of positive cells, percentage positive cells, number of positive cells per mm2.
Proteome analysis with mass spectrometry
Mass spectrometry-based analysis of the proteome was conducted for 59 EACs (20 MET-amplified; 39 MET-non-amplified). A detailed description of the mass spectrometry protocol is provided in the Supplementary materials and methods as described before. To ensure reproducibility, we measured pool samples daily or every 16 patient samples. Before analysis of the samples of our study cohort, we compared the results of the pool samples using a principal component analysis. The results of the measured pool samples formed a cluster, confirming the reproducibility of our mass spectrometry platform. The raw liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059513. The proteomic dataset has not been published previously.
Protein-protein interaction network analysis
For the protein-protein interaction network analysis, we constructed a correlation matrix (Pearson’s r) using all available mass spectrometry expression data from the EAC cohort. We then applied several filtering steps. First, we selected only the proteins that were differentially expressed between MET-amplified and non-MET-amplified EACs. Next, we pruned the network by removing interactions with an absolute correlation lower than 0.4. Additionally, for each node (protein), only the three highest absolute correlations were retained, and all other interactions were removed. Finally, for protein cluster identification, we used the Markov Cluster Algorithm (MCL), implemented in the MCL package in R.
Statistical analyses and graphical visualization
The data processing and statistical analyses were conducted using R (version 4.3.2, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). K-means clustering was used to divide the cohort into two groups based on protein expression levels for each protein cluster. Values of the contingency table were analyzed using Fisher’s exact test. For differential expression analysis, we used the limma package. P-values below 0.05 and p-adjusted-values below 0.2 were considered significant. R was also utilized for the graphical visualization of the results. Additionally, Flaticon (https://www.flaticon.com, Freepik Company S.L., Malaga, Spain) was used for further graphical illustrations.

RESULTS:
Results
Proteomic characterization of MET-amplified esophageal adenocarcinoma reveals distinct survival-associated protein clusters
We screened 953 patients with EACs who underwent resection of their primary tumors with curative intent for potential MET amplifications using FISH analysis (Fig. 1a). In this cohort, 20 EACs exhibited high MET amplification, corresponding to a prevalence of 2.1% high-level MET-amplified EAC (Fig. 1b). We then employed mass spectrometry-based proteomics to analyze these 20 MET-amplified (MET+) and 39 MET-non-amplified EACs (MET-) to delineate the proteomic landscape associated with MET amplification (Fig. 1c). The general patient characteristics are depicted in Supplementary Table S2. Here, significantly more MET-amplified tumors could be detected in patients over 64 years (p = 0.0459).
Mass spectrometry-based quantification of protein expression identified 3,277 proteins, enabling an in-depth exploration of proteomic variances. Differential expression analysis between the MET + and MET- groups revealed 81 proteins with significant expression disparities (p < 0.05, p-adjust < 0.2) (Fig. 2a; Supplementary Table S3/S4). Confirming the validity of our approach, MET protein exhibited pronounced overexpression in MET + specimens, serving as a conclusive positive control. Notably, a discernible decrease in Hornerin expression was observed in MET + EAC, a protein of the S100 family associated with tumor progression in various entities. Additionally, a concomitant reduction in various keratins (KRT1, KRT2, KRT9, KRT10) was recorded.
To understand the biological significance of these differentially expressed proteins, we constructed a correlation-based Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) Network. We then used the Markov Cluster Algorithm to segregate and delineate functional protein groups indicative of distinct phenotypic signatures. This analysis identified 26 unique protein clusters from the 81 differentially expressed proteins. To ensure heightened phenotypic relevance, we excluded clusters comprising fewer than four proteins from subsequent analyses (Fig. 2b). Overrepresentation analyses (ORA) of these clusters identified pathways associated with various biological processes, including cellular metabolism (cluster 4), keratinization (cluster 5), RNA Processing (cluster 23), and MET signaling (cluster 26), among others (Supplementary Table S5/S6).
Further analysis aimed at elucidating clinically significant phenotypes involved correlating cluster associations with patient survival data. We used the protein expression levels of all proteins within each cluster to perform k-means clustering, dividing the cohort into two groups for each protein cluster. Survival analyses were then conducted to evaluate the prognostic implications. As expected, elevated expression levels of proteins in cluster 26, which includes MET, were significantly correlated with decreased patient survival rates (p = 5.9 × 10^-9). Furthermore, the analyses revealed a significant association between decreased survival and increased protein expression in cluster 23 (pPC1 = 0.015, Fig. 2c), as well as decreased expression in cluster 4 (pPC2 = 5 × 10− 4, Fig. 2d), highlighting their potential clinical relevance. Henceforth, these protein clusters are referred to as PC1 (cluster 23) and PC2 (cluster 4). To provide an overview of the proteins in both clusters, Table 1 lists the respective proteins along with a brief description of their functions.
MET amplifications correlate with protein cluster linked to androgen receptor signaling and alternative RNA splicing
We conducted an advanced characterization of protein clusters PC1 and PC2. Combined hierarchical clustering of protein expression in both clusters within the EAC cohort segregated the proteins into two groups, aligning with the results of graph cluster analysis (Fig. 3a). Additionally, a binary expression pattern was detected, indicating a further subclassification of the tumors by the two clusters. Utilizing k-means-based categorization of the cohort with individual PC1 and PC2 clusters, as shown in Fig. 2c/d, followed by combining the cluster groups, segregated the tumors into four subgroups: PC1High/PC2High, PC1High/PC2Low, PC1Low/PC2High, and PC1Low/PC2Low (Fig. 3b). The PC1High/PC2Low expression was observed in the majority of MET-amplified tumors (65%, n = 13) and only in a few non-amplified tumors, demonstrating a statistically significant enrichment of MET-amplified cases in this subgroup (Fisher’s exact test: PC1High/PC2Low vs. the remaining cohort; MET amplified vs. non-amplified, n = 59, p = 1.5 × 10− 6). The remaining MET-amplified tumors predominantly exhibited a high expression pattern for both PC1 and PC2 proteins, with only two instances of low PC1 expression (Fig. 3b). These findings underscore a robust association between the PC1 proteins and MET-amplified EACs.
To further validate and extend our initial observations from the pathway analysis, we performed an overrepresentation analysis on proteins that showed an absolute correlation coefficient greater than 0.4 with the proteins in clusters PC1 and PC2. This analysis aimed to deepen our understanding of the functional profiles and pathways linked to these clusters. The ORA reinforced PC1’s association with RNA processing and splicing activities and revealed an additional link to the proteasome pathway (Fig. 3c; Supplementary Table S7). It also highlighted PC2’s involvement in various metabolic pathways (Fig. 3c; Supplementary Table S8). Furthermore, an in-depth literature review elucidated the connection of PC1 proteins DEAD box RNA helicases 39 A and B (DDX39A/B), and Transducin (β)-like 1 X-linked receptor 1 (TBL1XR1) with androgen receptor (AR) signaling dynamics. Notably, the RNA helicases DDX39A and DDX39B are involved in the generation of the AR splice variant AR-V7, and TBL1XR1 has been identified as a co-activator of AR. This links PC1, and consequently MET amplification, to AR signaling. This connection prompted an investigation into the potential relationship between these molecular subtypes and patient gender. However, Fisher’s Exact Test indicated no significant gender-based differences in the prevalence of PC1 or MET amplification (pPC1 = 0.47, pMET = 0.78, Fig. 3d), suggesting that the molecular impact on tumor phenotype does not vary by gender.
Protein expression, inflammation, and survival link to biological diversity in MET-amplified EACs
Our investigation pivoted to examine survival-related parameters within the cohort of MET-amplified EACs. We aimed to identify proteins whose expression levels are associated with patient survival outcomes. Despite the high number of proteins and the small size of our cohort, raising concerns about multiple testing, we conducted Cox regression analysis on all 3,277 quantified protein expression levels. To provide a comparative overview of the data set, the analyses were carried out in different subsets: MET-amplified (MET+) (Supplementary Table S9), non-amplified (MET-) (Supplementary Table S10), and the complete proteomic data set (MET+/-) (Supplementary Table S11), as depicted in Fig. 4a. As anticipated, none of the proteins showed significant p-adjusted values (p-adjusted < 0.2) due to the extensive number of tests performed. Acknowledging this limitation, we proceeded with further exploratory analyses using unadjusted p-values, applying a significance threshold of p < 0.05. This approach uncovered several associations between protein expression and survival across the different subsets. Notably, within the MET-amplified group, 121 proteins were identified as correlated with survival, many of which were uniquely associated with this subset. For a more focused review of clinically relevant proteins, and considering previous findings, we narrowed our analysis to proteins annotated as oncogenes or tumor suppressors in the OncoKB database, or those identified within the PC1 and PC2 protein clusters. This filter reduced the list to nine proteins associated with survival outcomes (Fig. 4b). Among these, AKT1 oncogene expression showed a positive association with increased survival rates (HR = 0.09, 95% CI = 0.01–0.54, p = 9 × 10− 3). Conversely, even within the MET-amplified cohort, higher MET protein expression was linked to reduced survival (HR = 1.8, 95% CI = 1.12–2.87, p = 1.4 × 10− 2). A similar observation was made for the helicase DDX39B from the protein cluster PC1 (HR = 3.86, 95% CI = 1.02–14.59, p = 4.7 × 10− 2). No additional associations of proteins from PC1 and PC2 were identified at the significance level mentioned above.
Finally, our analyses focused on the associations between the tumor microenvironment (TME) and survival in MET-amplified EACs. We evaluated the various markers of inflammation using standard immunohistochemical markers on whole slide specimens of MET-amplified EACs. Correlation analyses among these markers revealed approximately three distinct clusters with moderate inter-marker correlations: CD4/FOXP3/CD68, CD3/CD8/CD163, and CD20/Mast/MUM1 (Fig. 4c).
Univariable Cox regression analysis for each marker identified a significant association between an increased proportion of CD163-positive intratumoral macrophages and poorer survival, underscoring the potential role of macrophages within the TME (Supplementary Figure S1, Supplementary Table S12). Stratifying MET-amplified tumors into high- and low-CD163 groups using a cutpoint finder package corroborated these findings (p = 0.023, Fig. 4d). However, no other inflammatory markers demonstrated significant survival associations within our cohort of MET-amplified EACs.
To further explore these findings, we expanded our analyses to CD163-positive macrophages in non-MET-amplified EACs using immunohistochemical staining of our TMAs (see Methods). In addition to CD163 (M2 macrophage marker), we assessed CD68 (M1 macrophage marker) to investigate potential influences of macrophage subpopulations. In total, TMA data from 17 MET-amplified and 787 non-amplified EACs were analyzed. Unlike the whole-slide specimens, no distinction was made between intratumoral and peritumoral regions due to the limited size of the TMA cores. We observed significant associations between CD163/CD68 metrics (positive cell density, percentage of positive cells, total positive cell count) and poorer survival outcomes (Supplementary Table S13).
Taken together, the findings of this section indicate a complex tumor biological heterogeneity with clinical relevance, despite the presence of MET amplification as a predominant oncogenic driver.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) is a significant global public health concern, characterized by its rising incidence and poor prognosis. In advanced stages, the median overall survival is less than one year, with palliative chemotherapy or radiotherapy as recommended treatment options. Recently, treatment options have expanded to include immunomodulatory approaches (programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) inhibitors) and other targeted therapies (human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)neu inhibitors). However, these therapies have only slightly improved overall survival.
The mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) receptor tyrosine kinase regulates cellular processes such as proliferation, migration, and survival through various signaling pathways. In several types of tumors, MET amplifications have been identified as tumor-driving mechanisms that lead to increased activity of the MET signaling pathway. In EAC, MET amplifications and increased protein expression correlate with lower overall survival. In recent years, several studies have investigated MET inhibitors in MET-amplified EACs. Although an objective response to therapy was achieved, the median progression-free survival and overall survival were only 3.4 and 7.9 months, respectively.
The development of improved therapeutic approaches for MET-amplified tumors requires a detailed understanding of the underlying tumor biology. Previous studies have primarily focused on identifying resistance mechanisms to MET inhibitors. These studies have identified several on-target mutations and off-target events, such as Kirsten rat sarcoma virus (KRAS) gene mutations or HER2neu amplifications, as resistance mechanisms in different tumor entities. However, analyses to identify additional vulnerable targets beyond MET, which could serve as the basis for combined therapeutic approaches to mitigate resistance development, have not yet been conducted in MET-amplified EACs.
Proteomic profiling enabled the identification of new subtypes in various cancer entities. In a cohort of 124 patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses revealed that the tumor extracellular matrix compared to normal tissue undergoes drastic changes during tumorigenesis. Especially proteins of the cell cycle, DNA repair system, and immune response were enriched in tumors. Additionally, Liu et al. were able to describe two different subtypes with different prognostic implications based on the proteomic analyses in ESCC. Subtype S2 showed compared to S1 and non-tumor tissue upregulated proteins involved in proliferation. Furthermore, a hyperphosphorylation of spliceosomal protein could be detected. These different expressions of proteins involved in cancer cell proliferation and metastasis result in a significantly worse patient survival of patients with subtype S2.
This study aimed to elucidate the differences between MET-amplified and non-amplified esophageal adenocarcinomas on proteome and cellular level. This could lead to further understanding of escape mechanisms of MET-amplified esophageal adenocarcinomas against MET inhibitors as well as identifying additional therapeutic targets beyond MET.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Code availability
The underlying code of the study is available upon request.
Data availability
The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Declarations
Ethical approval
This study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Approval was granted by the Ethics Committee of the University of Cologne (protocol code 20-1393).
Consent to participate
Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Consent to publish
Not applicable.