PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
diseases: Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Pdac; Early diagnosis; Serum biomarker; Clinical implementation; Multiple-reaction monitoring assay

ABSTRACT:
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) suffers from lack of an effective diagnostic method, limiting improvement in patient survival. Although the FDA-approved biomarker CA19-9 has been used for detection and surveillance of PDAC, its clinical utility is generally regarded to be limited due to its suboptimal diagnostic performance. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) has emerged as a burgeoning technology in clinical proteomics, and identified a plethora of protein biomarker candidates for PDAC. Yet few if any has successfully transitioned into clinical practice. This translational standstill is owed partly to the limited considerations of practical needs and perspectives of clinical implementation in the course of a biomarker pipeline, such as demonstrating analytical validity of proposed biomarkers, which is critical to turning research-grade assays to clinical-grade tests. Here, we developed a fit-for-purpose multi-marker panel for PDAC diagnosis by consolidating analytically robust biomarkers as well as employing a relatively simple LC-MS method. In the discovery phase, we systematically collected putative biomarkers from both in-house proteomics data and the large volume of literature documenting PDAC biomarkers. In the verification phase, we developed a multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM)-MS-based proteomic assay using surrogate peptides that passed stringent analytical validation criteria. Given the intended use of our panel (i.e., primary screening), we adopted a high-throughput protocol including short gradient (<10 min) and simple sample preparation (no depletion or enrichment steps). To further facilitate clinical implementation, we performed verification of our panel on serum samples, which are usually the preferred biospecimen available in clinical settings. We developed a stacking ensemble model based on our final panel of 12 protein biomarkers combined with CA19-9, which showed improved diagnostic performance compared to using CA19-9 alone (AUC 0.919 and 0.830, respectively). A large-scale clinical validation study is underway to demonstrate the clinical validity of our panel.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Development of a fit-for-purpose multi-marker panel for early diagnosis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
A 5 μL aliquot of serum was diluted in 95 μL of 50 mM TEAB solution with 8M urea and sonicated for 10 min. Protein was reduced (DTT, 10 mM, 56°C, 30 min) and alkylated (IAA, 20 mM, room-temperature in dark, 30 min). Samples were then digested with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; trypsin (1:25 trypsin/protein) was added and incubated overnight at 37 °C. Then, 0.1% TFA was added to stop the enzymatic reaction. Concentration of the digested peptides was measured using NanoDrop and adjusted to 1 mg/ml. Resulting samples were vacuum-centrifuged to dry and stored at −80 °C until used. Digested peptides were separated using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA and separated on an Acclaim™ Pepmap RSLC C18 column (150 mm × 150 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å) equipped with a C18 Pepmap trap column (20 mm × 100 μm i.d., 5 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) over 120 min (1 μL/min) using a 5–40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO at 50 °C. The LC was coupled to a Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer with EASY-SPRAY™ source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry runs were operated in DIA mode. For DIA experiments, full MS resolutions were set to 60,000 and full MS AGC target was 500% with an IT of 20 ms. m/z range was set to 350-1,500. AGC target value for MS2 spectra was set to 300%. Seventy windows of 9 Da were used with no overlap. Resolution was set to 15,000 and IT to 22 ms. NCE was set at 28.

DATA PROCESSING:
The DIA-MS data were processed using DIA-NN (ver. 1.8.1) with library-free mode. Mass spectra were searched with default settings, except match-between-runs (MBR) activated. Identification results were filtered at false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at precursor and protein level (Lib.Q.Value <0.01 and Lib.PG.Q.Value <0.01 in the DIA-NN main output, respectively).