PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Ms/ms; Nuclear fraction; Fasp; Raav production

ABSTRACT:
In this comparative proteomic analysis, we focused on proteins in the nuclear fraction. As the nucleus is the epicenter of DNA uptake, transcription, capsid assembly and packaging. Three HEK-293 cell samples i) not transfected, ii) MOCK plasmid transfected, and iii) triple-transfected with rAAV2-production plasmids were harvested 24 h and 72 h after transfection. In total 3384 proteins in all samples were identified revealing regulated proteins due to transfection and rAAV production.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Analysis of the nuclear proteome fraction of rAAV2-plasmid transfected HEK-293 cells during AAV production

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HEK-293 cells were transiently transfected with plasmids to generate MOCK samples, AAV samples and no plasmid for HEK samples. Cells were harvested 24 h and 72 h post-transfection and nuclear fractions were isolated by consecutive steps of solubilization and centrifugation (cell lysis, washing of nuclei, lysis of nuclei). Filter-aided-sample preparation (FASP) was used for sample purification and peptide digestion. Nano liquid chromatography Orbitrap mass spectrometry (UltiMate 3000 RSLC, Q Exactive Plus instrument; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) measurements were performed with a 120 minutes gradient with 5 to 30 % solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in LC-MS grade water) mixed with solvent A (0.1% FA in LC-MS grade water with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Pre-column: Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 300 µm I.D. × 5 mm, and separation- column: Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100, 2 µm particle size, 75 µm I.D × 25cm, all parts purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany. Top 10 data dependent MS mode was used with a scan range of 350 – 2,000 m/z, and  a resolution of 70,000 for MS acquisition. For MS/MS precursor ions were scanned with a resolution of 17,500 and fragmented with normalized collision energy (CE) of 28. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4 and 3.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific). As reference the human protein database (Homo sapiens SwissProt DB (TaxID 9606), Version 2017-10-25) was used for protein identification. Settings were chosen as following: trypsin as digest enzyme, 2 allowed missed cleavages, a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da and a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, methionine oxidation in peptides and N-terminal protein acetylation and loss of methionine as dynamic modifications. Finally, identifications of the different data sets were globally merged, and an automatic peptide validation mode was chosen with FDR of 0.01 based on q-value. The protein FDR calculation was performed with a confidence value of 0.01 as target confidence values, and protein grouping according to strict parsimony principle.  For basic peptide quantification the Minora Feature Detection node was used with high PSM confident. Afterwards a chromatographic RT alignment was performed based on the Feature Mapper node with 10 min RT shift window and 10 ppm mass tolerance. Features from different files were mapped via automatic RT and mass determination. The final calculation of up and down regulated proteins occurred with the Precursor Ions Quantifier node and following parameters: only unique peptides used, quantification based on intensity, and normalization to total peptide amount. Ratios were calculated based on protein abundance of summed abundances of peptides (without imputations) and a t-test (abundances of individual proteins) for statistical hypothesis test.

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Cell Culture of HEK-293 Cells
HEK-293 cells (DSMZ no. ACC 305, Braunschweig, Germany) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium supplemented with 10 % (v/v) fetal calf serum and 1 % (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin (all from Sigma Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 in T175 culture flasks (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany).
4.2. Transfection of HEK-293 Cells
For transfection, 9 × 106 HEK-293 cells were seeded in 150 mm cell culture dishes and incubated overnight. A total amount of 45 μg DNA per 150 mm dish was transfected. One Bijou sample container was filled with 1 mL of 2× HBS (50 mM HEPES, 1.5 mM Na2HPO4, 280 mM NaCl, pH 7.05, sterile filtered), and the second one was filled with 1 mL of CaCl2 (0.3 M).
Three types of samples were generated, each in triplicate: First, HEK-293 cells without transfection (HEK Sample); second, HEK-293 cells transfected with plasmids pHelper (pZMB0088), pRepCap (pZMB0618), and pITR-mVenus (pZMB0522) for rAAV2 production (AAV Sample) in a molar ratio of 1:1:1; third, HEK-293 cells transfected with the pITR-mVenus and a second non-human-coding pUC19 plasmid (pZMB0169) (MOCK Sample). For MOCK transfection, cells were transfected with the same amount of the ITR plasmid as for AAV production, while the DNA amount of pHelper and pRepCap was replaced by the noncoding plasmid. The DNA was added to the CaCl2 solution and was transferred dropwise to the container with 2× HBS and vortexed three times for 3 s. Immediately, 2 mL of this solution was pipetted dropwise to the cells. After 24 h and 72 h of cultivation, cells of two 150 mm cell culture plates (Sarstedt) were harvested by scraping, washed three times with PBS by resuspension and pelleting (800× g, 5 min), and finally pelleted by centrifugation (3000× g, 10 min). The cell pellets were stored at −80 °C.
4.3. Fluorescence Microscopy
mVenus expression was imaged with an automated fluorescence microscope (DMI 6000B, Leica Microsystem, Wetzlar, Germany) 24 h and 72 h post-transfection.
4.4. Protein Fractionation into Nuclear Fraction
Nuclear proteins were isolated from cell pellets using different buffers. First, the pellet was resuspended by addition of 1.25 mL LB1 buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerin, 0.5% (v/v) NP-40, 0.25% (v/v) Triton X-100, pH 7.5), incubation for 10 min at 4 °C on a tube roller, and centrifugation for 5 min at 2000× g and 4 °C. Second, the resulting pellet was resuspended in 1.25 mL LB2 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, pH 8.0) and centrifuged for 5 min at 2000× g and 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in 225 μL LB3 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% (v/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.5% (v/v) N-lauroylsarcosine, pH 8.0). Next, ultrasonication was performed three times for 10 s (Branson S-250A sonifier, 40% amplitude, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) with samples cooled on ice. The sample was supplemented with 22.5 μL of 10% Triton-X 100, vortexed, and centrifuged for 10 min (at 4 °C, 13,300× g). The supernatant was used for further MS-sample generation. The protein amount was quantified with a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, UP40840A, Interchim, Montluçon, France) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with bovine serum albumin as a reference substance measured at 560 nm with an iMark microplate absorbance reader (Bio-Rad, Feldkirchen, Germany).
4.5. Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) for Mass Spectrometry
The filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method was adapted after Wiśniewski et al.. Moreover, 50 µg of protein was precipitated by a 9-fold acetone volume, vortexed, stored at −20 °C overnight, and centrifuged for 10 min at 13,300× g. After centrifugation, the supernatant was aspirated and the pellet was dried at room temperature for 10 min. The pellet was resuspended in 200 µL UA buffer (8 mM urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9) and added to a 30 kDa cutoff centrifugation device (Nanosep with Omega Membrane, Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany). Samples were centrifuged at 9600× g, respectively, at room temperature until the volume passed the filter completely. This step was repeated once. Reduction and alkylation were performed by adding 100 μL dithiothreitol (DTT) (50 mM DTT in UA buffer) to the filter device and incubating for 5 min at 60 °C and 600 rpm (MultiTherm shaker, Benchmark Scientific, NJ, Sayreville, USA). This step was followed by centrifugation at 9600× g at room temperature (until the volume passed the filter completely). Next, 100 µL of iodoacetamide (IAA) buffer (50 mM IAA in UA buffer) were added to the filter device, followed by incubation for 1 min at room temperature with 600 rpm and centrifugation (9600× g at room temperature until volume passed the filter completely). The filter device was washed three times by adding 150 μL of UA buffer. A tryptic digest (trypsin/LysC, Mass Spec Grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany) with 10 ng/μL in DB buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 50 µL) was performed overnight at 37 °C and 300 rpm shaking. On the next day, samples were centrifuged (9600× g at room temperature until volume passed the filter completely), and peptide-containing flowthrough was analyzed by absorption measurement (205 nm, NanoDrop, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany) for peptide content. From each sample, 20 µg peptide was dried in a SpeedVac and then dissolved in 10 μL 2.5% v/v acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in LC-MS grade water (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). To remove particles, samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000× g. Supernatant was used for Nano-Liquid Chromatography–Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry (nLC-Orbitrap MS/MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) measurement.
4.6. Nano-Liquid Chromatography–Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry Measurement
In this study, 1 µg of peptide sample was loaded to the nano-HPLC system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC, Thermo Fisher, Dreieich, Germany) by autosampler. Desalting was performed with a C18 pre-column cartridge (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 300 µm I.D. × 5 mm) and separated on a 25 cm C18 column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100, 2 µm particle size, 75 µm I.D. × 25 cm; all parts were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). An effective gradient of 5–30% of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in LC-MS grade water mixed with solvent A (0.1% FA in LC-MS grade water) in 120 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min was performed. Online ESI-Orbitrap mass spectrometry measurements were carried out by a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany), equipped with a dual MALDI-/ESI-source (Spectroglyph LLC, Kennewick, WA, USA) in data-dependent top 10 acquisition mode. The MS scan range was 350–2000 m/z with a resolution of 70,000, and the dynamic exclusion time of precursors for MS/MS was set to 60 s. Precursor ions were scanned with a resolution of 17,500 and fragmented with a normalized collision energy (CE) of 28.
4.7. Data Analysis: Protein Identification and Label-Free Quantification
Protein identification and quantification were performed with Proteome Discoverer versions 2.4 and 3.0 with precursor detection node (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The human protein database (Homo sapiens SwissProt DB (TaxID 9606), Version 25 October 2017) was used as a template for peptide spectrum matching. For the protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ), mass tolerances of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for deviation from the theoretical masses from MS/MS were allowed. The maximum number of missed cleavages for tryptic digest was set to two. In the validation steps, a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was selected for protein and peptide identification. Dynamic modifications of oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) and fixed modification of carbamidomethylation (C) were set. LFQ values were normalized based on total peptide amount. Protein abundance was calculated based on the average of the top-three quantified peptides (top N set to 3) of normalized LFQ values. Fold changes (abundance ratios) were calculated based on the protein abundance setting larger values to a maximum of 100 fold change. Statistical quantitative analysis and principal component analysis (PCA) were performed with Proteome Discoverer software. The analysis of top regulated proteins (Section 4.2) is based on the evaluation with version PD 2.4 (according to data in Supplementary Materials: Table S1_PDv24), and all other analyses were performed with PD 3.0 (according to data in Supplementary Materials: Table S2_PDv30). The mass spectrometry proteomics raw data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD062079.
For protein identification, only proteins with at least one unique peptide were allowed. For gene ontology enrichment analysis, the Search Tool of the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING, ) was used for significantly regulated proteins. The following settings were used for analysis: Network: full STRING network; required score: medium confidence (0.4); FDR stringency: medium (5%); and minimum count in network: 2. Venn diagrams were generated with the online tool VENNY 2.1 ().
For analysis of top regulated proteins, we considered proteins as significantly regulated only if they held at least two unique peptides, a minimum fold change of 2 of abundance ratios (LFQ values), and a maximum p-value of 0.05. Volcano plots were generated with Python (Python.org, Python 3.12.4) based on log2-transformed fold changes and log10-transformed p-values generated by a two-sided t-test with significance values.

RESULTS:
2. Results
The nucleus serves as a critical cellular compartment for rAAV production, as it provides the essential environment and machinery for viral DNA synthesis from transfected DNA and transcription, as well as capsid assembly and packaging of the viral DNA into the capsids. Therefore, we decoded with an nLC-ESI-MS approach the nuclear proteome of (i) untransfected (HEK sample), (ii) mock-transfected (MOCK sample), and (iii) AAV2-production-transfected (AAV sample) HEK-293 cells (Figure 1). Samples were generated in triplicate for robust statistical analysis of the results. HEK-293 cells were checked for successful transfection by fluorescence microscopy 24 h and 72 h post-transfection (ptf) based on mVenus, expressed by the plasmid pITR-mVenus, and then harvested. Nuclear fractions were generated by several steps of solubilization and precipitation, and samples were prepared for nLC-ESI MS/MS measurements by ‘filter aided sample preparation’ (FASP) based on a tryptic digestion and membrane adsorption. Raw data were analyzed for protein identification and label-free quantification with Proteome Discoverer Software (see Methods for details).
Figure 2 presents images of the HEK, MOCK, and AAV samples for both harvesting time points, 24 h and 72 h ptf. In the HEK control samples no fluorescence signal was detected, whereas in MOCK and AAV samples most cells were fluorescent, indicating successful transfection. As expected, fluorescence intensity increased from 24 h ptf to 72 h ptf. Here, we were interested in the confirmation of successful transfection. In general, fluorescence microscopy is also a powerful tool for the investigation of rAAV biology.
2.1. Protein Identification and Sample Variability
Raw nLC-ESI MS/MS data of the untransfected (HEK sample), mock-transfected (MOCK sample), and rAAV-production-transfected (AAV sample) HEK-293 cells, 24 h and 72 h post-transfection, were processed and then analyzed with Proteome Discoverer software. In total, 3384 human proteins were identified in all samples combined when filtering for proteins with at least one detected unique peptide. A principal component analysis (PCA) revealed a grouping of samples mostly based on their status of transfection and time of sampling. AAV-transfected and MOCK-transfected samples were distinct from untransfected samples by principal component 1, and samples taken at 24 h ptf were distinct from the 72 h ptf samples based on principal component 2 (Figure 3A). Additionally, distribution of identified proteins over all samples is visualized in a Venn diagram (Figure 3B). For an improved overview, 24 h and 72 h samples of each sample group (AAV, MOCK, HEK) were combined. As a reliable base for quantitative analysis, 3348 proteins are found in all sample groups altogether. Whereas one protein was only identified in AAV samples and seven in HEK samples with a confident identification. Furthermore, 21 proteins are present only in AAV and MOCK samples, five proteins in AAV and HEK samples, and two proteins in MOCK and HEK samples. In addition, the rAAV proteins Rep78, Rep52, VP1, and AAP were identified in AAV samples (proteins not included in Figure 3B).
2.2. Identification of Top Regulated HEK-293 Proteins
To identify significantly up- and down-regulated cellular proteins across treatments, abundance ratios (fold change) were calculated for different sample groups of the same harvest time point. Either rAAV-transfected samples or MOCK-transfected samples were compared to non-transfected HEK-293 samples. To identify significant events, proteins with at least two unique peptides, a p-value maximum of 0.05, and a minimum fold change of 2 were set as the threshold. The results were visualized by volcano plots for each comparison. The ten proteins with the strongest up-regulation and down-regulation are labeled with their UniProt accession number in each volcano plot (Figure 4).
2.3. Comparison of Top Regulated Proteins
To provide a better overview, we merged the top ten regulated proteins of both comparison time points in a Venn diagram (labeled in Figure 4 and displayed in Figure 5) and then checked for overlaps.
The comparison of the top down-regulated proteins identified three shared proteins in AAV vs. HEK and AAV vs. MOCK, namely protein XRP2 (O75695), radixin (P35241-1), and isoform 2 of DNA-directed RNA polymerases I and III subunit RPAC2 (Q9Y2S0-2). One protein was down-regulated in all sample groups, namely peripheral plasma membrane protein CASK (O14936). Furthermore, this comparison revealed five proteins down-regulated in AAV vs. HEK and MOCK vs. HEK. Interestingly, five proteins were found for AAV vs. HEK in the top rank of down-regulated proteins. The comparison of AAV vs. MOCK revealed 13 exclusive down-regulated proteins. Also, 13 down-regulated proteins were only in the MOCK vs. HEK comparison. Among the top up-regulated proteins (24 h + 72 h ptf), five proteins were found in AAV vs. HEK and AAV vs. MOCK; nine in AAV vs. HEK and MOCK vs. HEK; three in AAV vs. HEK; eleven in AAV vs. MOCK; and nine just in the MOCK vs. HEK group.
Additionally, those groups of significant proteins are listed with protein name, UniProt accession, and fold change in Table 1 for down-regulated proteins and in Table 2 for up-regulated proteins. To enable a fast search of proteins of interest, tables are sorted alphabetically for the UniProt accession numbers for each comparison (AAV vs. HEK, AAV vs. MOCK, etc.).
2.4. Comparison of Significantly Regulated Proteins and Respective Functional Groups
The total number of significant up- and down-regulated proteins detected in the MOCK vs. HEK samples at 24 h was higher than that of regulated proteins in AAV vs. HEK samples. This observation suggests that the transfection itself had a high impact on the regulation of cellular proteins. In AAV-producing HEK-293 cells versus non-transfected HEK-293 cells, at 24 h ptf 235 proteins and at 72 h ptf 318 proteins were significantly up-regulated, while at 24 h 374 proteins and at 72 h 212 proteins were significantly down-regulated. In MOCK-transfected samples versus non-transfected samples, at 24 h ptf 215 and at 72 h ptf 132 proteins were up-regulated, and at 24 h ptf 425 and at 72 h ptf 116 proteins were down-regulated (Figure 6).
Using the STRING online tool, we further analyzed proteins regulated in rAAV-producing cells versus HEK-293 cells at both time points (24 h and 72 h ptf). We did not exclude proteins that were also regulated in the MOCK samples, as we were interested in obtaining a picture of the whole process. The proteins were put in context using gene ontology annotations assigned by the STRING tool. In the AAV vs. HEK samples, down-regulated proteins were ascribed to the following GO terms: histone modification (30 proteins), chromatin organization (38 proteins), cellular response to stress (58 proteins), and gene expression (168 proteins). Up-regulated proteins had the following GO terms: chromosome organization (49 proteins), protein transport (56 proteins), response to stress (106 proteins), and regulation of gene expression (150 proteins), as shown in Figure 7.
2.5. Up-Regulated Proteins in the Context of the GO Term ‘Response to Virus’
In the GO enrichment analyses, we specifically looked at the GO term ‘response to virus’ (GO:0009615) as a subgroup of the GO term ‘response to stress’. Ten proteins with this GO assignment were identified, and an overview of the regulations of these proteins is given in Table 3.
2.6. rAAV-Production Specific Response in HEK-293 Cells
In the literature, we found that cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) may play a role in rAAV production. In our dataset cGAS was not detected, but two proteins associated with cGAS were up-regulated in the AAV samples. In Table 4, these proteins are listed with their calculated abundance ratios.
2.7. Identified Proteins with Context to Adenoviral Proteins
Finally, we checked for known linkages of identified proteins to adenoviral proteins by literature research, and we identified six candidates. These proteins are listed in Table 5 with related fold changes for each of our comparisons.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Adeno-associated viruses are the preferred carrier for gene replacement therapies. In 2012, the first approved gene therapy in Europe was Glybera, based on the AAV1 capsid. Several approvals in, e.g., Europe and the USA followed, such as Luxturna (AAV2, 2017,), Zolgensma (AAV9, 2019,), Hemgenix (AAV5, 2022,), Upstaza (AAV2, 2022,), Roctavian (AAV5, 2023,), Elevidys (AAVrh74, 2024,), and Beqvez (AAVRh74var, 2024,). Luxturna, Zolgensma, Upstaza, and Beqvez are produced in mammalian human embryonic kidney cells (HEK) derived from the 293 clone.
The triple transfection of HEK-293 serves as a classic rAAV production system. This cell line was immortalized with a fragment of the Adenovirus 5 genome, features a near-triploid karyotype with some polyploidy, and stably expresses the adenoviral proteins E1A and E1B. Three required plasmids provide the basis for rAAV production: the therapeutic transgene cassette flanked by the necessary inverted terminal repeats (ITRs) of the AAV genome, as well as the non-structural AAV (Rep78, Rep68, Rep52, Rep48, AAP, and MAAP) and structural (Cap VP1, VP2, and VP3) proteins. Production has also been reported in yeast, Sf9 insect cells, and Chinese hamster ovary cells. Furthermore, AAV capsids were produced in E. coli.
The production of rAAV-based therapeutics poses a number of challenges, such as extensive up- and downstream processes as well as limited yield, which results in high manufacturing costs. In this context, the question arises of how rAAV production affects the host cell and how host-cell regulation processes or modifications could be used to further increase productivity. Several transcriptomic and proteomic experiments have been carried out to investigate the impact of rAAV production on the host cells. For example, a proteomic approach was performed by Strasser et al., comparing untransfected and, for rAAV5 production, transfected FreeStyle 293-F cells. This study showed that rAAV production leads to altered expression of proteins involved in processes such as metabolism, proliferation and cell death, endocytosis, and lysosomal degradation. Chung et al. examined a HEK-293-derived suspension cell line transfected for rAAV9 production with polyethylenimine (PEI) by RNA-Seq and identified several up-regulated pathways, including inflammatory and antiviral responses, as well as higher protein levels of interferon-stimulated cytokines and chemokines. Another transcriptome study was conducted by Wang et al. and investigated two HEK-293 cell lines from different suppliers adapted to different media in order to identify significantly regulated metabolic pathways and examine cellular characteristics of the host cell, which may support rAAV production. They compared rAAV-producing cells with the parental cell lines and found significantly enriched and up-regulated host cell innate immune response signaling pathways (e.g., RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathway, Toll-like receptor signaling, cytosolic DNA sensing, and JAK-STAT signaling). This regulation was associated with enriched gene ontology terms for host cellular stress responses, including endoplasmic reticulum stress, autophagy, and apoptosis in virus production. In contrast, fatty acid metabolism and neutral amino acid transport were down-regulated in the late phase of viral production. The impact of transfection on host cells and rAAV productivity is of great interest. Lu et al. performed a kinetic multi-omics analysis of rAAV production of transfected HEK cells. Another kinetic study compared the different transfection systems of virus co-infection and multi-plasmid transfection by transcriptomic and proteomic analysis. In a SWATH-MS proteomic approach, Patra et al. investigated three different transfection conditions (standard, sub-optimal, and optimal transfection) in HEKT cells. The reviews of Wang et al. and Gurazada et al. provide a good overview of omics studies in this field.
We aimed to provide answers to the question of how rAAV production influences the host cell’s nuclear proteome. Since gene regulation and virus assembly are located in the nucleus, we hypothesize that limiting or supporting factors for production also reside in the nucleus and that the pre-selection for nuclear proteins helps to zoom in on important changes. We analyzed untransfected adherent HEK-293 cells and compared the nuclear proteome with that of mock-transfected cells or that of rAAV2 production-transfected cells at 24 h and 72 h post-transfection. Our label-free quantitative MS proteome analysis identified more than 3300 proteins, and we discuss the relation of selected proteins to AAV production. This study provides a valuable addition to the above-mentioned, existing proteomic analysis of the whole cell proteome approaches.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: .
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics raw data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD062079.