PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Kinetochore microtubule attachments; Tubulin detyrosination/tyrosination code; Kmn complex

ABSTRACT:
Post-translational cycles of α-tubulin detyrosination/tyrosination generate microtubule diversity, with broad physiological and clinical implications. However, the mechanistic understanding of how this microtubule diversity is decoded into specific cellular functions remains largely unknown. Here we show that the core microtubule-binding site at kinetochores ‘reads’ and responds to the α-tubulin detyrosination/tyrosination code. By combining CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing of enzymatic ‘writers’ of α-tubulin detyrosination/tyrosination in human cells, with biochemical purifications, mass spectrometry and super-resolution microscopy, we identified over a hundred proteins that preferentially associate with either detyrosinated or tyrosinated microtubules during mitosis. Among these, the conserved KNL-1/MIS12 complex/NDC80 complex (KMN) network at kinetochores showed a preference for tyrosinated microtubules. In addition to established roles in error correction and polar chromosome alignment, live-cell imaging uncovered a previously overlooked link between the α-tubulin detyrosination/tyrosination code and the formation of functional kinetochore-microtubule attachments, necessary for normal metaphase chromosome oscillations and timely spindle assembly checkpoint satisfaction. In vitro reconstitution experiments revealed that α-tubulin detyrosination specifically promotes Ndc80 diffusion along the microtubule lattice. We propose that the gradual accumulation of detyrosinated α-tubulin after initial microtubule capture at kinetochores facilitates the biased diffusion of core-binding proteins along the microtubule lattice, establishing a positive feedback loop that sustains kinetochore-microtubule attachments.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Kinetochores read detyrosinated tubulin to sustain microtubule attachments

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Each sample was processed for proteomic analysis following the solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation (SP3) protocol and enzymatically digested with Trypsin/LysC as previously described. Protein identification and quantitation were performed by nanoLC-MS/MS. This equipment is composed of an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a Q-Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Five hundred nanograms of peptides of each sample were loaded onto a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18 100 Å, 5 mm × 300 μm i.d., 160454, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in a mobile phase of 2% ACN, 0.1% FA at 10 μL/min. After 3 min loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter EASY- Spray column (ES903, PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) at 250 nL/min. Separation was achieved by mixing A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA with the following gradient: 5 min (2.5% B to 10% B), 120 min (10% B to 30% B), 20 min (30% B to 50% B), 5 min (50% B to 99% B), and 10 min (hold 99% B). Subsequently, the column was equilibrated with 2.5% B for 17 min. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 4.0 and Tune 2.11 software (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent (dd) positive acquisition mode alternating between a full scan (m/z 380-1580) and subsequent HCD MS/MS of the 10 most intense peaks from a full scan (normalized collision energy of 27%). The ESI spray voltage was 1.9 kV. The global settings were as follows: use lock masses best (m/z 445.12003), lock mass injection Full MS and chrom. peak width (FWHM) of 15 s. The full scan settings were as follows: 70 k resolution (m/z 200), AGC target 3 × 10e6, maximum injection time 120 ms; dd settings: minimum AGC target 8 × 10e3, intensity threshold 7.3 × 10e4, charge exclusion: unassigned, 1, 8, >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on and 45 s of dynamic exclusion. The MS2 settings were as follows: microscans 1, resolution 35 k (m/z 200), AGC target 2 × 10e5, maximum injection time 110 ms, isolation window 2.0 m/z, isolation offset 0.0 m/z, dynamic first mass, and spectrum data type profile.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw data was processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400 software (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt database for the Homo sapiens reviewed Proteome (2021_03 with 20371 entries) together with a spectral library database (NIST Human Orbitrap HCD 20160923). A common protein contaminant list from MaxQuant was also considered in the analysis. The MSPepSearch and Sequest HT search engines were used to identify tryptic peptides. The ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Maximum allowed missing cleavage sites was set to two. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as constant modification. Methionine oxidation, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, peptide terminus glutamine to pyroglutamate, and protein N-terminus acetylation, Met-loss, and Met-loss+acetyl were defined as variable modifications. Peptide confidence was set to high. The processing node Percolator was enabled with the following settings: maximum delta Cn 0.05; decoy database search target false discovery rate 1%, validation based on q-value. Protein label-free quantitation was performed with the Minora feature detector node at the processing step. Precursor ions quantification was performed at the consensus step with the following parameters: unique plus razor peptides were considered, precursor abundance based on intensity, and normalization based on total peptide amount. For hypothesis testing, protein ratio calculation was pairwise ratio-based and an t-test (background based) hypothesis test was performed.