PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
diseases: Pulmonary tuberculosis
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Proteomics; Tuberculosis; Ion mobility spectrometry

ABSTRACT:
Utilized sensitive, high throughput multiplexed ion mobility-mass spectrometry (IM-MS) to characterize the serum proteome of tuberculosis  patients prior to and at 8 weeks of antibiotic treatment. Goal is to identify a serum protein signature indicative of treatment effect.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Application of Multiplexed Ion Mobility Spectrometry towards the Identification of Host Protein Signatures of Treatment Effect in Pulmonary Tuberculosis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were digested with trypsin, then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

DATA PROCESSING:
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Study population
CDC TB Trials Consortium (TBTC) Study 29 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT00694629) is a prospective, multicenter, open-label Phase 2 clinical trial comparing the antimicrobial activity and safety of standard daily regimen containing rifampin, to that of the experimental regimen with daily rifapentine (10 mg/kg/dose), both given with isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol to adults with smear positive, culture-confirmed pulmonary TB. The primary efficacy endpoint of the trial was the proportion of patients, by regimen, having negative sputum cultures at completion of 8 weeks (40 doses) of treatment. All TB treatment was administered 5 days/week for 8 weeks and directly observed. All participants underwent HIV testing. Cultures were performed using both Lowenstein-Jensen (LJ) solid media (inoculum volume, 0.2 mL) and BACTEC mycobacterial growth indicator tube (MGIT, Becton Dickinson and Co, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey) liquid media (inoculum volume, 0.5 mL) with the MGIT 960 system, and assessed for presence of M. tuberculosis. Additional information regarding the design, conduct, and results of TBTC Study 29 has been published.
Selection of participants
Out of a total of 531 participants in the parent trial, we included 289 consecutively enrolled protocol-correct participants from CDC-TB Trials Consortium clinical trials sites in North America, South Africa, Uganda, and Spain, for this sub-study. The 289 participants included in the proteomic analyses had sputum smears positive for acid fast bacilli at baseline and were culture positive for drug-susceptible pulmonary TB. Detailed demographic, clinical, radiographic and microbiologic data were collected using CDC-TBTC developed case report forms as part of the parent clinical trial.
Sample processing
Serum was collected, processed and stored at baseline (time of enrollment), and after 8 weeks (40 doses) as previously described, in a standardized manner according to a manual of operating procedures. The investigators conducting LC-IM-MS assays were blinded to all patient characteristics until after assay results were submitted to the TBTC Data and Coordinating Center. Individual human serum samples were partitioned and depleted of 14 specific highly abundant proteins using a ProteomeLab™ 12.7 × 79.0-mm human IgY14 LC10 affinity LC column (Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA), which was performed using the manufacturer’s instructions to disrupt protein-protein binding and capture of additional proteins. Further processed of the flow-through portion of the depletion included automated protein isolation, denaturation, tryptic digestion, and peptide isolation.
LC-IM-MS analysis
Analysis of processed serum samples was performed on an in-house built instrument that couples a 1-m ion mobility separation with an Agilent 6224 TOF MS upgraded to a 1.5 m flight tube coupled with LC and including a fully automated in-house built 4-column HPLC system equipped with in-house packed capillary columns. A 60-min gradient with shorter columns (30 cm long with same dimensions and packing) was used with the IM-MS platform and data were collected from 100 to 3200 m/z. This unique platform has been previously described in detail, and has been optimized for higher throughput larger scale clinical sample analysis as it provides the benefit of the inclusion of an orthogonal ion mobility separations for depth of coverage coupled with a reduced LC separations component for faster overall analysis times (60 min per sample).
Data processing
Identification and quantification of the detected peptide peaks was performed utilizing the Accurate Mass and Time (AMT) tag approach. Briefly, three pooled human serum samples were created (baseline, 8 weeks negative culture status, 8 weeks positive culture status) and divided into 24 fractions each using HPLC high pH fractionation. LC-MS/MS was performed on each fraction using the LTQ Orbitrap Velos MS and a reverse phase low pH LC separation. A subsequent AMT tag database was created as previously described. All MS/MS data can be obtained at ProteomeXchange under identifier PXD009029. Multiple in-house developed informatics tools (publicly available http://omics.pnl.gov/software) were used to process the LCMS data and correlate the resulting LC-MS features to an AMT tag database that contained accurate mass, LC separation elution time, and IMS drift time information for peptide tags generated from serum proteins. Among the tools used were algorithms for peak-picking and for determining isotopic distributions and charge states. Further downstream data analysis incorporated all possible detected peptides into a visualization program, VIPER, to correlate LC-MS features to the peptide identifications in the AMT tag database.
Statistical analysis
Peptide values were log2 transformed and normalized for occur­rence filtering and outlier removal as previously described. Protein values were generated from the processed peptide level data utilizing the R roll-up approach as previously described. All analyses were performed in the R environment, version 3.3.3. Linear mixed models were fit using the lme4 package in R. Contrasts were estimated using the package lsmeans in R (R Project for Statistical Computing, http://cran.r-project.org). Pathway enrichment statistics were calculated using a log-rank test on proteins that were ordered by significance level within each contrast. To determine which demographic, clinical, radiographic and microbiologic variables may drive protein expression during model building, univariate regressions or ANOVAs were assessed. Redundancy amongst variables was assessed using Spearman’s correlations of the variables themselves, as well as correlations calculated using protein abundance values, which shows the cross correlations of relevant clinical and demographic variables as well as bar plots, after only site/region adjustment, showing the number of significant proteins associated with each variable based upon the serum proteome results. Once the primary drivers of protein expression were determined, separate linear mixed models were fit to investigate the influence of culture conversion on protein expression in response to treatment (with adjustment for baseline disease severity). Baseline disease severity was determined by chest radiograph classification of cavitation status. All models adjusted for patient and study site as random effects, and the following fixed effects: geographic region, age, body mass index, sex, and HIV status.
Criteria to identify significantly different proteins included p-value < 0.05, minimum ± 0.1 log2 abundance change between comparisons and quantified in at least 50 patient pairs per protein. Samples without quantitative protein information were treated as missing data and not included for that particular protein analysis. Immunoglobulin constant region proteins and other immunoaffinity depleted proteins were excluded as described previously. Pathway mapping was performed utilizing GO annotations extracted from DAVID version 6.8 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) using the ontology for biological process (GOTERM_BP_DIRECT). Bonferroni correction for only those GO term pathways that had a p value < 0.05 were selected. Cytoscape version 3.5.1 was used to create the interconnections of the pathway networks.
Ethics statement
Study 29 was approved by both CDC and local institutional review boards, and written informed consent was obtained from all study participants for collection of serum for TB-related research. The institutional review board at University of California, San Francisco approved this biomarker study (UCSF IRB Number: 12–10360).

RESULTS:
Results
Study population and serum proteins identified
A schema of the proteome study is provided in Fig. 1. Table 1 shows the clinical metadata of the 289 study participants from whom serum was collected and LC-IM-MS high-throughput analysis applied. In total, 10,137 peptides corresponding to 872 proteins were identified, quantified, and used for statistical analysis across the longitudinal patient cohort (Supplemental Table 1).
Treatment effect on serum protein abundances
A linear mixed model, fit to investigate the outcome associated with treatment effect of each serum protein abundance over time, identified 244 serum proteins deemed significantly changing after 8 weeks of treatment (Fig. 2A and Supplemental Table 2). A heat map of the 244 serum proteins identified, where values represent the quantitative change in protein abundance between baseline and 8 weeks per protein, is shown in Fig. 2B. Observed are subsets of proteins which are quantitatively differentiated in the serum due to either up (red) or down (blue) regulation upon treatment. The majority of protein alterations are upregulated upon treatment (138 out of 244). Network and pathway interaction mapping of these treatment related proteins identified interconnections of multiple pathway networks and their response after 8 weeks of treatment (Fig. 3). In addition to acute phase proteins, pathway networks emerged for lipid transport and metabolism; complement cascade; proteolysis; coagulation cascade; inflammation and defense; and cell adhesion and extracellular matrix, among others.
Serum protein signatures and culture conversion
By utilizing the same comparison model described above, patient serum protein results were divided and analyzed based upon either positive or negative culture status for a particular time point to determine protein significance. Looking at week 2 culture status stratifications, CRP and many other highly downregulated proteins (SAA1, A1AG1) have reduced fold change differences for patients who have quickly converted at week 2 compared to week 8 stratifications where such proteins have similar or greater fold change differences between positive and negative stratification (Supplemental Table 3). Investigation of patients who remain culture positive after 8 weeks of treatment utilized the same model as previous but fit the outcome to culture status stratification at either 6 or 8 weeks of treatment. Fig. 4A and B shows the volcano plots of the week 8 and week 6 culture results respectively. Overall, we identified 41 and 54 proteins for week 8 and week 6 culture status respectively whose baseline to end of intensive phase biomarker changes were significantly differing between culture-negative and culture-positive patients. Fig. 4C shows the overlap between each comparison and the original 244 treatment effect serum proteins. Whereas these culture-status comparisons are statistically less significant, the 17 proteins which are consistently discriminatory for both week 6 and 8 culture status stratifications provide a promising list to explore further as predictive markers of culture conversion. (Fig. 4A and B and Supplemental Table 4).
Baseline serum proteins predictive of culture status
Seventeen proteins were identified with concentrations at baseline that were associated with culture conversion status with a p < 0.001 at any time point stratification (Supplemental Table 5). Across all culture time points, these seventeen proteins were most discriminatory for the week 6 culture status. The top six baseline proteins that discriminate culture status at subsequent time points are shown in Fig. 5, and all overlap with those identified as significant in fold change comparisons from baseline to week 8.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Tuberculosis (TB) is the leading cause of death from a single infectious agent. According to the WHO, an estimated 10.4 million people fell ill with TB in 2016 with most of the incidents concentrated in developing countries. Sputum-based culture remains the gold standard for monitoring response to treatment in clinical practice as well as in clinical trials. Despite its long history in TB drug development, 8-week culture status and culture conversion as a measure of bacterial burden has limitations. First, the reliance on sputum is limiting given sputum production decreases rapidly on treatment. Additionally, analyses of performance of treatment culture conversion for predicting long term outcomes have shown variable results. As a consequence, there has been a call for the development of new quantitative, non-sputum, nonculture-based TB biomarkers. If proven accurate and predictive, a blood-based biomarker signature would facilitate middle and phase 2 development for new TB drugs and regimens, as well as provide information on individual response to treatment.
Recent technologic advances in mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics now provide multiple, robust tools that allow for high-accuracy, high-throughput analysis of clinical samples. As a result, a better depth of coverage with accurate quantification can be obtained for a global proteome in complex clinical specimens. To date, discovery-based proteomics has primarily concentrated on investigating protein biomarkers of infection for early diagnosis of TB. Early surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization (SELDI) platforms compared serum samples from active TB patients with uninfected controls to identify possible discriminatory protein profiles, with recent studies involving a more in-depth separation. Additionally, several liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) based platforms have been used as well to perform this comparison, providing a complimentary list of differentiated host proteins. Achkar et al., presented a more comprehensive diagnostic study using LC-MS/MS and multiple-reaction monitoring (MRM) based assay to identify panels of host proteins that can distinguish active TB from latent infections as well as other respiratory disorders. Longitudinal studies of TB treatment and response have also been conducted using aptamer array-based methods applied to small cohorts of patients.
In the present study we evaluate treatment response through the use of a sensitive MS platform, with the addition of ion mobility separations (IM) to an LC-MS platform, providing a more robust and higher throughput discovery analysis pipeline capable of larger scale clinical study investigations. We assayed a large collection of serum samples collected at baseline and after 8 weeks of treatment from participants enrolled in a phase 2 clinical trial comparing rifapentine to rifampin, as part of combination therapy. In this study, we sought to provide an unbiased characterization of the serum proteome in TB patients undergoing treatment, evaluating associations with clinical and microbiologic characteristics, comparing changes in protein bio­markers relative to culture status at time points 2, 4, 6 and 8 weeks during treatment, with the objective of identifying a serum protein signature indicative of treatment effect.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tube.2018.07.005.