PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Heart
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Human; Cardiac; Macrophages; Bioengineering

ABSTRACT:
The first macrophages that seed the developing heart originate from the yolk sac during fetal life. While murine studies reveal important homeostatic and reparative functions in adults, we know little about their roles in the earliest stages of human heart development due to a lack of accessible tissue. Generation of bioengineered human cardiac microtissues from pluripotent stem cells models these first steps in cardiac tissue development, however macrophages have not been included in these studies. To bridge these gaps, we differentiated human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into primitive LYVE1+ macrophages (hESC-macrophages; akin to yolk sac macrophages) that stably engrafted within cardiac microtissues composed of hESC-cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts to study reciprocal interactions. Engraftment induced a tissue resident macrophage gene program resembling human fetal cardiac macrophages, enriched in efferocytic pathways. Functionally, hESC-macrophages induced production and maturation of cardiomyocyte sarcomeric proteins, and enhanced contractile force, relaxation kinetics, and electrical properties. Mechanistically, the primary effect of hESC-macrophages was during the stressful events surrounding early microtissue formation, where they engaged in phosphatidylserine dependent ingestion of apoptotic cardiomyocyte cargo, which reinforced core resident macrophage identity, reduced microtissue stress and drove hESC-cardiomyocytes to become more similar to human ventricular cardiomyocytes found in early development, both transcriptionally and metabolically. Inhibiting efferocytosis of hESC-cardiomyocytes by hESC-macrophages led to increased cell stress, impaired sarcomeric protein maturation and reduced cardiac microtissue function (contraction and relaxation). Taken together, macrophage-engineered human cardiac microtissues represent a considerably improved model for human heart development, and reveal a major beneficial, yet previously unappreciated role for human primitive macrophages in enhancing cardiac tissue function.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human cardiac microtissues LC-MSMS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tissue processing  Individual Biowires were washed thoroughly with PBS and frozen at -80°C. Biowires were suspended in 50uL of 8M urea and were homogenized with 10 freeze-thaw cycles in an ethanol / dry ice bath. Samples were reduced with DTT (final concentration 2.5mM in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 1 hour at 37°C. Alkylation was performed with iodoacetamide (final concentration of 5mM in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Samples were diluted 8-fold using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin/Lys-C mix (mass spectrometry grade; Promega) was added (0.5ug) and incubated overnight at 37°C. The following day, samples were acidified by addition of formic acid to 1% of total volume.   Chromatography and DIA Mass Spectrometry  We analyzed Biowire tryptic peptides by loading 20% of total protein extracted onto C18 tips (Evosep, EV-2001; according to manufacturer’s protocols), which was subjected to in-line chromatography using the Evosep One (EV-1000) instrument 15SPD LC protocol. An 88-minute gradient via the Endurance 15cm analytical column (EV-1106) was used, including a stainless-steel emitter (EV-1086) and a spray voltage of 1.9kV. The Q exactive Plus instrument was used for DIA MS data acquisition. Each cycle comprised of one full MS scan (70,000 resolution) with a 30 MS/MS scan windows (17,500 resolution) covering a mass range of 400-951 m/z. We used an AGC target of 3e6 for full MS scans and 5e5 for MS/MS scans. The maximum injection time was set to 200ms for full MS scans, with a normalized collision energy set to 27 for MS/MS scans. Finally, isolation windows were 20 m/z including 1 m/z overlap between scan windows.

DATA PROCESSING:
We used the DIA-NN 1.81 software to search RAW files, specifically using an in silico spectral library with canonical and isoform protein sequence FASTA files from UNIPROT (UP000005640_9606, February 2021 release), permitting a maximum of one missed cleavage and one variable modification (methionine oxidation), where carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Next, filtering was performed with a precursor FDR of 0.01, including the features ‘match between runs (MBR)’, ‘unrelated runs’ and ‘use isotopologues’. ‘Robust LC (high precision)’ was set for quantification and ‘RT & signal-dep’ was set for cross-run normalization. Finally, mass accuracy and scan window were determined through built-in features in DIA-NN.