PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Golgi; Fam114a

ABSTRACT:
The Golgi apparatus contains many resident enzymes that must remain in place whilst their substrates flow through on their journey from the endoplasmic reticulum to elsewhere in the cell. COPI-coated vesicles bud from the rims of the Golgi stack to recycle Golgi residents to earlier cisternae. Different enzymes are present in different parts of the stack, and at least one COPI adaptor protein, GOLPH3, has been shown to recruit enzymes into vesicles in a specific part of the stack. We have used proximity biotinylation to identify further components of intra-Golgi transport vesicles and found FAM114A2, an uncharacterised cytosolic protein. Affinity chromatography with FAM114A2, and its paralogue FAM114A1 showed that they bind to numerous Golgi resident proteins, with membrane-proximal basic residues in the cytoplasmic tail being sufficient for the interaction. Deletion of both proteins from U2OS cells did not result in substantial defects in Golgi function. However, a Drosophila orthologue of these proteins (CG9590/FAM114A) is also localised to the Golgi and binds directly to COPI. Generation of Drosophila mutants lacking FAM114A revealed defects in glycosylation of glue proteins in the salivary gland. Thus, the FAM114A proteins are COPI vesicle resident proteins that bind to Golgi enzymes and so are candidate adaptors to contribute specificity to COPI vesicle recycling in the Golgi stack.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The FAM114A proteins are adaptors for the recycling of Golgi enzymes - Figu 2SA

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cysteines were reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 4mM and heating the samples to 60C for a total of 10 minutes. To prevent cysteine re-oxidation iodoacetamide was added as an alkylating reagent to a final concentration of 14mM and incubation proceeded for 45 minutes at room temperature in the dark. Digestion was carried using a trypsion:protein ratio of 1:50 37C on an Eppendorf ThermoMixer C for an additional 16h.  The acidified tryptic digest was then centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 15 minutes to remove RapiGest degradation by-products and the supernatant subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data was searched using MaxQaunt against Uniprot database.