PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Osteosarcoma
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Mitochondrial diseases; oxidative metabolism; oxidative phosphorylation

ABSTRACT:
Defects in mitochondrial oxidative metabolism contribute to various genetic inherited disorders, termed mitochondrial diseases, with limited treatment options. Given the lack of functional annotation for numerous mitochondrial proteins, there is a necessity for an extensive gene inventory related to mitochondrial function, with special interest in Oxidative Phosphorylation (OXPHOS). To address this gap, we developed a CRISPR/Cas9 loss-of-function library targeting nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes and conducted galactose-based screenings at various time points to uncover novel regulators of mitochondrial function. Our study resulted in a gene catalog essential for mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, and constructed a dynamic timeline mapping a broad network of mitochondrial pathways, with a particular focus on the OXPHOS complexes. Computational analysis pinpointed RTN4IP1 and ECHS1 as key genes strongly associated with OXPHOS and whose mutations are associated with mitochondrial diseases in humans. RTN4IP1 was found to be crucial for mitochondrial respiration, with complexome profiling revealing its role as an assembly factor required for the complete assembly of complex I. Furthermore, we discovered that ECHS1 controls oxidative metabolism independently of its canonical function in fatty acid oxidation. Deletion of ECHS1 leads to reduced catabolism of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), which impairs the activity of lipoic acid-dependent enzymes such as pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). This deleterious phenotype can be rescued by restricting valine intake or catabolism in ECHS1-deficient cells

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Time-resolved mitochondrial-focused screening identifies regulatory components of oxidative metabolism

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins were extracted from WT and  RTN4IP1 KO 143B cells in 300µl of lysis buffer with protease inhibitor and 0.5 µl of endonucleases.  Samples were reduced and alkylated with TCEP and CAA for 30 minutes at 60ºC, and a total 100µg of protein for each sample was digested in S-Trap columns(PROTIFI, Farmingdale, NY) with trypsin (1:20) in reducing and alkylating (chloroacetamide) conditions. Tryptic peptides were dried in a speed-vacuum system and desalted using C18 tips.  Thereafter, they were subjected to independent LC-MS/MS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples (5 uL) were injected on a C18 PepMap trap column (5 µm, 300 µm I.D. x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) at 20 µL/min, in 0.1% formic acid in water, and the trap column was switched on-line to a C18 PepMap Easy‐spray analytical column (2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm I.D. x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific). Equilibration was done in mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water), and peptide elution was achieved in a 120 min gradient from 4% - 50% B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) at 250 nL/min. Data acquisition was performed in DDA (Data dependent acquisition) mode, in full scan positive mode. Survey MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, scan range was 375-1200 m/z, with Normalized Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 300 % and a maximum injection time (IT) of 45 ms. The top 20 most intense ions from each MS1 scan were selected and fragmented by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of 30%. Resolution for HCD spectra was set to 15,000 at m/z 200, with AGC target of 100 % and maximum ion injection time of 80 ms. Precursor ions with single, unassigned, or six and higher charge states from fragmentation selection were excluded.

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein identification and Label-free protein quantitation analysis Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched using three search engines(Mascot v2.7; MS Fragger and Sequest, against a target/decoy database built from sequences corresponding to the Homo sapiens reference proteome downloaded from Uniprot Knowledge database. Database included typical laboratory contaminants. Search parameters considered fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, and the following variable modifications: methionine oxidation, possible pyroglutamic acid from glutamine at the peptide N-terminus and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The peptide precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance was 0.02 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites. Spectra recovered by a False Discovery Rate (FDR) <= 0.01 filter were selected for quantitative analysis. Label-free Protein quantification used unique + razor peptides. The "t-test background based" statistical method was used for p-values calculation, and the Benjamin-Hochberg method was adopted for adjusted p-values. Those peptides and proteins differentially expressed with adjusted p-values < 0.1, 0.05 and 0.01 were considered as significant.

METHODS:
Methods
Cell culture
The screening was performed on either human HeLa and 143B cell lines, expressing the spCas9 protein. Subsequent experiments for studying the candidate proteins were performed on human HeLa cells. Lentiviruses were generated using 293T-X cells (Takara Bio, USA). Human skin fibroblasts were obtained from a healthy donor or a patient with a pathogenic variant in COQ7 gene, harboring a frameshift deletion (c.161_161delG, p.Val55fs) in exon 2 and a missense mutation (c.319 C > T, p.Arg107Trp) in exon 3.
Cell lines were cultured in media consisting of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), 2 mM l-glutamine, 10% inactivated fetal bovine serum, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). In case of experiments without branched-amino acids, cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine and P/S, and without valine, leucine, or/and isoleucine. Fibroblasts were cultured in high glucose DMEM-GlutaMAX medium supplemented 1% MEM non-essential amino acids, and 1% P/S. All cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
CRISPR/Cas9 sgRNA library infection
143B and HeLa cells were first infected with the lentiviral vector pLX_311 expressing the endonuclease Cas9 with 8 µg/ml polybrene for 48 h, and then selected with 5 µg/ml blasticidin for 1 week. After selection, to check Cas9 activity, a vial of cells was infected with the lentiviral vector pXPR_011 with 8 µg/ml polybrene for 48 h and then selected with 1 µg/ml puromycin for 4 days. Then, EGFP intensity was measured in Cas9-expressing and control cells by flow cytometry as described (Doench et al,). To titer the optimal cell density and volume of library lentiviruses, a viral tritation was performed. 36 × 106 143B or HeLa cells expressing Cas9 were infected with the Mito-library with 8 µg/ml polybrene, to achieve a 30–50% infection efficiency. Cells were infected for 48 h, then the medium was removed and cells were incubated in fresh medium with 1 µg/ml puromycin for 1 week. Then, two vials of 7 × 106 cells were harvested for the initial time point (t0h) and the rest of cells were separated in two different media: DMEM containing 25 mM glucose or 25 mM galactose as the sole source of sugar. Cells were incubated in both media and two vials of 7 × 106 cells were harvested at the different time points (t24h, t48h, t1week, and t2weeks) and frozen at −80 °C until DNA extraction.
Genomic DNA isolation and identification of sgRNA sequences
Genomic DNA was purified from one of the two vials of all screening samples using the Blood & Cell Culture DNA Midi Kit. DNA was resuspended in 100 µl of nuclease-free water. DNA concentrations were measured with a Nanodrop and 10 µg of DNA of each sample were subsequently sequenced. Samples were submitted and sequenced at the Broad Institute using a HiSeq2000 (Illumina) as previously described (Doench et al,), and sgRNA abundance was measured in all time points.
Data processing and clustering analysis
Counts data from sgRNA sequencing were initially processed using the MAGeCk software (Li et al,), which generated tables capturing gene presence and abundance at each time point. For each gene, the average presence was calculated based on individual sgRNA measurements. For clustering analysis, genes were grouped based on their temporal behavior using the “clust” software, as previously published (Abu-Jamous and Kelly,). The measures obtained from Hela and 143B cells were considered as replicates to ensure the robustness and reproducibility of the results. The clust algorithm follows several steps to identify optimal gene clusters: Seed Cluster Generation: clust produces a pool of “seed clusters” by applying k-means clustering multiple times to the data with different K values (4, 8, 12, 16, 20). Consensus Clustering: if multiple datasets are used, consensus clusters are calculated using the Binarization of Consensus Partition Matrices (Bi-CoPaM) method, which consolidates clusters across datasets to form consensus clusters. Evaluation of Seed Clusters: Seed clusters are evaluated using the M-N scatter plots technique, which favors larger clusters with low dispersion values and ensures distinct clusters. Selection of Elite Seed Clusters: Elite seed clusters are selected based on their performance in the M-N scatter plots, distinguished by their size and low within-cluster dispersion. Outlier Removal and Final Cluster Identification: The distributions of within-cluster dispersion are analyzed to remove outliers and identify genes that fit within clusters but were missed in previous steps. A range of parameters was explored to identify optimal clustering conditions, including Clustering Method: k-means, Number of Clusters (K values): 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, Tightness Weight: values between 1.5 and 16 were tested, Outliers Threshold (Q3): threshold values ranging from 1.8 to 4 were evaluated, Minimum Cluster Size: clusters were required to include at least 10 genes. Normalization Between Experiments: different types of normalizations were tested, including No normalization, Quantile normalization, Column-wise mean subtraction, and Normalization Per Gene: various methods were assessed, including No normalization, Z-score normalization, Division by the total (sum) of the row, and Linear transformation to the [0, 1] range. Gene Filtering: The option to exclude genes that did not show changes over time was considered. After extensive parameter testing, the best clustering results were achieved with the following settings: Quantile normalization between experiments, Tightness weight of 2.0, and Q3 threshold of 2.5. For enrichment analysis, clusters were evaluated for enrichment in genes known to be structural components or regulators of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. This enrichment was assessed using the hypergeometric distribution, which calculates the probability of observing a given number of genes from a specific category within a cluster by chance. The hypergeometric test parameters include N (Population size): the total number of genes analyzed; K (Number of success states in the population): the total number of genes known to be involved in the mitochondrial respiratory chain; n (Number of draws): the number of genes in the cluster; and k (Number of observed successes): the number of mitochondrial respiratory chain genes in the cluster. The p value obtained from the hypergeometric test indicates the statistical significance of the observed enrichment, with lower p values suggesting a non-random clustering of mitochondrial genes. Candidate Gene Selection: from the clusters showing significant enrichment, candidate genes lacking known functions were selected for further analysis. This approach aimed to identify new genes potentially involved in mitochondrial function and regulation.
Creation of knock-out cell lines
For the RTN4IP1, HIBCH, ACADS1, and ACAD8 loss of function, CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knock-outs were performed by transducing HeLa cells with LentiCRISPRV2 lentivirus expressing sgRNAs targeting the gene of interest as previously described (Shalem et al,). For the ECHS1 knockout, a doxycycline-inducible CRISPR-Cas9 system was used by transducing HeLa cells with TLCV2 lentivirus expressing sgRNAs of interest. Lentivirus were formed by transfection with PolyFect reagent and packaging plasmids in 70% confluent 293T-X cells. Transductions were performed by the addition of lentivirus-containing supernatants in the presence of 10 ug/mL polybrene for 24 h. Then the medium was replaced with fresh DMEM, followed by selection with puromycin (1 µg/ml) for 1 week. In the case of the doxycycline-inducible system, cells were treated with 1 µg/ml doxycycline for 5 days to induce Cas9 expression. Finally, a limiting dilution was performed to obtain different stable single-cell clones for the following experiments.
Cell proliferation
For proliferation assays, equal numbers of cells were seeded in 12-well plates and allowed to proliferate in DMEM containing glucose 25 mM or galactose 25 mM as the main source of sugar. Cells were Hoechst-stained and relative cell numbers counted using a BioTek Cytation 5 Cell Imaging Multimode Reader (Agilent) at the specific time points.
Mitochondria isolation
Cells were homogenized in medium A (0.32 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4) at 4 °C, using a Heidolph homogenizer (600 rpm, 30 strokes). The homogenate was centrifuged for 10 min at 600 × g and 4 °C. The supernatant was then centrifuged twice for 10 min at 10,000 × g and 4 °C. The pellet was resuspended in medium A and the concentration was quantified using the Bradford assay. Mitochondria were stored at 80 °C until the following experiments. Mitochondria that were run in a western blot were previously mixed with Laemmli buffer and boiled for 5 min at 95 °C.
Immunoprecipitation
To immunoprecipitate pyruvate dehydrogenase subunit E2 (DLAT), 4 × 106 cells were lysed with TBS (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8), 1% Triton X-100, and protease inhibitors for 10 min. Cells were centrifuged for 5 min at max speed and 4 °C, and supernatants were collected. About 30 µl of protein G-sepharose beads per sample were washed with 500 µl PBS and centrifuged for 1 min at 10,000 × g and 4 °C, and beads were resuspended in 200 µl PBS and mixed with 1:50 DLAT antibody for 10 min. Then, cell supernatants were incubated with DLAT antibody-bound beads overnight at 4 °C. Two different negative controls were also performed: a control with DLAT antibody-bound beads without cell lysate; and a control with beads and cell lysate without DLAT antibody. The following day, all samples were washed 6 times with 300 µl lysis buffer and centrifuge for 1 min at 10000 G and 4 °C. Finally, samples were mixed with Laemmli buffer, boiled for 5 min at 95 °C, and immunoblotted in a western blot.
SDS PAGE (western blot)
Samples were loaded onto a Bis-Tris gel in electrophoresis buffer (25 mM Tris base, 192 mM glycine, 0.1% SDS) and run at 120 V for 1 h. The gel was transferred to a PVDF membrane using the wet transfer method in transfer buffer (25 mM Tris base, 192 mM glycine, 20% methanol) at 100 V for 1 h at 4 °C. The membrane was blocked with 5% non-fat milk powder in phosphate-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST) for at least 30 min. Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer and incubated with membranes overnight at 4 °C. Membranes were washed 3 × 10 min with 1x PBST, incubated for 1 h at 25 °C with secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies or secondary fluorescent antibodies, washed again 3 × 10 min with 1x PBST, and developed using ECL in the Amersham IM-680 imager system. The following primary antibodies were used for western blot analysis: anti-lipoic acid (1/1000), anti-DLAT (1/1000), and anti-vinculin (1/1000).
Blue native gel electrophoresis (BNGE) and in gel activity
BNGE and CI in gel activity was performed as described (Balsa et al,). To solubilize the electron transport chain complexes, digitonin (4 g per g of mitochondrial protein) or 2% dodecyl-β-d-maltoside (DDM) was added in a buffer containing 1.5 M aminocaproic acid and 50 mM bis-tris/HCl (pH 8). Samples were heated at 80 °C for 5’ and centrifuged for 20’ at 4 °C max speed. About 100 µg of protein were loaded and run on 3–13% gradient Blue Native gels. The gradient gel was prepared in 1.5-mm glass plates using a gradient former connected to a peristaltic pump. Blue cathode buffer (50 mM trycine, 7.5 mM imidazole, 0.02% Coomassie blue G, pH 7) was added in the inner chamber to cover the wells, whereas outer chamber was filled with Anode buffer (25 mm imidazole/HCl, pH 7.0), and electrophoresis was run at 150 V for 30’ at 4 °C. Then, Blue cathode buffer was replaced by Cathode buffer (50 mM trycine, 7.5 mM imidazole, pH 7), and electrophoresis was run at 300 V for 1 h at 4 °C. After electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred onto PVDF membranes using the wet transfer method in Tansfer buffer (25 mM Tris base, 192 mM glycine, 20% methanol) at 100 V for 1 h at 4 °C. Finally, membranes were blocked with 5% non-fat milk powder in PBST for 30 min and sequentially probed with specific antibodies in the same manner as western blot. The following primary antibodies were used: NDUFA9 (1/1000), NDUFS2 (1/1000), ACAD9 (1/1000), SDHA (1/1000), UQCRQ (1/1000), NDUFV1 (1/1000), NDUFB7 (1/1000), and MT-CO1(1/1000).
To assess complex I in gel activity, the gel was incubated with 0.14 mM NADH and 1 mg/ml nitro blue tetrazolium in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) at 37 °C until the color developed.
Seahorse measurement of mitochondrial respiratory capacity
Bioenergetic profiles were measured using Seahorse XF96-Cell Mito Stress Test (Agilent Technologies). Cells were plated in Seahorse XF96-Cell culture Microplates at a density of 15,000 cells per well one day prior to the assay. One hour before the assay, the medium was changed to Agilent Seahorse XF DMEM medium supplemented with 10 mM d-glucose, 1 mM pyruvate, and 2 mM l-glutamine, to a final volume of 180 µM per well. Cells were incubated in a non-CO2 incubator at 37 °C for 1 h before the measurement. For oxygen consumption rate (OCR), the procedure included initial baseline recordings, followed by successive additions of specific metabolic inhibitors: 1 µM oligomycin, 0.75 µM FCCP, and 1 µM rotenone/antimycin. A total of three measurements of OCR and pH were taken for each drug injection. After seahorse measurements were done, cell nuclei were Hoechst-stained and relative cell numbers for loading control were counted using a BioTek Cytation 5 Cell Imaging Multimode Reader.
In isolated mitochondria: To minimize variability between wells, mitochondria were first diluted 10x in cold 1x MAS (70 mM sucrose, 220 mM mannitol, 10 mM KH2PO4, 5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM HEPES, 1.0 mM EGTA, and 0.2% (w/v) fatty acid-free BSA, pH 7.2 at 37 °C).
Stock substrates 0.5 M malic acid, 0.5 M pyruvic acid, or 0.5 M succinate and 0.2 mM ADP, were subsequently diluted to the concentration required for plating. Next, while the plate was on ice, 50 uL of mitochondrial suspension (containing 10 µg of mitochondria) was delivered to each well (except for background correction wells). The XF96-Cell culture Microplate was then transferred to a centrifuge equipped with a swinging bucket microplate adapter, and spun at 2000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation, 130 uL of prewarmed (37 °C) 1x MAS + substrates pyruvate/malate (10 mM/2 mM) or succinate (10 mM) were added to each well. In the case of succinate-driven respiration, 100 uM Rotenone was also added to the MAS buffer. The plate was then transferred to the Seahorse XF96 Analyzer, and the experiment was initiated.
Proteomics
For the whole-cell proteomic analysis, label-free quantitative proteomics was performed. Proteins were extracted in 300 µl of lysis buffer with protease inhibitor and 0.5 µl of endonucleases. Samples were reduced and alkylated with TCEP and CAA for 30 min at 60 °C, and a total of 100 µg of protein for each sample was digested in S-Trap columns. About 2 µl of the final tryptic digest was quantified by the QBIT method. About 1 µg of tryptic digest from each sample was analyzed by liquid nano-chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry, using a gradient of 120 min, a flow rate of 300 nl/min, and a reverse-phase column of 50 cm length and 75 µm internal diameter. The analysis was performed on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 liquid nano-chromatograph coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer, working in DDA mode. The MS1 and MS2 spectra obtained were loaded into the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 analysis suite for identification and quantification of the tryptic peptides in each sample. A database downloaded from UniprotKB containing Homo sapiens sequences as well as a number of typical laboratory contaminants (keratins, albumins, etc) was used as a database.
Blue-DiS proteomics
For complexome profiling, mitochondria were isolated from cell pellets (60–70 million). Briefly, pellets were resuspended in homogenizing buffer A (0.083 M sucrose, 10 mM MOPS, pH 7.2), incubated 2 min on ice, and homogenized in a tightly fitting glass-teflon homogenizer. Then an equal volume of buffer B (0.25 M sucrose, MOPS 30 mM, pH 7.2) was added. The following steps were performed as previously described. Three wells per condition were loaded each with 200 mg of 4 g/g digitonin-treated mitochondria in a 3–13% hand-casted native gels. After electrophoresis, gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 and sliced into 11 bands. Gel bands were subjected to in-gel digestion. After reduction with DTT (10 mM) and alkylation of Cys groups with iodoacetamide (50 mM), modified porcine trypsin (Promega) was added at a final ratio of 1:20 (trypsin-protein). Digestion proceeded overnight at 37 °C in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate at pH 7.8. Resulting tryptic peptides were loaded and washed on Evotips and separated in an Endurance 15 cm × 150 µm ID, 1.9 µm beads-EV1106 column using an Evosep one HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, San José, CA, USA) and a 30 SPD preprogrammed gradient.
MS analysis was performed using the data-independent scanning (DiS) method, with some modifications. Briefly, each sample was analyzed in a single chromatographic run covering a mass range from 390 to 1000 m/z. The DiS cycle consisted of 255 sequential HCD MS/MS fragmentation events with 2.5 m/z-windows from 390 to 900 m/z, and with 4 m/z-windows from 900 to 1000 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed using a 33 normalized collision energy. MS/MS scans were performed using 70 ms injection time, 3 × 105 ions AGC target setting, and 17,500 resolution. The whole cycle lasted a maximum of 18 s, depending on ion intensity during chromatography. For protein identification and quantification, all MS/MS spectra were analyzed using DIA-NN 1.8.1. A spectral library was generated (HS_MetOx_1miss_300-1800.predicted.speclib) and used to validate PSMs by filtering at 0.01 FDR. The maximum number of variable modifications was set to 1, and highly heuristic protein grouping was used to reduce the number of protein groups obtained. Fixed-width center of each elution peak was used for quantification, and interference removal from fragment elution curves was disabled.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD061050 and 10.6019/PXD061050
Quantification of CoQ9 and CoQ10 levels
Cell lipid extraction was performed by mixing the cells homogenate with 50 mM SDS and a proportion 2:1 of hexane:ethanol. After vortexing for 2 min in a glass tube, the mix was centrifuged at 2000 × g for 5 min (twice). The upper phase was transferred to a glass tube and evaporated with nitrogen gas. The residue was resuspended in 1-propanol. CoQ9 and CoQ10 levels were determined in the resultant extract using a reverse-phase C18 3.5 mm, 4.6 × 150 mm column coupled to electrochemical detection, as previously described (González-García et al,). Mobile phase consisted of methanol, ethanol, 2-propanol, acetic acid (500:500:15:15), and 50 mM sodium acetate at a flow rate of 0.9 ml/min. Then, a standard curve of CoQ9 and CoQ10 was used for a quantitative estimation. Results were normalized by milligram proteins, which were quantified in tissue or cell homogenates using the Bradford assay. The results were expressed in nanograms of CoQ per milligram of protein.
Graphics and statistics
Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism (version 9). Data are expressed as mean ±  s.e.m. (standard error of the mean). Comparisons for the two groups were calculated using unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-tests. Comparisons for more than three groups were calculated using one-way ANOVA. Unless otherwise specified, n represents the number of individual biological replicates and is represented in graphs as one dot per sample.
Gene Ontology enrichment analysis was performed with the ShinyGO version v0.741 of the website of South Dakota State University. RTN4IP1 top 100 codependencies for CRISPR were done with the DepMap Public database on the website https://depmap.org/portal/. Sankey diagrams were plotted with the package ggsankey in R version 4.4.0. Graphical figures were designed with Biorender.

RESULTS:
Results
Galactose-based CRISPR screening using a custom-developed Mito-library
We postulate that genome-wide galactose-based screenings conducted exclusively at very early time points may lack the capacity to discern regulatory components of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, which may manifest as more subtle, long-term phenotypes (Fig. 1A). To overcome these intrinsic constraints, we developed a new lentiviral library containing all the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes cataloged in human MitoCarta 3.0 (Rath et al,). A total of 1124 genes were targeted with a coverage of four sgRNAs per gene. HeLa and 143B cell lines constitutively expressing the Cas9 nuclease were infected with the Mito-library, cultured in glucose-rich medium, and selected with appropriate antibiotics for at least 7 days to allow for CRISPR-mediated gene knockout. Next, cells were seeded in medium containing either glucose or galactose as the sole sugar source. Finally, cells were harvested immediately after selection (t0h) and at multiple time points (t24h, t48h, t1week, and t2weeks), and genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated for sequencing to calculate the difference in abundance of each sgRNA between the initial seeding and final populations (Fig. 1B). We calculated log2 fold change values for the abundance of sgRNAs between galactose and glucose conditions (gal/glu ratio) at each time point for every gene relative to the initial population (t0h). A strong correlation between cell lines at the earliest time points was observed (24 h, r = 0.7711 and 48 h, r = 0.7663), which decreased over time (1 week, r = 0.5612 and 2 weeks, r = 0.2973) (Fig. EV1A). This could indicate cell-specific behaviors in multiple genes. Significant changes in genes (p < 0.05) for each time point were categorized as mild or severe according to their phenotype severity (mild: genes exhibiting a phenotype with a drop in fold change in the gal/glu ratio above 20% but below 35%. Severe: genes exhibiting a phenotype greater than 35%). For both mild and severe conditions, we observed a trend where genes with significant phenotypes increased over time, reaching a maximum at 1 week. This progressive increase was more accentuated in the category of genes with a severe phenotype, and overall suggests that incorporating a temporal resolution feature in this type of screening enhances the total number of genes detected (Fig. 1C). Notably, differences were observed in the total number of positive genes detected between HeLa and 143B cells, with the screening in HeLa cells yielding more positive genes and exhibiting a greater magnitude of the phenotype. Intriguingly, the percentage of genes exhibiting phenotypes begins to drop at 2 weeks. This observation suggests an accumulation of residual cells with low Cas9 activity, resulting in phenotypic behavior resembling wild-type cells due to the absence of gene editing. As expected, GO term analysis performed with genes exhibiting a phenotype identified pathways associated with cellular respiration, OXPHOS and ETC. However, we observed time-dependent variations when comparing early and late time points. This analysis revealed that mitochondrial translation and gene expression were the more significative pathways at early time points (24 and 48 h), while mitochondrial respiratory chain complex assembly emerged as the top pathway during later time points (1 and 2 weeks) (Fig. 1D). Collectively, this data indicates that employing small focused libraries in combination with multiple time points is a powerful strategy to uncover the temporal evolutions of phenotypic hierarchies, potentially enabling the identification of dynamic changes with subtle differences.
Temporal profiling of mitochondrial pathways essential for oxidative metabolism
We proceeded to analyze the data using the terms defined by MitoCarta 3.0, which established well-defined ontologies and sub-ontologies, most of which are incontrovertible. Nevertheless, many are unavoidably redundant, as bifunctional proteins are necessarily assigned to multiple ontologies and some missadscriptions to particular ontologies are documented. All the genes in our Mito-library were subdivided into the following functional categories: Dynamics and surveillance, Signaling, Mitochondrial central dogma (encompassing mtRNA translation, mtDNA maintenance, and mtRNA metabolism), Transport (encompassing protein import and small molecule transport), OXPHOS and metabolism; and Sankey diagrams were chosen as a visualization tool to depict the temporal dynamics of the phenotypic variations (Dataset EV1). Dynamics and surveillance, along with the Signaling pathway, exhibited notable enrichment in genes with no discernible phenotype, implying that genes within these categories may be dispensable for proliferation in galactose, likely owing to their limited influence on OXPHOS activity (Fig. 2A,B). The only genes displaying a severe phenotype were ATP5ME, CYCS, and SLC25A5, which also possess redundant functions allocated in other categories (Fig. EV2A,B). Several genes associated with the mitochondrial central dogma exhibited both mild and severe phenotypes beyond the 24-h time point, particularly those involved in translation (Fig. 2C). We also detected several genes involved in mtDNA maintenance and mtRNA metabolism, mutations in which are well-known to cause mitochondrial diseases in humans. Examples of these include TWNK, LRPPRC, POLRMT, and MTO1 (Mootha et al,; Ghezzi et al,) (Fig. EV2C). The transport pathway also exhibited mild and severe phenotypes in a time-dependent manner (Fig. 2D), exemplified by the newly discovered mitochondrial NAD+ transporter SLC25A51 and the ADP/ATP carrier SLC25A5, both of which play pivotal roles in oxidative metabolism (Fig. EV2D). Notably, we identified SFXN4 as one of the genes exhibiting a severe phenotype, consistent with recent studies demonstrating that, unlike SFXN1/2/3, which are involved in serine transport (Kory et al,), SFXN4 is necessary for the formation of the ND2 module of complex I (Jackson et al,) (Fig. EV2D). A significant number of genes within the Metabolism pathway exhibited a severe phenotype (Fig. 2E), particularly those involved in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. However, the majority of these genes are primarily associated with the biogenesis of iron-sulfur clusters, cofactors such as lipoic acid, and metallochaperones (Fig. EV2E). Undoubtedly, OXPHOS was the category with the most enriched genes displaying a positive phenotype (Fig. 2F). As expected, core components of the ETC complexes manifested phenotypic changes before the assembly factors. Exceptions to this pattern were observed for factors involved in the early assembly of CI (NDUFAF5, NDUFAF4, or NDUFAF8) and CIV (COX17, COA6, or COX16), which were detected as early as 24 h. Late detection of assembly factors with severe phenotype includes genes such as NDUFAF3, SURF1, TACO1, SCO1, LYRM7, or TIMMDC1, whose mutations are commonly found in patients with mitochondrial diseases (Fernandez-Vizarra and Zeviani,) (Fig. EV2F).
High-resolution dynamic timeline illustrating the evolving behavior of OXPHOS components
Galactose medium is commonly utilized to uncover defects in the OXPHOS system. In fact, at each time point, OXPHOS genes account for a significant percentage of the total genes with phenotype, indicating that this screening setup was particularly successful in detecting genes that impact the OXPHOS system (Fig. EV3A). Given our effectiveness in capturing OXPHOS-related genes, we proceeded with additional analysis focusing on the temporal fitness of each OXPHOS complex. We systematically divided each OXPHOS complex into its core subunits and assembly factors, tracking their phenotypic changes over time. In line with our initial hypothesis (Fig. 3A), we observed that the phenotype of core subunits tended to be more pronounced and occurred at earlier time points compared to assembly factors. Curiously, the only complex that did not follow this trend was complex CIV. We reasoned that this could be attributed to the presence of tissue-specific subunit paralogs for CIV (Cogliati et al,). Consequently, we repeated the analysis, categorizing CIV genes into two groups: those with paralogs and those without. The CIV paralog subunits did not show a phenotype, whereas those lacking paralogs exhibited a more dramatic response than the assembly factors (Fig. EV3B). We extended this rationale to other complexes. We partitioned Complex I into its constituent modules, namely N, Q, and P, and monitored the progression of each individually. The more aggressive phenotype was observed in genes belonging to the proton translocation module (P module), which is involved in proton pumping, compared to the N module and Q-module, which are involved in NADH oxidation or ubiquinone (Q) reduction, respectively (Kravchuk et al,) (Fig. EV3C). This suggests that the generation of the electrochemical proton gradient through CI proton pumping is more significant than its NADH dehydrogenase activity in sensitizing cells to galactose conditions. In addition to its role in proton translocation, the P module may also contribute to the biogenesis or proper assembly of other respiratory chain complexes, such as CIII and CIV, which could explain the more severe phenotype associated with its disruption (Moreno-Lastres et al,). This broader impact highlights the potential of the P module to influence overall respiratory chain integrity and mitochondrial function. For CII, we observed a consistent phenotype among its subunits, except for SDHA, which showed no phenotype (Fig. EV3D). Lastly, CV (or ATP synthase) was dissected into its major structural components, referred to as F1 and F0, and we tracked their phenotypic progression over time. Here, genes located within the F1 region, responsible for catalyzing the synthesis of ATP, exhibited a more pronounced phenotype (Fig. EV3E).
Our analysis also depicted a progressive increase in the detection of assembly factors showing positive scores across most complexes as time elapsed. This phenomenon was particularly evident in the context of CI, where the identification of assembly factors increased nearly threefold between 24 h and 1 week (Fig. 3A). In the case of CIII, we observed a steady linear escalation in assembly factors, peaking at 2 weeks, while for CV the maximum stabilizes at 1 week (Fig. 3A). Overall, this underscores the importance of incorporating multiple time points in this type of screenings facilitating the identification of a growing number of assembly factors and potential regulators of OXPHOS, including those with subtle phenotypes.
Identification of uncharacterized assembly factors and regulatory components of mitochondrial oxidative metabolism
We leveraged combined MAGeCK (Li et al,) and clustering (clust) computational analysis (Abu-Jamous and Kelly,) to identify novel, uncharacterized genes strongly correlated with the temporal dynamics of OXPHOS components. Raw data from both cell lines, encompassing various time points, were utilized to generate a ranked dataset comprising average phenotypic values at the gene level via MAGeCK. Subsequently, a clustering method using parameter sweeping was employed. This process identified a total of 23,933 phenotypic-based clusters. These clusters were evaluated through a hypergeometric distribution for their enrichment of genes associated with OXPHOS, both individually and collectively, encompassing core components and assembly factors. Finally, using the clusters with the best p value (p < 0.00001) we compiled a curated list comprising the most frequent gene candidates (Dataset EV2), which refers to genes found within the clusters but not functionally assigned as OXPHOS components (Fig. 3B). From this list, we directed our focus towards genes not previously linked to OXPHOS function. Based on these criteria, we selected RTN4IP1 and ECHS1 for follow-up validation (Fig. 3C,D). RTN4IP1 is classified as an uncharacterized gene in the Mitocarta database (Calvo et al,). Additionally, we found ECHS1 to be an intriguing candidate because it is the only gene involved in fatty acid oxidation (FAO) whose mutations in patients manifest clinical characteristics compatible with Leigh syndrome (LS), a disease commonly associated with OXPHOS defects.
RTN4IP1 depletion selectively impairs Complex I levels and activity
Among the list of candidates potentially implicated in OXPHOS activity, we further investigated reticulon 4-interacting protein 1 (RTN4IP1), also known as optic atrophy-10 (OPA10), due to its status as a poorly characterized gene lacking clear functional annotation (Angebault et al,). RTN4IP1 has recently been reported to function as an NADPH oxidoreductase involved in coenzyme Q (CoQ) biosynthesis (Park et al,). However, whether RTN4IP1 is essential for proper OXPHOS function and the molecular mechanism underlying the pathological phenotype observed in patients is unknown. We confirmed that RTN4IP1-null cells were unable to thrive under galactose and perished under these conditions (Fig. 4A). This phenotype was likely attributed to a disruption in OXPHOS functionality as whole-cell oxygen consumption was almost undetectable in RTN4IP1 KO cells (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, mitochondria from RTN4IP1 KO cells showed minimal oxygen consumption when driven by pyruvate and malate (Complex I substrates), while oxygen consumption driven by succinate (a Complex II substrate) was unaltered (Fig. 4C). These phenotypes were rescued by ectopically expressing RTN4IP1 in KO cells (Fig. EV4A–C). To elucidate the role of RTN4IP1, we utilized a previously established methodology to analyze the Achilles dataset via the cancer dependency map portal (DepMap) (Pacini et al,), aiming to identify genes that exhibit coessentiality with RTN4IP1. This analysis revealed that among the top 50 genes co-essential with RTN4IP1, a significant portion are implicated in essential cellular processes, including ETC function, mitochondrial translation/transcription, and CoQ biosynthesis. Notably, the most enriched genes were associated with mitochondrial complex I (Fig. 4D). Consistent with this observation, blue native analysis performed on digitonin-solubilized mitochondria revealed a total absence of mature forms and activity of CI super assembly with other complexes in RTN4IP1 KO cells (Fig. 4E,F). This defect was rescued by ectopic overexpression of RTN4IP1 in these cells (Fig. EV4D). To gain further insights into how RTN4IP1 disruption could impact cell biology, we conducted proteomics analysis on whole-cell samples from RTN4IP1 WT and KO cells. Among the approximately 4800 proteins identified, we observed an upregulation in 129, while 149 were significantly downregulated (Fig. EV4E; Dataset EV3). Pathway analysis revealed that the affected biological processes of upregulated proteins were related to cell-substrate adhesion and extracellular organization. Interestingly, downregulated proteins were primarily involved in the mitochondrial electron transport chain, NADH dehydrogenase complex assembly, and mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I (Fig. EV4F). Proteins downregulated in the OXPHOS system were notably enriched in complex I, whereas the protein subunits of complexes II, III, IV, and V did not exhibit a significant reduction (Fig. 4G). Intriguingly, the sole protein showing significant upregulation in complex I was ACAD9, an assembly factor that, in conjunction with ECSIT and NDUFAF1, is critical for the early steps of CI assembly (Xia et al,). These findings suggest the involvement of RTN4IP1 in the assembly of complex I, possibly at the level of the Q-module.
RTN4IP1 functions as an assembly factor for Complex I involved in the progression of the Q-ND1 module
To gain a comprehensive understanding of the effects of RTN4IP1 depletion on respiratory chain complex assembly and the steady-state levels of other mitochondrial proteins, we employed complexome profiling, a quantitative mass spectrometry assay that has previously yielded valuable insights into the investigation of other genes associated with complex I biogenesis (Guerrero-Castillo et al,).
We conducted an in-depth comparison of the BN-PAGE migration profiles using isolated mitochondria from WT and RTN4IP1 KO samples. Eleven distinct bands, corresponding to regions enriched with CI components of the ETC, were sliced and analyzed using mass spectrometry (Fig. EV5A). We identified 41 subunits, accounting for 93% of the mass of CI, and 14 bona fide assembly factors (Dataset EV4). As expected, the detection of peptides corresponding to RTN4IP1 in KO samples was severely limited (Fig. EV5B). When analyzing the different modules involved in CI assembly, we observed significant differences in the higher molecular weight bands. RTN4IP1 KO cells showed a substantial reduction in these CI-containing modules, likely at the level of supercomplexes, indicating a notable deficiency in the assembly of the mature form of CI. These differences were particularly pronounced in modules N/Q and Pd-b (Figs. 5A and  EV5C). We hypothesized that RTN4IP1 deficiency would lead to an accumulation of the specific module involved in its assembly, while the subsequent modules would experience a decrease in their levels. Indeed, we observed a specific accumulation of the Q-ND1 module in the KO, indicating a halt in the biogenesis progression of this module due to the absence of RTN4IP1 (Fig. 5B). To further test this, we used our complexome profiling data to calculate the ratio between KO and WT cells for all the assembly factors dedicated to each module and submodule in CI biogenesis. TIMMDC1, NDUFAF3, and NDUFAF4, which are critical factors for the assembly of the ND1 module (Sánchez-Caballero et al,), accumulated massively in the KO. Similarly, ACAD9 and, to a lesser extent, DMAC1, which are involved in the assembly of the ND2-Pp-b module (Xia et al,), were also increased in the KO samples. However, other components of this module, such as ECSIT, NDUFAF1, and TMEM126B, showed no alterations (Fig. 5C). The remaining assembly factors involved in the assembly of other modules, mostly at the interface between the Q- and N-module (NDUFAF2) and Pd-a module (TMEM70, DMAC2, and FOXRED1), were markedly reduced in the KO samples (Fig. 5C). These results were further validated by analyzing band 7, which revealed significant differences in these assembly factors between RTN4IP1 KO cells and controls (Fig. EV5D). This suggests that RTN4IP1 is likely to participate in assisting the late stages of CI assembly, specifically the binding of Q-ND1 module to N module, and Pd-b to Pd-a module. Further supporting this hypothesis, we observed that structural components Q-ND1 module, such as NDUFS7, NDUFS3, NDUFS8, NDUFA5, and ND1 itself, were among the subunits that were less reduced in KO samples compared to WT. Conversely, the KO/WT ratio of subunits from other modules that formed later in CI biogenesis, such as those belonging to the Pd-b and N-modules, was more reduced. This reduction was likely because these modules could not fully integrate to form a mature CI and consequently were degraded (Fig. 5D). Blue native analysis of dodecyl-β-d-maltoside (DDM)-solubilized mitochondria confirmed the accumulation of Q-ND1 module subassemblies. However, no accumulation was observed for the N-module or Pd-b module, as determined using specific antibodies against their respective subunits (Fig. EV5E). Collectively, these findings provide compelling evidence that RTN4IP1 is a critical factor in promoting the late-stage assembly of CI.
Since RTN4IP1 has been implicated in CoQ biosynthesis by assisting the O-methyltransferase function of COQ3 (Park et al,), we sought to determine if reduced CoQ levels were indeed the cause of the observed decrease in mitochondrial respiration. First, we confirmed that RTN4IP1 cells had reduced levels of CoQ10 and CoQ9, while the intermediate of the CoQ pathway, DMQ10, accumulated (Fig. EV5F). Next, we supplemented RTN4IP1 KO cells with CoQ10 for a week, and CI levels were assessed. Blue Native analysis did not show a restoration of CI levels in CoQ-treated cells, suggesting that the function of RTN4IP1 in CoQ biosynthesis is distinct from its role in CI assembly (Figs. 5E and EV5G). Additionally, COQ7 mutant cells, characterized by diminished CoQ levels due to defective CoQ synthesis (Wang et al,), exhibited comparable CI levels to those of control cells (Fig. EV5H), suggesting that the reduced CoQ levels are not responsible for the decreased CI levels. In summary, these findings suggest that RTN4IP1 not only regulates CoQ biosynthesis but also plays a crucial role as an assembly factor for CI, specifically within the Q-module responsible for CoQ binding (Fig. 5F).
Disrupting ECHS1 leads to the accumulation of valine catabolism intermediates and impairs lipoic acid-dependent enzymes
Unlike the other FAO enzymes, mutations in ECHS1 result in clinical presentations characterized by Leigh syndrome (Sun et al,). This pathology is believed to be caused by combined respiratory chain deficiency secondary to ECHS1 disruption (Sakai et al,), although the molecular mechanism linking these processes remains unknown. Indeed, we confirmed that ECHS1 was the only enzyme involved in FAO that scored positive in our screening data (Fig. 6A). ECHS1 KO cells were unable to sustain long-term growth in galactose (Fig. 6B) and displayed reduced mitochondrial respiration (Fig. 6C). Of note, cell lacking ACADS1, which is involved in an upstream step in FAO, did show normal oxygen consumption levels. Ectopic expression of ECHS1 rescued these phenotypes (Fig. EV6A–C). To determine whether impaired oxygen consumption was due to defects in the levels of the respiratory OXPHOS complexes, we performed Blue Native analysis in ECHS1 WT and KO digitonin-solubilized mitochondria. We detected a subtle decrease at the level of supercomplexes without affectation of the isolated forms of complexes CIII, CIV and CII (Fig. 6D). Nonetheless, these marginal changes are unlikely to explain the observed decrease in respiration and galactose-mediated cell death in ECHS1 knockout cells. We were puzzled by the specific phenotype of ECHS1 compared to the rest of the FAO enzymes and sought to corroborate whether inhibiting FAO could yield similar phenotypes. Treatment with etomoxir, which inhibits FAO by preventing the import of long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondria, did not alter cell proliferation or survival of galactose-grown cells (Fig. EV6D). This suggests that FAO does not account for the phenotype observed in the ECHS1 cells. As ECHS1 may also participate in the catabolism of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) (Ferdinandusse et al,), we examined our screening datasets for enzymes involved in BCAA metabolism that exhibit a similar phenotype to ECHS1. Interestingly, HIBCH, a 3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA Hydrolase that lies downstream of ECHS1 in valine catabolism, also yielded positive results (Fig. EV6E). Furthermore, HIBCH KO cells also exhibited reduced oxygen consumption and a proliferative defect when grown under galactose conditions (Fig. EV6F,G). This suggests that disrupting valine metabolism, particularly at these two steps, can compromise mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, sensitizing cells to galactose-induced cell death. We reasoned that if disrupting BCAA metabolism compromised mitochondrial oxidative capacity somehow, then limiting access to the BCAAs valine, leucine, and isoleucine should ameliorate the phenotype. Consistent with this hypothesis, seahorse analysis revealed that ECHS1 KO cells cultured in a medium lacking BCAAs exhibited elevated levels of oxygen consumption (Fig. 6E). Next, we dissected the contribution of each specific amino acid by culturing ECHS1 KO cells in media without either valine, leucine, or isoleucine. Interestingly, ECHS1 KO cells cultured without valine showed a significant restoration in their oxygen consumption levels compared to those same cells cultured without leucine or isoleucine and were able to sustain growth under galactose conditions (Figs. 6F and EV6H). This indicates that disrupting valine metabolism by ablating ECHS1 or HIBCH causes a deficit in oxidative metabolism. Notably, supplementation of ECHS1 KO cells with high doses of valine was enough to further decrease their mitochondrial respiration (Fig. EV6I). To further strengthen these results, we restricted BCAAs utilization proximal to ECHS1 by deleting the ACAD8 gene, which acts upstream of ECHS1. ECHS1/ACAD8 double KO cells showed a similar restoration in their oxygen consumption compared to ECHS1 KO cells deprived of BCAAs (Fig. 6G). One potential shared mechanism underlying the specific phenotype observed exclusively in ECHS1 and HIBCH KO cells is the accumulation of upstream metabolites methacrylyl-CoA and 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA. These metabolites, characterized by their high reactivity, have the potential to form adducts through interaction with sulfhydryl groups (Haack et al,). We leveraged our screening datasets to identify top-scoring genes and pathways in which thiol groups play an essential role in their function. Lipoic acid metabolism emerged as the top-ranked pathway in our analysis, correlating with ECHS1 at later time points (Fig. EV6J,K). All the genes involved in the formation of lipoic acid exhibited a pronounced phenotype under galactose conditions (Fig. EV6L). Lipoic acid serves as a cofactor for numerous mitochondrial enzymes, including pyruvate dehydrogenase, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (Solmonson and DeBerardinis,). In our screening, genes associated with the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHX, PDHB, DLAT, DLD, and PDHA1) exhibited similar scores to ECHS1, whereas genes related to branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (BCKDHA and BCKDHB) did not display any notable phenotype (Fig. EV6M). In this regard, pyruvate dehydrogenase activity was reduced in the ECHS1 KO cells, and it was restored in ECHS1/ACAD8 double KO cells (Fig. 6H). This correlated with decreased levels of total protein lipoylation and reduced lipoylation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex subunit E2 (dihydrolipoyl transacetylase) in mitochondrial extracts of ECHS1 KO cells, which was rescued in ECHS1/ACAD8 double KO cells (Figs. 6I and EV6N). Further experiments confirmed that immunoprecipitated pyruvate dehydrogenase complex subunit E2 showed reduced levels of lipoylation in ECHS1 KO cells, which were again normalized in double KO cells (Fig. 6J).
Altogether, these results unveil a mechanism whereby the disruption of branched-chain amino acid metabolism, specifically at the enzymatic steps involving ECHS1 and HIBCH, impairs mitochondrial pathways reliant on sulfur metabolism. This impairment leads to decreased levels of protein lipoylation, particularly affecting enzymes such as pyruvate dehydrogenase and, likely, OGDH, which ultimately compromises oxidative metabolism and reduces cellular fitness (Fig. 6K).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Mitochondria are unique and complex organelles that perform essential functions in many aspects of cell biology (Monzel et al,). Arguably, the most extensively understood role of the mitochondria, and the reason it is often referred to as the “powerhouse of the cell”, is its function in cellular energy production through the oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) (Vafai and Mootha,). This bioenergetic process necessitates the transfer of electrons to molecular oxygen through the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC), which involves four multi-subunit complexes (known as complex I–complex IV) and two mobile electron carriers, ubiquinone (also known as coenzyme Q10) and cytochrome c (cyt c). As a result of the respiratory chain’s activity, a transmembrane proton gradient is generated, which complex V (or ATP synthase) harnesses to produce ATP (Enríquez,). The OXPHOS system, central to cellular energy production, is intricately intertwined with the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, where diverse metabolic pathways, including glucose, glutamine, fatty acids, and amino acids, converge to supply substrates. This nexus intimately connects nutrient intake to mitochondrial energy generation. Mutations that compromise these critical metabolic pathways are the root cause of a heterogeneous group of genetically inherited disorders referred to as mitochondrial diseases, for which no cures are currently available (DiMauro and Schon,; Thorburn,).
A greater understanding of mitochondrial genetics has led to improved diagnosis over the past few years. Nonetheless, a significant number of patients with biochemically established mitochondrial diseases lack mutations in known mitochondrial disease genes, implying the existence of unidentified proteins involved in OXPHOS function (Legati et al,). In addition, there have been numerous reported cases of mutations in genes whose function is not directly linked to OXPHOS, suggesting that these genes might have additional, unknown functions related to oxidative metabolism (Rodenburg,). Even though we now possess a very detailed picture of the core proteins that comprise the OXPHOS complexes, the list of assembly factors and regulatory components is far from being completed. More surprisingly, it has been estimated that nearly 15% of the mitochondrial proteome lacks precise functional annotation (Rensvold et al,; Pagliarini et al,). Thus, a complete inventory of genes that are required for the proper function of the OXPHOS system would provide a molecular framework for the investigation of mitochondrial biology and pathogenesis.
It is widely reported that OXPHOS-deficient cells are viable in glucose-rich medium but cannot survive when glucose is replaced with galactose (Balsa et al,). While this selective lethality has been exploited in the past to perform genetic screens, these attempts were not particularly tailored to identify regulatory components, but rather genes with strong phenotypes (Bayona-Bafaluy et al,; Arroyo et al,). This limited success may be attributed to several factors. First, the use of RNAi technology often results in only partial knockdown, necessitating complete knockdown to produce a phenotypic consequence (Le Vasseur et al,). Second, the utilization of large genome-wide libraries makes it particularly challenging to detect the depletion of a gene in a highly complex library when the fitness effect is modest between the two conditions being compared (Thomas et al,). Third, all of these studies focused solely on one specific time point, and it is likely that understanding temporal dynamics regarding the phenotype is necessary to capture a wide spectrum of gene candidates. Consequently, the identification of OXPHOS essential genes with pronounced phenotypes may overshadow the subtle effects of potential assembly factors and regulatory components that exhibit more modest phenotypes.
To overcome these challenges, we have generated a small CRISPR loss-of-function library exclusively containing all the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes (Mito-library). Subsequently, we carried out a galactose-based screening at multiple time points to uncover new regulators controlling OXPHOS function and mitochondrial metabolism. We assembled a list of genes vital for mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and developed a dynamic timeline that delineates the extensive network of components within mitochondrial pathways, particularly focusing on the OXPHOS complexes. Employing MAGeCK and clustering (clust) computational analyses, we identified two poorly characterized genes, RTN4IP1 and ECHS1, which exhibited significant correlation with established components of OXPHOS. RTN4IP1 was found to be critical for mitochondrial respiration and the assembly of complex I, while ECHS1 was revealed to regulate oxidative metabolism independently of its typical role in fatty acid oxidation. Deficiency in ECHS1 results in the buildup of toxic intermediates of BCAA metabolism, which adversely affect enzymes dependent on lipoic acid. Overall, we have demonstrated that conducting temporal dynamic screenings using our Mito-library is a robust approach to identify novel uncharacterized genes controlling the function and integrity of OXPHOS and mitochondrial metabolism.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary information
Expanded view
These authors contributed equally: Marcos Zamora-Dorta, Sara Laine-Menéndez.
Supplementary information
Expanded view data, supplementary information, appendices are available for this paper at 10.1038/s44319-025-00459-9.
Data availability
Data from the CRISPR screenings are available in datasets EV1 and EV2. Proteomic datasets are available in EV3 and EV4 and have been deposited via ProteomeXchange under the identifier PXD061050. Additional datasets used and/or analyzed in this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
The source data of this paper are collected in the following database record: biostudies:S-SCDT-10_1038-S44319-025-00459-9.