PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Peptide counting
keywords: Membrane proteins; Footprinting

ABSTRACT:
We introduce IC-FPOMP (in-cell fast photochemical oxidation of MPs), a method enabling in situ footprinting of IMPs within live cells. IC-FPOMP generates reactive oxygen radicals from several precursors nearby the membrane. We achieve high-throughput and rapid footprinting of IMPs. IC-FPOMP of two human IMPs (human glucose transporter-hGLUT1 and human gamma glutamyl carboxylase-hGGCX) were successful, providing comprehensive footprinting of both the transmembrane and extramembrane regions.  IC-FPOMP offers insights on IMP structure-function relationships in cell for the first time, facilitating drug discovery.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
In-Cell Fast Photochemical Oxidation of Integral Membrane Proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Workflow for Fast Oxidation of hGLUT1 in cell: IC-FPOMP. (1) Cell preparation: 150 mL of 293S cells were collected by centrifugation in five 40 mL aliquots at 600-800g for 10 min. From this, a 1 mL cell aliquot was saved, spun down, and frozen for further analysis using FSEC.  The sample suspension was incubated for 30 minutes before the laser irradiation. (2) Laser footprinting: the laser optics were modified for footprinting cells in a 96-well plate format at a high photon density for a 355 nm laser beam (Fig. 1). The beam originated from a QuantaRay DCR-2A (10) Nd:YAG laser equipped with a harmonic generator crystal set. The second and third harmonic crystals were oriented in the fundamental of the laser output to maximize 355 nm energy. The beam was transmitted the optic table and was reflected 90° with the fundamental and second harmonic components allowed to pass straight through to a beam dump. The reflected 355 nm beam was transmitted horizontally until it was reflected 90° downward vertically by 355-nm beam splitter. A 250-mm FL plano-convex lens reduced the beam size to ~5 mm as it strikes the cells held on a plate. Each pixel is ~4x4 mm in area. Timing of both the laser lamp and the Q-switch triggering pulse sequences were achieved by a programmable Parallax Inc. P8X32A microcontroller (the X-Y plate stepping will be improved to move the tissue pixel by pixel). The cells were aliquoted into each well (50 μL/well) and irradiated by the laser beam (100 pulses/well) at energy of 30mJ/pulse.  After the footprinting, the cells were collected into one tube for further purification and digestion. The membrane proteins were denatured and purified by adding 400 μL of denaturing solution (8 M urea in NH4HCO3), followed by mixing and three repetitions of wash steps to remove lipids and salts. The resulting supernatant was saved after the first wash. Subsequently, 250 μL of 50 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) in buffer was added and incubated at 55 °C for 30 min on an orbital shaker. Next, 250 μL of 100 mM iodoacetamide in buffer was added, and the resulting solution incubated in the dark for an additional 30 min. Solvents were removed by centrifugation, and the protein-bound beads were transferred to a low-protein binding tube. The digestion was performed using 2 μL each of 0.5 µg/mL Chymotrypsin and Trypsin (Promega) in digestion buffer (NH4HCO3), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37 °C in a water bath, covered with tape and aluminum foil. The next morning, the peptides were collected by centrifugation, and an additional 50 μL of digestion buffer was added for further collection. Finally, 1 μL of formic acid was added to the collected peptides.

DATA PROCESSING:
Detection by Mass spectrometry. A C18 reversed-phase column (purchased from ThermoFisher, 5 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm* 30 cm) was utilized to load the sample solution at a flow rate of 3 μL/min for 10 min for desalting purposes. Peptide separation was carried out using an analytical column (Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation) containing C18 reversed-phase material in silica tubing. High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) gradients were established with solvent (A) consisting of water with 0.1% formic acid by volume and solvent (B) consisting of 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid by volume. The HPLC gradient was: 0-10 min: 2% B, 10-90 min: 2% B to 60% B, 90-100 min: 2% B to 98% B, 100-105 min: 90% B, 105-115 min: 90% B to 2% B, and equilibrated at 2% B for 5 min. For downstream detection, a Thermo Q Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Massachusetts, USA) was coupled with a Nanospray Flex source. The spray voltage was set at 3.0 kV and a temperature of 250 °C. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive-ion mode for a range of 300-2000 m/z at a mass resolving power of 70000 for MS1 and 16700 for MS/MS. The data-dependent mode was used for acquisition, where the 10 most abundant ions were selected for "higher energy" collisional dissociation (HCD). Signals with a charge state of +1 and > +6 were excluded.  Data analysis: The nHPLC-MS/MS raw files were processed by the ByonicTM software (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA, USA) to reveal sequence coverage (20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 60 ppm fragmentation mass tolerance, and CID/HCD fragmentation for searching).  The automatically searched results by the ByonicTM software were checked manually. Specifically, all entries of identified peptides and the product ion (MS/MS identifications) were validated. A true positive entry should have a matching precursor ion mass and confident MS/MS supporting assignment of its modified residue. Confident MS/MS that locates modification to a specific residue in a peptide should have either a series of b- or y-ions to support assignment. Modification levels for specific peptides were calculated with ByologicTM software (Protein Metrics). Residue-level modifications were determined by analyzing the product-ion spectra and further confirmed through manual examination of the MS/MS fragmentation data.