PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Metabolism; Phosphinic compounds; Multi-omics; Proteomics; Bacteria; Antimicrobials

ABSTRACT:
The proteome of Escherichia coli was established by shotgun proteomics and changes upon treatment with phosphinic compounds were measured, highlighting the potential of these new antimicrobials.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Escherichia coli proteome analysis to decipher the molecular impact of phosphinic antimicrobials

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed with a Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT against a database comprising all known protein sequences from Escherichia coli K-12, the results were then parsed, spectral counts were extracted and compared.

METHODS:
Experimental procedures
Materials
Ingredients for Lysogeny Broth (LB) medium were from BD-Difco (Becton, Dickinson and Company). Sodium chloride, ammonium chloride and D-glucose were from Carlo Erba Reagents. Ingredients for E medium were purchased from VWR International and AppliChem.
Deuterium oxide (D2O) containing 3-(trimethylsilyl)-2,2,3,3-tetradeuteropropionic acid (TSP) and methanol were from VWR International and Sigma-Aldrich, respectively. Pyridoxal hydrochloride was from Calbiochem, AlCl3·6H2O was from Acros.
Ion-exchange chromatography was carried out on Dowex 50W × 8, H+-form, 100 to 200 mesh (BioRad, USA). TLC was carried out on Kieselgel 60 F254 plates (Merck, Germany).
Synthesis and analysis of phosphinic compounds
L-Glu-γ-PH was synthesized as described elsewhere. The powder was dissolved in Milli-Q water to obtain a solution, which was adjusted to pH 7.0 by dropwise addition of 5 M NaOH. The stock solution (2.8 mg/ml; ∼17 mM) was filter-sterilized, dispensed into aliquots, and stored at −20 °C.
To synthesize α-KG-γ-PH, rac-Glu-γ−PH, prepared as described elsewhere, was used as starting material. A solution of rac-Glu-γ−PH (240 mg, 1.44 mmol), pyridoxal hydrochloride (422 mg, 2.07 mmol), and AlCl3·6H2O (50 mg, 0.21 mmol) in water (100 ml) was adjusted to pH 6.7 with aq. NH4OH and refluxed in argon atmosphere for 90 min. The reaction mixture was concentrated in vacuo to ∼ 6 ml and α-KG-γ-PH was isolated by column chromatography on Dowex 50W × 8 column (100–200 mesh, H+-form, V = 40 ml) eluting with water. Acidic fractions were analyzed by 31P NMR and those containing target H-phosphinate were combined and evaporated to dryness in vacuo. The residue was co-evaporated in vacuo with water (3 × 5 ml) and dried in vacuo over P2O5/KOH to give α-KG-γ-PH (80 mg, i.e. 34% yield) as a clear glass-like semisolid oil.
α-KG-γ-PH was dissolved in Milli-Q water and the solution was adjusted to pH 7.0 with 5 M NaOH. The stock solution (4 mg/ml; ∼ 24 mM) was filter-sterilized, dispensed into aliquots, and stored at −20 °C.
1H NMR and 31P NMR spectra were recorded on a 500 MHz Bruker spectrometer equipped with a QXI probe and a 31P SEX probe, respectively. The compounds were suspended in D2O with sodium 3-trimethyl-1-propanesulfonate (TSP) which was used as an internal standard for 1H NMR, whereas 85% H3PO4 was used as an external standard for 31P NMR. Chemical shifts are given in parts per million (ppm), the letter “J” indicates spin-spin coupling constants which are given in Hertz (Hz).1H NMR (500.1 MHz,): δ: 6.97 (dt, 1H, 1JHP 512.98 Hz, 3JHH 1.75 Hz, H-P), 2.96 [dt 3JHHa 7.47 Hz, 3JHP11.55 Hz, CH2-C(O)], 1.93 (m, 2H, CH2-P). 31P NMR (202.49 MHz, D2O, pH 7.02): δ: 28.13 (s). The NMR spectra of the studied compounds are shown in Fig. S5.
Bacterial strain and culture media preparation
The wild-type E. coli K12 strain MG1655 was used in this study and cultivated or resuspended in one of the following media, sterilized by autoclaving. The rich medium used was LB consisting of 10 g/l Bacto-Tryptone, 5 g/l Bacto-Yeast Extract, and 5 g/l NaCl dissolved in Milli-Q water and pH brought to 7.4 by dropwise addition of 5 M NaOH. The chemically defined medium was medium E, pH 7.0, which was prepared from a 50 times concentrated (50X) E medium, diluted to the working concentration (1X), having the following composition: 0.2 g/l MgSO4•7H2O, 2.0 g/l citric acid•H2O, 10.0 g/l anhydrous K2HPO4, 3.5 g/l NaNH4HPO4•H2O (https://www.uniroma1.it/en/brevetto/102016000098005). This was then supplemented with 20 g/100 ml (w/v) D-glucose to attain a final concentration of 0.4 g/100 ml and obtain the EG medium. The stock solution of D-glucose 20 g/100 ml (w/v) in Milli-Q water was sterilized separately by autoclaving for 15 min at 121 °C. The physiological solution was prepared by dissolving NaCl 0.9 g/100 ml (w/v) in Milli-Q water and sterilized by autoclaving. To revive cells, bacteria from 20% glycerol stocks stored frozen at −80 °C were streaked twice (i.e. on two consecutive days) on LB-agar plates and incubated at 37 °C overnight. For every assay, a pre-inoculum was carried out by transferring a single colony from freshly streaked bacteria on an LB-agar plate in LB medium and cultivating them by incubation at 37 °C, overnight and under vigorous shaking.
Growth culture conditions and determination of minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)
Bacterial growth curves and MICs were determined in chemically defined medium EG according to the microtiter broth dilution method as described elsewhere, using the microplate reader Biotek EL×808. The microplate was shaken for 30 s every 15 min to resuspend the bacteria. Briefly, overnight cultures (2 ml) of E. coli K12 strain MG1655 were centrifuged at 1500g for 15 min at 15 °C and the cell pellets resuspended in an isovolume of physiological solution (NaCl 0.9 g/100 ml, w/v) and the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) was brought to 1.0. The resuspended cells were diluted (1:25) in 2 ml of EG and grown at 37 °C under 150 rpm up to OD600 = 0.5 (7–8 h from the inoculum), then diluted again (1:25) in 3 ml of EG. This suspension was diluted 1:10 in the same medium in a 96-well microplate preloaded with serial dilutions of the compound(s) to be tested. The final volume in each well was 200 μl. The number of colony-forming units (CFU)/ml at time zero was between 0.5-1×106, following the CLSI guidelines for antimicrobial susceptibility testing. For each compound tested, at least three independent assays were performed.
Sample collection for metabolomic and proteomic analyses
Starting from overnight pre-cultures, the bacterial cultures to be subjected to omics analyses were prepared as described above, but with two key differences, i.e. the OD600 was brought to 2.0 and the first inoculum in EG medium was in 5 ml. When OD600 reached 0.5 (typically after 5 h), a 400 μl aliquot was used to inoculate 100 ml of EG medium (dilution 1:250), containing either L-Glu-γ-PH or α-KG-γ-PH at concentrations close to MIC50, i.e. 3.5 μg/ml and 8.5 μg/ml, respectively. For the untreated samples, a 280 μl aliquot was diluted 1:10 in 2.52 ml of EG medium and then 500 μl was used for the inoculum in 100 ml of EG medium (total dilution 1:2000). The eight times higher dilution in the control culture was necessary to ensure that after overnight growth it reached the same OD600 1.0 ± 0.1, as the treated cultures. Two biological replicates, from two independent pre-cultures, were used each time to inoculate a total of six flasks, i.e. two flasks for each experimental condition (i.e. control/untreated cells, L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated cultures). This was carried out 5 times to obtain a total of ten different biological replicates for each experimental condition. A sixth additional experiment was performed with four biological replicates of the control condition because in two of the above experiments, after the overnight growth, the untreated/control reached OD600 1.78 to 2.2, and therefore the OD600 was considered not suitable in the downstream analysis.
The experimental workflow is depicted in Fig. S2. Bacteria cultures were incubated at 37 °C, 150 rpm until the late-exponential phase (OD600 = 1.0 ± 0.1), which was reached after 17.5 ± 0.9 h, 25.2 ± 2.8 h and 23.5 ± 2.5 h for the untreated cultures, the L-Glu-γ-PH -treated and the α-KG-γ-PH -treated cultures, respectively. For the metabolomic and proteomic analyses, samples were split in two 50-ml tubes and immediately transferred to a −35 °C bath (Julabo FP50-HE) for 2.5 min, for metabolism quenching. Then, the tubes were centrifuged for 5 min at 5000g at 4 °C, to obtain the bacterial pellets to which two different protocols were applied to prepare samples for metabolomic and proteomic analysis.
Metabolomic studies
The cell pellets were washed in 1.5 ml of ice-cold physiological solution, then transferred in a 2-ml microcentrifuge tube and centrifuged for 5 min at 5000g at 4 °C; the supernatants were discarded, and each pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of ice-cold physiological solution. The OD600 was measured using a 5-μl aliquot diluted 1:200. Based on the OD600 readings, the volume corresponding to OD600 = 25 (∼350 μl) was transferred to another 2 ml microcentrifuge tube and centrifuged for 5 min at 5000g, at 4 °C. The physiological solution was discarded, and the pellets were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −20 °C.
Proteomic studies
The cell pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of ice-cold physiological solution and transferred to 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes. Samples were resuspended in ice-cold physiological solution and centrifuged twice for 5 min at 5000g, at 4 °C to achieve complete removal of the residual spent medium; then the weight of each pelleted material was measured (102.7 ± 8.5 mg) and the samples were immediately frozen and stored at −20 °C.
Metabolite extraction, NMR data collection, and processing
Pellets stored for metabolomics studies were thawed on ice, resuspended in 750 μl of ice-cold methanol (60% v/v), submitted to three freeze-thaw cycles using liquid nitrogen, and centrifuged for 5 min at 12,900g, at 4 °C. The supernatants were transferred into 1.5-ml microcentrifuge tubes, and the extraction procedure was repeated a second time on the residual pellet. Samples were then concentrated down to dryness using a speed-vacuum concentrator (Vacufuge plus, Eppendorf) and stored at −20 °C until use. Dried extracts were dissolved in 250 μl of 0.35 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, 451.5 μl D2O with 2 mM sodium azide, and 50 μl D2O with 3.2 mM TSP (final volume 751.5 μl per sample). Subsequently, 600 μl of each sample was transferred to a 5 mm NMR tube for 1H NMR spectra acquisition. For 31P NMR, after 1H NMR acquisition, samples were pooled, concentrated by speed-vacuum concentrator (as above) dissolved in 1 ml of D2O, and transferred to a new 5 mm tube. Prior to 31P NMR spectra acquisition, samples were checked for pH, which ranged between 7.1 to 7.4.
1H NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker Avance II+ 800 MHz spectrometer equipped with a 5 mm TCI H&F/C/N/D cryoprobe. All 1D 1H were acquired at 298.15 K and using a noesygppr1d pulse program, in which water pre-saturation occurred during mixing time and relaxation delay. Acquisition parameters were the following: 80 scans, relaxation delay of 4 s, mixing time of 10 ms, spectral width of 20.0237 ppm. The size of free induction decay (FID) was 128k points. Processing of spectra was performed with Bruker TopSpin 3.2. All FIDs signals were multiplied by an exponential function, followed by Fourier Transformation. Spectra were manually phase and baseline corrected. For the spectral assignment, 2D NMR spectra were acquired for some samples: 1H-1H TOCSY (dipsi2esgpph pulse sequence, 512 points in F1 and 2048 points in F2; 128 scans; relaxation delay of 1.5 s; mixing time of 60 ms; sweep width of 8012.12 Hz for both dimensions); 1H-13 C HSQC (hsqcetgpsisp2 pulse sequence, 512 points in F1 and 2048 points in F2; 128 scans; relaxation delay of 1.5 s; sweep width of 33,207.441 Hz in F1 and 12,820.513 Hz in F2) and 1H J-resolved (jresgpprqf pulse sequence, 100 points in F1 and 8192 points in F2; 16 scans; relaxation delay of 2 s; sweep width of 78.113 Hz in F1 and 133,68.984 in F2).
31P NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker Avance II 500 MHz spectrometer equipped a 5 mm SEX P-H-D probe. 31P NMR spectra were acquired at 298.15 using a proton decoupled zgpg pulse program. Acquisition parameters are the following: 1000 scans, relaxation delay of 1 s, spectral width of 99.5630 ppm. The size of free induction decay (FID) was 128k points.
Processing of spectra was performed with Bruker TopSpin 3.2. All processed 1D 1H NMR spectra were grouped and transformed into a matrix, i.e. each column was a spectrum, while each row was one of the 128k points that make up the FID. The spectra were aligned and calibrated according to the chemical shift of TSP at 0.00 ppm. For the untargeted analysis, the region of water (4.70–4.95 ppm) was removed. After trimming the interfering peaks, only the region between 0.15 to 10.00 ppm was used. All aforementioned steps were done according to standard procedure and completed using an R software environment for statistical computing (v3.6.2) with homemade scripts. The generated matrix was used to assess the presence of outliers in the experimental groups.
The Chenomx NMR suite 8.12 (Chenomx, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada) was used for the identification and quantification of individual metabolites using the Chenomx reference library for 800 MHz NMR and the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) library.
Proteomic analysis and mass spectrometry proteomic data
Each bacterial pellet was resuspended in LDS 1X (Invitrogen) consisting of 106 mM Tris-HCl, 141 mM Tris-base, 10% glycerol, 2% lithium dodecyl sulfate, 0.51 mM EDTA, 0.175 mM phenol red, and 0.22 mM SERVA Blue G250, buffered at pH 8.5 and supplemented with 2.5% ß-mercaptoethanol. The volume of LDS 1X used was 12.5 μl per mg of pellet. Cells were lysed by incubation for 10 min at 99 °C followed by 30 s sonication with a disruptor set at 80% amplitude with impulsion of 1 s every 4 s, and bead-beating lysis with a mixture of beads (0.1 mm silica beads, 0.1 and 0.5 mm glass beads) in a Precellys Evolution instrument (Bertin technologies) as recommended. After centrifugation at 16,000g for 3 min, the supernatants were collected, diluted with four volumes of LDS 1X, and then heated at 99 °C for 5 min. For each sample, the proteins contained in a volume of 15 μl (corresponding to 0.24 mg of the bacterial pellet) were subjected to electrophoresis on a NuPAGE 4 to 12% Bis-Tris (Invitrogen) gel. After 5 min migration at 200 V in MES buffer (Invitrogen), the proteins were stained with ready-to-use Coomassie SimplyBlue SafeStain (Thermo Fisher Scientific), excised as a single polyacrylamide band, treated and proteolyzed with trypsin as previously described. A fraction of the resulting peptide pool (5 μl out of 50 μl) was analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry with a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in similar conditions as those previously described. Peptides were desalted online with a PepMap 100 C18 pre-column and then resolved on a reverse-phase Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (500 mm length, 3 μm granulometry, 100 Å porosity, 75 μm inner diameter, 450 m2/g specific surface; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min with a 90 min gradient (4–25% B from in 75 min, and then 25–40% B from 15 min) with mobile phases A (0.1% HCOOH/100% H2O) and B (0.1% HCOOH/80%CH3CN/19.9%H2O) delivered by an Ultimate 3000 chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a Top20 strategy consisting of cycles of a full scan of peptide ions followed by sequential fragmentation of each of the 20 most intense precursors in the high energy collisional dissociation cell and MS/MS scans of the resulting fragments. Only peptide ions with a charge state of 2+ or 3+ were selected for dissociation, with a dynamic exclusion of 10 s. Full scan mass spectra from 350 to 1500 m/z were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 while MS/MS scans were recorded at a resolution of 15,000. Peptide-to-spectrum assignation was performed with the Mascot software v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) against the E. coli K12 database (downloaded 2020/04/30, 4545 entries totaling 1,428,385 residues) with the following parameters: full-trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages allowed, fixed modification of carbamidomethylated cysteine, mass tolerances of 5 ppm for peptide search and 0.02 Da for peptide fragments. Variable modifications were the oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine. Peptide matches with a Mascot peptide score below a p-value of 0.05 were selected. Proteins were considered valid when at least two different peptides were detected. False Discovery Rate (FDR) for protein identification was below 1% as estimated with the reverse database decoy Mascot search option. Spectral counts were compared between conditions after standard normalization using the T-Fold method as described, selecting proteins that satisfied |T-fold| (≥1.5) and p-value (≤0.05).
Mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository under the dataset identifiers PXD051418 and 10.6019/PXD051418.
Multivariate, univariate, and bioinformatics data analyses
The multivariate statistical analysis of metabolomics and proteomics data was performed using the Metaboanalyst Analytical Pipeline.
For metabolomics, missing values were replaced with half of the minimum positive value found within the original data as explained elsewhere. Metabolite concentrations were autoscaled whereas protein spectral counts were pareto scaled, without normalization or transformation. Multivariate analysis was performed, namely Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Partial Least Squares-Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA). The PLS-DA model was validated through cross-validation (Q2) and permutation tests (separation distances, B/W), and the model was considered valid when the permutation test gave a p-value < 0.05. To understand which metabolites were contributing the most to the separation observed in the PLS-DA, variables were then ranked based on the Variable Importance in Projection (VIP) scores. Heatmaps were built using Euclidean distance measure and Ward clustering algorithm.
Metabolites responsible for the discrimination between groups of samples were also analyzed by univariate analysis, concentration values 4 times above/below the InterQuartile Range (IQR) were considered outliers and excluded from the analysis. The assumption of normality was assessed by Shapiro-Wilk’s test and, based on the results, the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Kruskal-Wallis’s test were used as parametric and nonparametric tests, respectively. Statistical significance was defined as p-value < 0.05. To correct for pairwise multiple comparisons and adjust the p-values, the post hoc Tukey’s HSD test or Mann-Whitney U’s test (with the Bonferroni’s correction) were used.
For proteomics data univariate analysis, spectral counts were compared between conditions after standard normalization using the T-Fold method as described, selecting proteins that satisfied |T-fold| (≥1.5) and p-value (≤0.05). These proteins were also subjected to a Gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis using the Gene Ontology Consortium’s online tool (http://www.geneontology.org/). First, from the UniProKB codes the gene names of each protein were retrieved, and two gene lists were created: one with gene names of proteins whose T-fold (TF) was ≥ 1.5, and one with gene names of proteins whose TF was ≤ −1.5 compared to the control group. Then, each gene list was submitted to the GO tool, and the GO enrichment analysis for the biological process was performed selecting E. coli as a species. For statistical analysis, Fisher’s exact test was used, and p-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR’s test. Only GO-enriched terms with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.
The integration of the metabolomics and proteomics data was performed using the Joint-Pathway Analysis module of the Metaboanalyst Analytical Pipeline. Only metabolites with statistically significant different amounts (p-value < 0.05) relative to the control treatment and proteins with statistically significant amounts (p-value < 0.05) with a TF > 1.0 and < −1.0 relative to the control treatment were used. For each metabolite, the KEGG ID was retrieved, while for each protein the UNIPROT ID was used, along with the relative TFs. Then, the metabolite and protein lists were submitted selecting the E. coli K-12 strain MG1655 as a species, and the analysis was carried out using the Metabolic pathways as Pathway database. For the Enrichment analysis, the Hypergeometric test was used, while for the Topology measure and the Integration method, the default options (i.e. degree centrality and combine queries, respectively) were selected.

RESULTS:
Results
α-KG-γ-PH displays bacteriostatic activity on E. coli
L-Glu-γ-PH was previously shown to display a bacteriostatic effect in E. coli being able to inhibit cell growth with an MIC90 (i.e. the minimum concentration able to inhibit 90% of the cell growth) of 7 μg/ml, i.e., 42 μM (Fig. S1A). In this work, the effects on E. coli metabolism of L-Glu-γ-PH and its keto-acid derivate, i.e. α-ketoglutarate-γ-PH (α-KG-γ-PH), which arises from the oxidative deamination or transamination of L-Glu-γ-PH, were investigated. In fact, α-KG-γ-PH also exhibited a bacteriostatic effect with an MIC90 of 13 μg/ml, i.e., 78 μM (Fig. S1B). It was therefore decided to include in the study also α-KG-γ-PH, owing to the possible direct interconversion between the two molecules and because this could help to better understand their cellular transformations.
The effects of L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH on the E. coli metabolome
Bacteria were grown in chemically defined minimal medium EG, pH 7.0, to an optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 1.0 in the presence of either L-Glu-γ-PH or α-KG-γ-PH, at a sub-inhibitory concentration (MIC50), which was chosen because it still allowed growth, though at lower rate, as reported in Experimental procedures (section “Sample collection for metabolomic and proteomic analysis”). The control condition consisted of growing bacteria in the absence of either compound (untreated). Pellets from 10 biological replicates for each condition (i.e. untreated group, L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups) were collected and processed for metabolomics and proteomics analyses, as schematically depicted in Fig. S2. Based on the analysis of the entire 1H NMR spectra, one sample from the L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group projected beyond the 95% confidence interval (CI) and was therefore excluded from all downstream analyses.
In the 1H NMR spectra of the control group, 59 metabolites were identified and quantified. The same metabolites, with the inclusion of aspartate, cytidine, and uracil, for a total of 62 metabolites, were also detected in the L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups (Table S1). Approximately 10% of the NMR peaks remained unassigned because no corresponding metabolites were present in the databases. In all samples, glycogen was found to be the most abundant, i.e. in the μmoles range. Fig. 2 shows the boxplots of the top 20 metabolites that, amongst the most abundant in the untreated group, display statistically significant differences in one or both treated groups.
To globally assess the effect of the exposure and adaptation of the E. coli metabolome to the H-phosphinic compounds, the detected metabolites were subjected to a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) (Fig. 3A). Glycogen, which significantly increased in the α-KG-γ-PH -treated group (Table S1), was omitted because it negatively affected the data scaling. The first and the second components (i.e. PC1 and PC2) accounted for 27.3% and 18.2% of the total variance, respectively. This unsupervised analysis provided a clear separation of the three experimental groups. This first evidence indicated that L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH have a different effect on the E. coli metabolome. Unlike PC2, the projection along PC3 did not provide a significant separation of the three groups as it only described the variance (12.1%) among samples of the same cluster (Table S1).
Like PCA, the metabolites discriminated via the scores plot of the supervised multivariate statistical analysis Partial Least Square Discriminating Analysis (PLS-DA) showed that the L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group samples could be separated into two sub-clusters (Fig. 3B). The PLS-DA model allowed capturing the most important metabolites responsible for the projection of the three groups along the first and the second components of the model. Metabolites were ranked according to the Variable Importance Projection (VIP) score, as shown in Fig. 3C for the first component (and in Table S1 for all components). Based on the observed trends, the metabolites were clustered as follows: i) metabolites increased in both the L-Glu-γ-PH- and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups; ii) metabolites decreased in both the L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups; iii) metabolites with opposite trend between the L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups.
AMP, aspartate, dCMP, 4-aminobutyrate (GABA), glutathione, uracil, and CMP belonged to the first group, whereas tyrosine, UDP-glucose, leucine, phenylalanine, pyruvate, succinate, glucose 1-phosphate, fumarate, and N-acetyl-L-alanine fell in the second group. In contrast, putrescine, GDP, glucose 6-phosphate, valine, and glucose belonged to the third group. The former two metabolites increased and decreased in the L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups, respectively, whereas the opposite was observed for the latter three metabolites.
A further examination via heatmap (Fig. S3) of the metabolite levels showed that the three groups formed two major group clusters: the first cluster represented by the control group and L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group, whereas the second cluster was only formed by the samples exposed to α-KG-γ-PH. This suggested that the effect of α-KG-γ-PH on the E. coli intracellular metabolome was somehow more marked than that of L-Glu-γ-PH.
In conclusion, the results of the multivariate analyses demonstrated that on average the effect of L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH on E. coli metabolome was different, with α-KG-γ-PH displaying a greater impact than L-Glu-γ-PH, despite the interconversion of these two compounds (see next section).
α-KG-γ-PH is intracellularly converted to L-Glu-γ-PH
Since both L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH impacted the E. coli metabolism, possibly by entering one or more of the glutamate-dependent metabolic routes, the metabolome of the L-Glu-γ-PH - and of α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups was further investigated by 31P NMR in order to detect and identify possible H-phosphinic metabolites originated by the intracellular metabolism of L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH. Phosphonate and H-phosphinates have a typical chemical shift between 5 to 40 ppm, which is a spectrum zone where only a few phosphorous-containing metabolites appear. This facilitates the detection of the phosphonates and H-phosphinates by 31P NMR in a mixture of phosphorous-containing metabolites. Although the 31P NMR spectra revealed the existence of resonance of H-phosphinates in both L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups that do not belong to these compounds (Fig. S4), the low signal/noise ratio did not allow their identification. In the case of the cells treated with α-KG-γ-PH, the compound itself (α-KG-γ-PH) was not found in the extracts, while the major phosphinic compound present was L-Glu-γ-PH, indicating that E. coli can convert the α-KG-γ-PH into L-Glu-γ-PH. The contrary was not observed, i.e. L-Glu-γ-PH is the major phosphinic compound present in L-Glu-γ-PH-treated cells and α-KG-γ-PH is not detected (Fig. S4).
Thus, the conversion of α-KG-γ-PH into L-Glu-γ-PH should be taken into account when interpreting the global effect of the molecules on E. coli metabolism.
The effect of L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH on the E. coli proteome
In addition to the identification of the major intracellular metabolites undergoing a significant change in concentration, an analysis was also performed to study how the L-Glu-γ-PH or α-KG-γ-PH treatments affected the cells at the proteome level.
Based on the metabolomics data clustering, four samples of each of the control and α-KG-γ-PH-treated groups were selected for proteome analysis, whereas seven samples of the L-Glu-γ-PH-treated group were selected, to include both sub-clusters observed in the metabolome (Fig. 3). The shotgun proteomic dataset, comprising 956,723 MS/MS spectra, identified 23,369 unique peptide sequences that allowed monitoring the abundance of 1809 proteins (Table S2). The volcano plots (Fig. 4, A and B) show in red (increased abundance) and green (decreased abundance) all the proteins that satisfied |T-fold| (TF ≥ 1.5) and p-value (≤0.05) (Table S2). The T-fold was used in this study as a parameter combining the fold-change cutoff with a statistical test, as described elsewhere. To do so, all numbers <1.0 were converted to their reciprocals and assigned a negative sign.
When comparing each treated group with the control group, differences were observed between the L-Glu-γ-PH - and the α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups, with the latter displaying a higher number of affected proteins, i.e. 594 in α-KG-γ-PH -treated cells vs 423 in L-Glu-γ-PH -treated cells. Moreover, the plots show that the overall TF was higher in the α-KG-γ-PH -treated group than in the L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group. When all the proteins that satisfied the abovementioned criteria were subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, the GO terms for biological process revealed that both compounds lead to a decrease in the abundance of proteins involved in the following processes (Fig. 4, C and D, Table S3): chemotaxis, lysine biosynthesis via diaminopimelate, tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, aspartate family amino acid biosynthesis, dicarboxylic acid metabolism, nucleobase-containing small molecule metabolism and phosphorus metabolism. However, α-KG-γ-PH treatment was more markedly affecting the proteome as it caused a change in the abundance of proteins involved in many more processes (Fig. 4D), in particular the biosynthesis of methionine, as well as that of polar (Gln, Ser) and positively charged (Arg and His) amino acids, and that of purines and pyrimidines ribonucleoside monophosphates. On the contrary, L-Glu-γ-PH treatment uniquely repressed cellulose metabolism and branched-chain amino acids biosynthetic processes (Fig. 4C). Strikingly, based on the KEGG analysis, none of the 333 proteins that displayed a significant increase in abundance upon α-KG-γ-PH treatment turned out to hit specific metabolic processes, while in the case of L-Glu-γ-PH -treated samples, only a few of the 279 proteins that increased in abundance could be assigned to specific metabolic processes, namely glutamate metabolism and pyrimidine-containing compounds metabolism (Fig. 4C).
When proteins with increased abundance in the L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group and α-KG-γ-PH -treated group were compared to each other, 132 proteins were found to be in common (Fig. 5A; i.e. 47% of L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group and 40% of α-KG-γ-PH -treated group). This figure goes down to 73 when comparing the protein with decreased abundance in the two groups (Fig. 5B; i.e. 51% of L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group and 28% of α-KG-γ-PH -treated group). The heatmap in Fig. 5C compares the top sixty most affected proteins in the three groups. Once again, the extent to which the two compounds affected some cellular components displayed often an opposite trend. In general, α-KG-γ-PH displayed a more pronounced effect, in agreement with the metabolomic results.
A joint metabolomic and proteomic analysis illustrates the overall impact of the L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH on E. coli metabolism
The metabolomics and proteomics results indicated that both L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH significantly affect the E. coli metabolism, though to different extent. To better pinpoint the pathways mostly perturbed by L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH, an integrative analysis of the proteomics and metabolomics data based on both protein abundances and metabolite concentrations was carried out using the “Joint Pathways Analysis” module from MetaboAnalyst. To this aim, the integration of the metabolomic and proteomic data was performed only on the metabolic pathways in which both metabolites and proteins could be matched. The joint analysis was performed using only the metabolites that were significantly affected by L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH compared to the control group according to the univariate statistical analysis. Notably, N-Acetyl-L-alanine was excluded from the analysis as very little is known about this metabolite and its synthesis (according to KEGG). Therefore, a total of 25 and 34 statistically significant metabolites for L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups, respectively, were used. Regarding the protein queries, in addition to the proteins that were significantly altered in response to L-Glu-γ-PH or α-KG-γ-PH and with a TF > 1.5 and < −1.5 compared to the control group, the proteins with a TF > 1.0 and < −1.0 were also used. In fact, even with a low TF, their upregulation/downregulation could anyhow strengthen the overall impact that L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH have on each metabolic pathway. This increased the total number of proteins used for the joint analysis to 710 and 824 for L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated group, respectively.
Based on the joint analysis, the most affected metabolic pathways were plotted as a function of the level of significance and of the impact that L-Glu-γ-PH (Fig. 6A) or α-KG-γ-PH (Fig. 6B) has on each pathway compared to the control group. Only the metabolic pathways with an impact index ≥ 1.0 and a corrected p-value < 0.05 (based on the FDR) were considered significantly affected. The joint analysis shows that L-Glu-γ-PH impacted six metabolic pathways (reported as in the KEGG database; Table S4): the TCA cycle, the butanoate metabolism, the C5-branched dibasic acid metabolism, the alanine aspartate and glutamate metabolism, the pyruvate metabolism, and the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway. With the only exception of alanine, aspartate, and glutamate metabolism, which is part of the amino acid metabolism, the other five pathways are all related to carbohydrate metabolism. Of the 25 metabolites used in the analysis, only six of them, i.e. citrate, fumarate, succinate, GABA, glutamine, and aspartate, were mapped on the aforementioned pathways. Amongst them, fumarate (TF = −3.1) and succinate (TF = −1.4) contributed to the impact score and the significance of most of these pathways, such as the TCA cycle, butanoate metabolism, alanine aspartate and glutamate metabolism, and pyruvate metabolism. On the other hand, GABA (TF = 2.9) was mapped only on two pathways, i.e. butanoate metabolism, and alanine aspartate and glutamate metabolism, whereas citrate (TF = 1.6) was the only metabolite to be uniquely mapped on a single pathway, i.e., the TCA cycle. None of the 25 metabolites could be mapped on the C5-branched dibasic acid metabolism and the glycolysis/gluconeogenesis pathway.
Regarding the α-KG-γ-PH -treated group, in addition to the aforementioned pathways, α-KG-γ-PH significantly impacted the metabolism of tyrosine, glutathione, starch and sucrose, and glycine, serine, and threonine, as well as the pentose phosphate pathway. Furthermore, it also affected the biosynthesis of polyketide sugar unit, which is part of the metabolism of terpenoids and polyketides pathways, as well as the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, such as streptomycin, and acarbose and validamycin (Fig. 6B; Table S5). Overall, the joint analysis revealed that α-KG-γ-PH impacted seven pathways of carbohydrate metabolism, four pathways involved in amino acid metabolism, two pathways related to the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, and one pathway implicated in the polyketide sugar unit biosynthesis.
A total of 16 out of the 34 metabolites were mapped on almost all the above pathways, except for the acarbose and validamycin biosynthesis and the polyketide sugar unit biosynthesis pathways, for which no matches could be observed. Pyruvate (TF = −1.8) was the most mapped metabolite, being observed in eight pathways, followed by succinate (TF = −1.5) and fumarate (TF = −2.9), which contributed to the impact score and the significance of five and three pathways, respectively (Table S5). Glucose (TF = 3.1), GABA (TF = 4.8), glycine (TF = 1.2) and aspartate (TF = 10.0) were each mapped on two metabolic pathways, whereas lactate (TF = −1.5), ethanol (TF = −1.2), glutathione (TF = 4.78), putrescine (TF = −2.1), glucose 6-phosphate (TF = 2.5), glycogen (TF = 1.5), choline (TF = −1.4) and threonine (TF = −2.1) were each uniquely mapped on a single pathway (Table S5). This latter result, in agreement with the proteomic data, explains why the total number α-KG-γ-PH -affected pathways, as revealed by the joint analysis, was higher than in the L-Glu-γ-PH -treated cells.
Therefore, the joint analysis confirmed the greater pervasiveness of α-KG-γ-PH than L-Glu-γ-PH on E. coli metabolism. Alike L-Glu-γ-PH, though to a greater extent, α-KG-γ-PH significantly perturbed the central carbon metabolism and the biosynthesis of some amino acids.
Exposure to L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH leads to the upregulation of proteins involved in acid resistance and nitrogen assimilation and metabolism
Despite in KEGG and GO the stress responses pathways are not automatically pinpointed, the metabolomic analysis clearly indicated that some metabolites (i.e. glutamate, GABA, and glutamine) that participate in the glutamine/glutamate-dependent acid resistance (AR2) in E. coli and other bacteria are increased in both L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups (Table S1). The activation of the acid stress response was confirmed by the finding that the enzymes and structural proteins that participate in AR2 are indeed amongst the top overexpressed proteins in the proteomic analysis in both L-Glu-γ-PH - and α-KG-γ-PH -treated groups as compared to the control (Table S2). Specifically, these proteins include the ones that are listed to follow, together with the TF provided in parenthesis. The two glutamate decarboxylase isoforms GadA (TF = 4.83 for L-Glu-γ-PH -treated group and 9.71 for α-KG-γ-PH -treated group) and GadB (TF = 4.65 and 9.40), the glutamate/GABA antiporter GadC (TF = 5.02 and 9.05), the outer membrane protein Slp (TF = 2.37 and 4.00), the acid resistance membrane protein HdeD (TF = 5.71 and 5.75), which protect from acidic metabolites, the periplasmic chaperones HdeA (TF = 5.23 and 6.08) and HdeB (TF = 5.32 and 12.61), which confer protection from acid-denatured proteins, and the two multidrug resistance transporter MdtE (TF = 6.66 and 7.38) and MdtF (TF = 7.86 and 15.50), which together with TolC form the tripartite efflux system MdtEF-TolC. Notably, with the exception of GadB, GadC, and GlsA1 (TF = 2.05 and 2.84), all the genes encoding the above-mentioned proteins are located in a genomic island named AFI (Acid Fitness Island. The AR2 and AFI genes are under the control of specific transcriptional regulators, i.e. GadX and GadY, also encoded in the AFI and shown to be involved in the repression of BtuB, as observed in this study (see discussion).
Finally, the in-depth analysis of the proteomic data revealed that up to 38 and 31 proteins, whose genes are known or predicted to be activated in nitrogen starvation, were upregulated (TF ≥ 1.5) in response to L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH, respectively (Table S2). Most of these genes are part of the transcriptional circuit of the nitrogen regulator I (NRI, also known as NtrC or σ54). NRI is a member of the two-component regulatory system NRII/NRI, which controls the expression of the nitrogen-regulated (ntr) genes in response to nitrogen limitation. Indeed, a sharp increase in the levels of key proteins involved in nitrogen assimilation was observed, such as NRI (TF = 2.91 and 2.69), NRII (TF = 2.80 and 2.40), the ammonia channel AmtB (TF = 11.14 and 8.50), glutamine synthetase GlnA (TF = 3.56 and 2.92), and the nitrogen regulatory protein P-II GlnK (TF = 37.62 and 46.83) (Table S2).
Therefore, it was hypothesized that, as a result of their metabolic impact, L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH may deplete cells of nitrogen. This would lead to a nitrogen starvation response, which would stimulate the expression of the ntr genes via NRI in an attempt to provide cells with nitrogen through different sources. In agreement with this hypothesis, when cells were grown in EG medium, pH 7, with the same sub-inhibitory concentrations of L-Glu-γ-PH and α-KG-γ-PH used for the metabolomics/proteomics experiments, that is, 3.5 and 8.5 μg/ml, respectively, a 2-fold increase in the ammonium content (∼32 mM), which is the sole N-source in EG medium, mitigated the inhibitory activity of L-Glu-γ-PH (Fig. 7A) and α-KG-γ-PH (Fig. 7B). Notably, the increase in the ammonium content did not have any effect per se on cell growth in the untreated control (Fig. 7, A and B). Therefore, it was concluded that the increment in nitrogen availability improved the fitness of the cells when challenged with L-Glu-γ-PH or α-KG-γ-PH, but it did not abolish the inhibition at the tested concentrations.

INTRODUCTION:
Phosphonic and phosphinic acids are a group of uncommon natural products with one or more carbon-phosphorus (C-P) bond(s), resistant to hydrolysis by phosphatases and phosphodiesterases as well as to chemical treatments, such as boiling and acid or base treatments. Phosphonates contain one C-P bond, whereas phosphinates can present either two C-P bonds or one C-P and one P-H bond occurring on the same phosphorous atom. Due to the C-P bond(s), phosphonates and phosphinates structurally resemble chemical groups such as phosphate esters, carboxyl groups, and tetrahedral intermediates occurring during the transformation of carboxylic acids derivatives. This feature allows phosphonates and phosphinates to be easily recognized by the cellular enzymes involved in the biochemical transformations of these chemical groups. When this occurs, the inability to hydrolyze the C-P bond(s) impedes the completion of the reaction, which may even result in irreversible enzymatic inhibition. Due to the abovementioned properties and given the ubiquitous involvement of the targeted enzymes in metabolic and signaling pathways, phosphonates and phosphinates have a large application as bioactive molecules for the treatment of several human diseases, including microbial infections.
Some naturally produced phosphinates and phosphonates chemically resemble proteinogenic amino acids. A remarkable example is given by L-Phosphinothricin [L-2-amino-4-(hydroxymethyl-phosphinyl)butanoic acid, also known as glufosinate; L-PT in Fig. 1], a phosphinic analog of glutamate with its phosphinic moiety (C-P-CH3) replacing the γ-carboxyl group. L-PT was initially discovered and isolated from cultures of Streptomyces hygroscopicus and Streptomyces viridochromogenes. L-PT irreversibly inhibits the enzyme glutamine synthetase (GS), which catalyzes the ATP-dependent formation of glutamine from glutamate and ammonia. When in the active site of GS, L-PT becomes phosphorylated on the γ-phosphinic moiety, thus leading to a species that mimics the γ-glutamyl phosphate intermediate normally occurring during the catalysis. The reaction however cannot proceed further, and the enzyme-bound intermediate remains in the active site where it is protected from hydrolysis. Since GS plays a key role in nitrogen assimilation, its inhibition causes the accumulation of toxic levels of ammonia which inevitably leads to cell death. For this reason, L-PT has bactericidal, fungicidal, and herbicidal properties and nowadays is largely employed in the form of the broad-spectrum herbicides Bialaphos and Phosalacine, in which L-PT is enzymatically condensed with either two L-alanine residues or L-alanine and L-leucine residues, respectively (Fig. 1). The effect of the herbicidal activity of L-PT has been investigated in further detail on buffalo grasses using an untargeted metabolomics approach which confirmed that L-PT upregulates free amino acids pool, sugar-phosphate and amino acid metabolism. A recent report also showed the efficacy of Bialaphos and of a dipeptide L-Leucyl-L-PT on clinical isolates of the human pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae, resistant to more than 20 commercial antibiotics belonging to different classes.
The work of independent groups brought to the identification of the L-PT and Bialaphos biosynthetic gene cluster in S. hygroscopicus and S. viridochromogenes. In the attempt to dissect the chemical steps occurring during the complex biosynthesis of L-PT, the intermediate desmethylphosphinothricin [L-2-amino-4-(hydroxy)phosphinylbutyric acid; initially named MP101 or DMPT; hereafter and in Fig. 1 L-Glu-γ-PH] was discovered and isolated. L-Glu-γ-PH lacks the methyl group present in L-PT (C-P-CH3) which is instead replaced by a hydrogen (C-P-H). L-Glu-γ-PH was found to inhibit the growth of the producing strains at 10 μg/ml (i.e. 60 μM), as well as to display negligible toxic effects when administered in rats and mice. In addition to S. hygroscopicus and S. viridochromogenes, L-Glu-γ-PH was also isolated from Nonomureae sp. NRLL B-24552.
It was reported that L-Glu-γ-PH is decarboxylated by the Escherichia coli enzyme glutamate decarboxylase (EcGadB; E.C. 4.1.1.15), a pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzyme involved in the acid stress response in many enteropathogens. It was shown that the chemical contacts that stabilize the PLP-L-Glu adduct are conserved in the PLP-L-Glu-γ-PH adduct, and this allowed to conclude that, due to its single charge flatted tetrahedral structure, the H-phosphinic moiety of L-Glu-γ-PH is a bioisostere of L-Glu carboxyl group in γ-position. Furthermore, the EcGadB-dependent decarboxylation of L-Glu-γ-PH yielded the H-phosphinic analog of GABA (3-aminopropylphosphinic acid, 3-APPA; GABA-PH in Fig. 1), which could be further transformed into the H-phosphinic analog of succinic semialdehyde [3-(hydroxyphosphinyl)propanal, succinic semialdehyde-PH; SSA-PH in Fig. 1] and then into succinate-PH (Fig. 1) by GABase, a commercial crude preparation of Pseudomonas fluorescens containing GABA-transaminase and succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase. Taken together, the above results suggest that L-Glu-γ-PH may be a better substrate than L-PT in targeting glutamate-dependent reactions intracellularly. This was further put forward in a recently published study where a Glu-γ-PH dipeptide derivative was shown to effectively inhibit the growth of both Gram-negative and Gram-positive model microorganisms. The inhibition of the growth of E. coli K12 MG1655 strain, with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) comparable to that of well-known antibiotics, such as ampicillin (42 μM vs 11 μM, respectively) under the same experimental conditions, makes Glu-γ-PH a promising novel antibacterial, given that it is currently recognized that inhibiting multiple targets may be a useful feature to minimize the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria and given that L-Glu-γ-PH shows limited effect on eukaryotic cells. In fact, thanks to the two pharmacophores, the α-carbon moiety and the H-phosphinic group, L-Glu-γ-PH may undergo transformation to phosphorus-containing metabolites, or it may act as potent enzymatic inhibitor in ATP-dependent transformations where the distal carboxyl group of glutamate is involved. The former would result in the production of phosphinic derivatives that could affect central microbial metabolism, while the latter would lead to enzymatic inhibition as observed in GS with L-PT. It is important to recall that the geometry of the H3C-phosphinic group of L-PT is different from that of the flattened tetrahedral H-phosphinic moiety because of the size of the methyl group and therefore H3C-phosphinic group cannot be considered as a bioisostere of the carboxyl group. As a matter of fact, L-PT was shown not to be a competitive inhibitor of E. coli glutamate decarboxylase and to display a Ki 0.6 μM against E. coli GS, whereas the phosphonic analog of glutamate having two hydroxyl groups displays a Ki of 50 μM.
To date, very little is known about the biological effect of L-Glu-γ-PH on E. coli. As a result, this work wants to cover this lack of knowledge by using a modern untargeted multi-omics approach, rarely used to study the effect of this class of molecules at the cellular level, in particular employing 1H NMR-based metabolomics combined with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) based proteomics. The study also included the H-phosphinic analog of α-ketoglutarate, (2-oxo-4-H-phosphinyl)butyric acid; α-KG-PH in Fig. 1), i.e., the natural precursor of L-Glu-γ-PH in L-PT biosynthesis, which is herein shown to display an inhibitory effect on bacterial growth similar to that of L-Glu-γ-PH. A patent IT 102016000098005 has been granted, which includes α-KG-γ-PH, one of the compounds investigated in detail in this study (https://www.uniroma1.it/en/brevetto/102016000098005). Furthermore, one of the outcomes generated by the multi-omics analysis was experimentally corroborated through phenotypic assays.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
Mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository under the dataset identifiers PXD051418 and 10.6019/PXD051418. NMR metabolomic data is available at the NIH Common Fund’s National Metabolomics Data Repository (NMDR) website, the Metabolomics Workbench, https://www.metabolomicsworkbench.org where it has been assigned Study ID ST003202 ('Metabolomics Workbench: An international repository for metabolomics data and metadata, metabolite standards, protocols, tutorials and training, and analysis tools (2016)' [PubMed: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26467476/].). The data can be accessed directly via its Project DOI: https://doi.org/10.21228/M8QH90.
Supporting information
This article contains supporting information.
Supporting information
Present address for Fabio Giovannercole: Département de Biologie, Université de Namur, Rue de Bruxelles 61, 5000, Namur, Belgium.