PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Dia; Ifn response; Ip; Adar; Bioid; Interactome; Dda; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1 (ADAR1), is an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of adenosine to inosine in double-stranded RNA, a process critical for regulation of innate immune response and distinguishing between ‘self and non-self RNA’. It is expressed as two isoforms: nucleolar p110 and cytoplasmic, interferon (IFN)-inducible, p150. The interactome of the p110 under steady-state conditions is well-studied; however, less is known about the interactions of the p150 isoform, particularly during IFN response. To elucidate ADAR1's protein interactions during IFN stimulation, alongside steady-state conditions, three distinct methods of enrichment were used followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). These included: immunoprecipitation (IP) of endogenous ADAR1, IP of Strep II-tagged ADAR1, and proximity labeling using BioID. Individual ADAR1 isoforms (p110 and p150) and their respective dsRNA binding-deficient mutants were created to discern isoform-specific and dsRNA-dependent interactions. Altogether, our results reveal a comprehensive ADAR1 interaction map, identifying both known and novel partners, and highlighting the isoform-specific and dsRNA-binding-dependent nature of ADAR1 interactions. Under IFN stimulation, ADAR1's interaction spectrum encompasses viral replication inhibitors and LINE-1 regulators. Mimicking viral infection with HMW poly(I:C) changed the proximal network of proteins for both isoforms. Our findings provide new insights into ADAR1's roles and its dynamic during IFN response.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Distinct interactomes of ADAR1 nuclear and cytoplasmic protein isoforms and their responses to Interferon induction

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human Flp-In 293 T-REx™ (Invitrogen) cells were co-immunoprecipitated. Bead bound protein complexes were mixed with 2% SDS solution and heated to 50℃ for 20min after which the proteins were reduced using 500 mM DTT at 95℃ for 15 min. Resulting protein solutions were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) using 0.75 μg of trypsin. Peptides were then cleaned by liquid-liquid extraction (3 iterations) using water saturated ethyl acetate. Cleaned FASP eluate was evaporated completely in SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Resulting peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. LC-MS/MS analyses of all peptide mixtures were done using RSLCnano system connected to Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to LC separation, tryptic digests were online concentrated and desalted using trapping column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18, dimensions 300 μm ID, 5 mm long, 5 μm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific). After washing of trapping column with 0.1% FA, the peptides were eluted (flow rate - 400 nl/min) from the trapping column onto an analytical column (Aurora C18, 75μm ID, 250 mm long, 1.6 μm particles, heated to 50°C, Ion Opticks) by 110 min nonlinear gradient program (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in water; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in 80% ACN). Equilibration of the trapping column and the analytical column was done prior the sample injection to sample loop. The analytical column outlet was directly connected to the Digital PicoView 550 (New Objective) ion source with sheath gas option. ABIRD (Active Background Ion Reduction Device, ESI Source Solutions) was installed. MS data were acquired in a data-dependent strategy with cycle time for 3 seconds and with survey scan (350-2000 m/z). The resolution of the survey scan was 120000 (200 m/z) with a target value of 4×105 ions and maximum injection time of 500 ms. HCD MS/MS (30% relative fragmentation energy, normal mass range) spectra were acquired with a target value of 5.0x104 and resolution of 30000 (200 m/z). The maximum injection time for MS/MS was 500 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 s after one MS/MS spectra acquisition. The isolation window for MS/MS fragmentation was set to 1.2 m/z.

DATA PROCESSING:
The analysis of the mass spectrometric RAW data files was carried out using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.2.10) using default settings unless otherwise noted. MS/MS ion searches were done against modified cRAP database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap) containing protein contaminants like keratin, trypsin etc., and UniProtKB protein database for Homo Sapiens (ftp://ftp.uniprot.org/pub/databases/uniprot/current_release/knowledgebase/reference_proteomes/Eukaryota/UP000005640_9606.fasta.gz; downloaded 19.09.2018, number of protein sequences: 21,053). Oxidation of methionine, deamidation (N, Q) and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as optional modification, and trypsin/P enzyme with 2 allowed miss cleavages were set. Peptides and proteins with FDR threshold <0.01 and proteins having at least one unique or razor peptide were considered only. Match between runs was set among all analysed samples. Protein abundance was assessed using protein intensities calculated by MaxQuant. Protein intensities reported in proteinGroups.txt file (output of MaxQuant) were further processed using the software container environment (https://github.com/OmicsWorkflows). Processing workflow is available upon request. Briefly, it covered: a) removal of decoy hits and contaminant protein groups, b) protein group intensities log2 transformation, c) LoessF normalization, d) differential expression using LIMMA statistical test, e) volcano plot was created using the log fold change and adjusted p-value reported by LIMMA.