PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Disease free
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: iTRAQ
keywords: Time series; Hek-293; Phosphorylation; Temporal pathway synthesizer; Egfr

ABSTRACT:
A quantitative time series of EGFR signaling was acquired using mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to develop an algorithm that identifies signaling pathway structures.  The study used Flp-In 293 cells expressing EGFR that were stimulated with EGF.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Synthesizing Signaling Pathways from Temporal Phosphoproteomic Data

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
After EGF stimulation for 0, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128 min, cells were lysed and proteins were extracted, denatured, alkylated and trypsin digested.  Peptides were isobarically labeled, enriched using phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies and/or immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), and analyzed on a Velos Pro Elite mass spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide sequences and relative quantification were determined using COMET (see details in manuscript).

METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Temporal Pathway Synthesizer Algorithm Overview
TPS receives three types of input (Figure 1): a time series mass spectrometry phosphoproteomic analysis of a stimulus response; an undirected PPI subnetwork; and optional prior knowledge about interaction directions.
The undirected graph is obtained through a static analysis in which the significantly changing proteins are overlaid on a PPI network. A network algorithm recovers connections among the affected proteins, removing interactions that do not form critical connections between these proteins and nominating hidden proteins that do, even if they are not themselves phosphorylated. We recommend PCSF to select the PPI subnetwork but also successfully applied other methods.
TPS transforms the input data into logical constraints that determine which pathway models can explain the observed phosphoproteomic data. Topological constraints stem from the filtered PPI network and require that phosphorylated proteins are connected to the source of stimulation, such as EGF, by a cascade of signaling events. These signaling events propagate along the edges of the filtered PPI network. Temporal constraints ensure that the order of the signaling events is consistent with the timing of the phosphorylation changes. If protein B is downstream of protein A on the pathway, B cannot be activated or inhibited before A. Prior knowledge constraints guarantee that if the direction or sign of an interaction is known in advance, the pathway may not contain the edge with the opposite direction or sign. Typically, many possible pathways meet all constraints, so TPS summarizes the entire collection of valid pathways and identifies interactions that are used with the same direction or sign across all models. A symbolic solver reasons with these logical constraints and produces the pathway summary without explicitly enumerating all possible pathway models.
To illustrate this process, consider a hypothetical signaling pathway that contains a receptor node A and six other downstream proteins that respond when A is stimulated (Figure 5). The first input is time series mass spectrometry data measuring the response to stimulating the receptor (node A), which quantifies phosphorylation activity for six proteins. Node B is absent from the phosphorylation data because it is post-translationally modified, but not phosphorylated, by A. The second input is an undirected protein-protein interaction graph. These are detected independently of the stimulation condition but filtered based on their presumed relevance to the responding proteins with an algorithm such as PCSF. By combining phosphorylation data with the PPI subnetwork, this topology can recover “hidden” components of the pathway that are not phosphorylated (node B). Finally, TPS accepts prior knowledge of directed kinase-substrate or phosphatase-substrate interactions, such as the edge C → D. Each of these inputs can be used individually to restrict the space of plausible pathway models. Reasoning about them jointly produces more unambiguous predictions than considering each resource separately.
To formulate temporal constraints, we transform the time series data into a set of discrete signaling events (activation or inhibition) for each node, taking an event-based view of the signaling process (Table 1). We determine time points for each node that correspond to statistically significant phosphorylation changes. These discrete events are then used to rule out network models that contain signed, directed paths that violate the temporal ordering of these events no matter which event is chosen for each node. For example, there can be no edge from E to D in any model because D is activated strictly earlier than E regardless of whether E is activated at 1 to 2 min or 2 to 5 min. Because the time series data measure the response to a specific stimulus, we also devise topological constraints that ensure all signaling activity originates from this source. In our example, this asserts that all edges in a solution network must be on a directed path that starts at node A. Finally, our third input, the set of directed interactions, requires that no model violates this prior knowledge by including an edge from D to C.
Figure 6 shows the pathway models that can be learned using each type of constraint alone and in combination. When we enforce only temporal constraints, which corresponds to reasoning locally with phosphorylation data for pairs of nodes to see whether one signaling event strictly precedes another, we obtain a single precise (signed and directed) prediction from D to E (Figure 6A). The topological constraints by themselves are sufficient to orient edges from the source A and from node D because D forms a bottleneck (Figure 6B). The prior knowledge constrains the direction of the edge from C to D, but its sign remains unknown (Figure 6C). Jointly enforcing all of these constraints has a nontrivial impact on the solution space (Figure 6D). For instance, we can infer that F must activate G. If the edge direction was reversed, F would be downstream of E, but the data show that activation of F precedes activation of E. The final model that includes all available data closely resembles the true pathway structure (Figure 5A). The edges incident to node B are ambiguous, and the interaction between E and G cannot be uniquely oriented, but all other interactions are recovered.
The summary for the combination of all constraints produces precise predictions that cannot be obtained by intersecting the summaries for the individual types of constraints. For instance, TPS infers that the relationship between F and G must be an activation from F to G because the sole way G can reach F in a tree rooted at A is through E, but F’s activation precedes E’s. This inference cannot be made by combining the models in panels A, B, and C. The simple example also highlights the differences in how the TPS constraint-based approach improves upon related methods based on correlation or the time point of maximum phosphorylation change. See also Figure S7.
TPS Pathway Synthesis
TPS takes the undirected network from PCSF and transforms it into a collection of signed, directed graphs that explain dynamic signaling events.
Discretization of Time Series Data
To find pathway models that agree with the phosphorylation dynamics, TPS first performs a discretization step that determines time intervals in which each protein may be differentially phosphorylated. The discrete set of activation and inhibition state changes is then used to rule out networks that violate the observed temporal behavior.
The transformation consists of finding time points for each profile where phosphorylation significantly differs from either the baseline (pre-stimulation) or the previous time point. In the baseline comparison, this time point is accepted only if it is not preceded by an earlier, larger change with respect to the baseline. If there is a hypothetical phosphorylation level at which the protein is activated and acts upon its downstream targets, a signaling event occurs only at the first time this threshold value is reached. This criterion does not apply when comparing to the phosphorylation level at the previous time point. TPS supports missing values in the time series data. The time points for which a phosphopeptide is missing data are assumed to be insignificant in the discretized data.
In our EGF study, we use Tukey’s HSD test to find significant differential phosphorylation. If comparing a time point to the baseline or the previous measurement produces a p value below a user-defined threshold, the time point is marked as a possible activation or inhibition event depending on whether the phosphorylation level increased or decreased relative to the earlier time point to which it was compared.
Modeling Assumptions
We assume at most one signaling event happens for every node across time points. Our logical solver can explore all possible activation and inhibition events for every node, but the data are often too ambiguous to allow multiple events per node given a single type of stimulation. In the absence of perturbation experiments that test the pathway behavior under different initial conditions, it is impossible to distinguish between different Boolean logic functions governing the behavior of each node and whether a node responds to one or multiple regulators. We therefore formalize pathway models as signed, directed trees, which provide a sufficient basis for explaining the dynamic system behavior under these assumptions.
Translating Input into Constraints
TPS transforms each input into a set of constraints that declaratively specify valid signed, directed tree models that agree with the data (Supplemental Experimental Procedures). These constraints are expressed as Boolean formulas with linear integer arithmetic, ranging over symbolic variables that represent choices on edge signs and orientations as well as how the temporal data are interpreted. The constraints can then be solved by a satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) solver to find a network model that satisfies all constraints along with dynamic timing annotations for each interaction in the network.
Using constraints, we restrict the possible orientation and sign assignments to signed, directed tree networks rooted at the source node (e.g., EGF). Furthermore, constraints express how every tree model must agree with the time series data by establishing a correspondence between the order of nodes on tree paths and their temporal order of activity according to the time series data. Finally, we declaratively rule out models that contradict the prior knowledge of kinase-substrate interaction directions. These constraints define a very large space of candidate networks that agree with the data.
Pathway Summaries
TPS can reason with large state spaces by summarizing all valid pathways instead of explicitly enumerating them. A summary network is the graph union of all signed, directed tree networks that satisfy the stated constraints (Figure 6). Timing annotations are summarized by computing the set of possible annotations for each node over all solutions. In the graph union, some edges have a unique direction and sign combination, which signifies that this was the only observed signed, directed edge between two given nodes across the solution space. However, this does not guarantee that the edge between the interacting proteins must be present in all valid pathway models. Ambiguous directions or signs in the summary means that there are valid models with different direction or sign assignments.
We compute the summary graph by performing a linear number of SMT solver queries in terms of the size of the input graph. Each queries whether at least one signed, directed model contains a specific signed, directed edge. Because individual queries are computationally cheap, we can summarize the entire solution space without enumerating all models, which is typically intractable. The summary graph over-approximates the solution space. It is not possible to recover the exact set of valid models from the summary, only a superset of the models (Figure S7). This tradeoff must be made in order to analyze such a large state space.
Using Solvers for Synthesis
TPS uses the Z3 theorem prover via the ScalaZ3 interface to solve the constraints it generates. It also provides a custom data flow solver specifically for computing pathway summaries. The custom solver and the symbolic solver produce identical pathway summaries. However, the custom solver is much more scalable because it is specifically designed to address our synthesis task and can handle networks containing more than a hundred thousand edges and phosphosites (Figure S6).
Cell Culture and Mass Spectrometry
We stimulated EGFR Flp-In cells with 23.6 nM EGF (Peprotech) for 0, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128 min. Cells were lysed and proteins were extracted, denatured, alkylated, and trypsin digested. Following digestion, the tryptic peptides were either lyophilized, stored for future use, or directly processed for mass spectrometry analysis. To quantify dynamic changes in protein phosphorylation, all peptides were isobarically labeled, enriched using phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies and/ or immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC), and analyzed on a Thermo Fisher Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer in data-dependent acquisition mode. We determined peptide sequences using Comet (; Data S5) and quantified the iTRAQ signals with Libra. Across three biological replicates, we quantified 5,442 unique peptides in at least one replicate and 1,068 peptides in all replicates and used Tukey’s honest significant difference for statistical testing (Data S1). See the Supplemental Experimental Procedures for details and data processing. Also see our p value sensitivity analysis.
Quantitative Western Blotting
We used 25 nM Dasatinib (no. S1021), 400 nM SCH772984 (no. S7101), and 800 nM MK-2206 (no. S1078; all Selleckchem) for kinase inhibition and antibodies pY221-CRK (no. 3491; Crk-II isoform), pY10-ATP1A1 (no. 3060), and pS142/143-Zyxin (no. 8467; all Cell Signaling Technology) for western blotting (Supplemental Experimental Procedures). We normalized loading with β-actin (no. 3700) and imaged blots with an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (Li-COR Biosciences).
PCSF
We used the Omics Integrator PCSF implementation with msgsteiner to recover the most relevant PPIs connecting the phosphorylated proteins. The Supplemental Experimental Procedures describe how we selected parameters, ran PCSF multiple times to identify parallel connections between proteins, generated prizes from the phosphoproteomic data, and created a weighted interaction network from iRefIndex and PhosphoSitePlus.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Quantitative Time Series Phosphoproteomics of EGF Response Captures Widespread Signaling Activity
To quantify global EGFR-mediated cellular signaling changes in HEK293 EGFR Flp-In (EGFR Flp-In) cells with phosphoproteomics, we used in-line two-dimensional high-performance liquid chromatography separation (2D-HPLC) coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). We stimulated the cells with EGF for 0, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, or 128 min and collected three biological replicates with two technical replicates each (Figure 2). We identified 1,068 phosphorylation sites that were detected in all biological replicates (5,442 unique sites detected in at least one replicate), which were then used for TPS network modeling (Data S1 and S2). Phosphorylation intensities were well correlated across the three biological replicates.
Reference Pathway Databases Fail to Explain Phosphorylation Changes
We assessed how much of the observed phosphorylation could be explained by existing pathway databases. To obtain a comprehensive view of EGFR-mediated signaling, we collected eight EGFR-related reference pathways (; Supplemental Experimental Procedures). Despite the diversity of the pathway diagrams, they all fail to capture the vast majority of significant phosphorylation events triggered by EGF simulation in our system (Figures S1 and S2). Among the 203 significantly differentially phosphorylated proteins, typically 5% or fewer are present in a reference pathway. 85% of phosphorylated proteins are missing from all of the EGFR-related pathway maps (Figure S1B). Additionally, most of the proteins in the EGFR pathway maps are not differentially phosphorylated (Figure S1A), reflecting a combination of relevant proteins that do not undergo this particular type of PTM, phosphorylation events missed by the mass spectrometry, and interactions that are relevant in some contexts, but not in EGFR Flp-In cells. The low overlaps agree with phosphoproteomic studies of other mammalian signaling pathways. Less than 10% of insulin-regulated proteins were members of a curated insulin pathway. In a study of T cell receptor signaling, only 21% of phosphorylated proteins were known to be involved in the pathway. Phosphosites regulated by transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) stimulation were not enriched for the TGF- β pathway.
Crosstalk does not explain the low coverage. Most phosphorylated proteins (63%) are not present in the EGFR pathways or any BioCarta, Reactome, or PID pathway (Figure S1B), demonstrating the need for a context-specific representation of EGFR signaling pathway.
Reconstructing the EGFR Pathway with TPS Explains Temporal Phosphorylation Changes
We applied TPS to model the dynamic signaling response to EGFR stimulation in EGFR Flp-In HEK293 cells. Our workflow consists of three major steps: (1) preprocessing the protein-protein interaction network and temporal phosphorylation data; (2) transforming temporal information, subnetwork structure, and prior knowledge into logical constraints; and (3) summarizing all valid signaling pathway models to discover interactions with unambiguous directions and/or signs (Figure 1).
We first discretized the time series phosphoproteomic data, using Tukey’s honest significant difference (HSD) test to determine whether a peptide exhibits a significant increase, significant decrease, or no change in phosphorylation at each post-stimulation time point. 263 peptides, corresponding to 203 proteins, significantly change at one or more time points. Second, we used the prize-collecting Steiner forest (PCSF) network algorithm to link the phosphorylated proteins to EGF, the source of stimulation, weighting proteins based on their HSD test significance. PCSF identifies a PPI subnetwork of 316 nodes and 422 edges (Data S3). This subnetwork comprises the interactions through which signaling messages are most likely to propagate. Third, TPS combined the discretized temporal activities of the 263 significantly changing peptides, the PCSF network, and prior knowledge (the orientation of kinase-substrate interactions) to generate a summary of all feasible pathway models (Data S3). Each type of input was translated into logical constraints, which were used to rule out pathway models that are not supported by the data.
In contrast to the reference EGFR pathway diagrams, which capture at most 11% of the differentially phosphorylated proteins, the predicted network from TPS (Figures 3 and S3; Data S3) contains 83% of the responding proteins in its 311 nodes. Each of these proteins is linked to the EGF stimulation with high-confidence protein interactions and has timing that is consistent with the temporal phosphorylation changes of all other proteins in the pathway. These interactions are depicted as directed, signed edges in a graph, where the sign reflects that the proteins have the same (activation) or opposite (inhibition) activity changes. Of the 413 edges in the network, 202 (49%) have a consistent direction in all of the valid pathway models, a strong assertion about the confidence in these edge directions. Thirty-eight of the directed edges have a consistent sign as well. The PPI connections, phosphorylation timing, and prior knowledge of kinase-substrate interaction direction all play distinct, important roles in reducing the number of valid pathway models. The timing of protein activation and inactivation in the TPS pathway reveals a rapid spread of signaling post-stimulation.
Prior Evidence Supports EGFR Pathway Predictions
Although nearly all differentially phosphorylated proteins lie outside traditional EGFR pathway representations, 29 (11%) of the 273 phosphorylated proteins and 5 (13%) of the 38 unphosphorylated connective proteins in the TPS network are recognized as EGFR pathway members. We find strong evidence for many of the predicted directions as well. In total, 82 of 202 interaction directions are supported by our semi-automated evaluations using EGFR reference pathways, the PhosphoSitePlus input data, and natural language processing software (; Data S3 and S4; Supplemental Experimental Procedures). The vast majority of the remaining directions can neither be confirmed nor refuted (Data S3). Our additional analyses (; Data S3) show that TPS also recovers high-quality pathway models when applied to existing EGF response datasets with lower temporal resolution.
TPS Network Models Can Guide Follow-Up Experiments
The TPS network can be used to prioritize proteins and interactions for additional experimental testing. To illustrate this process, we focused on edges for which the direction or sign were predicted confidently and one of the two proteins is a member of an EGFR reference pathway. For each interaction, we inhibited the predicted upstream protein and measured the effect on the predicted target’s phosphorylation using western blotting. From our list of ten candidate interactions (Table S1), we selected the three edges for which the antibodies reliably produced clean and quantifiable bands at the right molecular weight: MAPK1-ATP1A1; ABL2 → CRK; and AKT1 → ZYX (zyxin) (Figures 3C and S4). These proteins are already known to physically interact. The novelty of the TPS predictions is the interactions’ relevance to the EGF response. The inhibitors used to inhibit the upstream proteins were SCH772984 for MAPK1, dasatinib for ABL2, and MK-2206 for AKT1. After serum starvation, the cells were treated with an inhibitor for one hour and then stimulated with EGF. We collected data at two time points (denoted short and long; see Figure S4) based on the timing of the phosphorylation events in our mass spectrometry data. Lysates were then assayed by western blot to quantify the level of phosphorylation of the downstream protein.
Dasatinib decreased phosphorylation of CRK (isoform Crk-II) pY221, consistent with the TPS pathway edge (Figure S4). Inhibiting AKT1 increased phosphorylation of Zyxin. In both cases, the predicted interaction direction is supported. MAPK1 inhibition increased ATP1A1 pY10 phosphorylation. The TPS model predicted an inhibitory interaction between these proteins, but the direction was ambiguous. Our data agree with the predicted edge sign and suggest that MAPK1 is upstream of ATP1A1. Truly validating the predicted edges would require more direct manipulation of the relevant kinases because Dasatinib is a multi-target inhibitor; SCH772984 inhibits both MAPK1 and MAPK3; and MK-2206 inhibits AKT1, AKT2, and AKT3. However, these inhibitor experiments demonstrate how TPS can generate testable predictions from global phosphoproteomic data.
TPS Makes Network Predictions Not Captured by Alternative Approaches
We compared TPS to two existing methods that combine PPI networks and time series data and a third that uses only the phosphorylation data (Supplemental Experimental Procedures). The dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) infers posterior peptide-peptide interaction probabilities from time series data and network priors. TimeXNet formulates pathway prediction as a network flow problem. FunChisq uses an adapted chi-square test to detect directed relationships between phosphorylated proteins. Comparing the four predicted EGF response pathway models demonstrates the impact of the diverse algorithmic strategies. Almost all of the protein-protein edges are unique to a single method, and no edges are predicted by all four methods. Despite greater overlap among the predicted nodes, the four pathways are divergent.
Because most of the differentially phosphorylated proteins are not members of any reference pathway, these pathways cannot be used to assess the overall quality of the predictions. The TimeXNet pathway, the largest of the three predicted networks, generally captures the most reference pathway interactions when ignoring edge direction and sign (Data S4). However, a closer examination that accounts for the predicted interaction direction shows that TPS typically makes the fewest errors, even when controlling for the size of the predicted pathways (Data S4).
Yeast Osmotic Stress Response Model Recapitulates Known Pathway Structure and Nominates Candidate Rck2 and Cdc28 Substrates
Although they are still not fully characterized, stress-response signaling cascades in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are better understood than their human counterparts and are not subject to cell-type-specific effects. Thus, we applied TPS to model the yeast osmotic stress response to assess its ability to recapitulate this frequently studied pathway and reveal additional interactions. The hyperosmotic stress response is primarily controlled by the high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway. profiled the rapid response to NaCl, an osmotic stressor, measuring phosphorylation changes for 60 s post-stimulation at uniform 5-s intervals. They identified 1,596 phosphorylated proteins, including 1,401 dynamic phosphopeptides on 784 proteins based on their fold changes in the salt stress time series with respect to a control (Table S2). We used these data to construct a TPS pathway model of the early osmotic stress response (Data S3).
The TPS osmotic stress pathway contains 216 proteins and 287 interactions (Figure S5). Thirty-six of these proteins (17%) have been previously annotated as osmotic stress pathway proteins. Focusing on the subset of interactions that connect known HOG pathway members reveals that many of the edges connecting them are correct as well (Figure 4A). TPS recovers the core part of the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) high-osmolarity pathway, including the interactions Sho1 → Ste50, Sho1 → Cdc24, Sho1 → Pbs2, Ssk2 → Pbs2, and Pbs2 → Hog1 (Data S4). In addition, it correctly places Hog1 as the direct regulator of Rck2 and the transcription factors Hot1, Msn2, and Sko1. TPS identifies Sch9 as an additional regulator of Sko1. Following hyperosmotic shock, Hog1 is recruited to Fps1, consistent with the TPS prediction. The predicted feedback from Hog1 to Ste50 is also well supported in osmotic stress. Many predicted interactions that deviate from the canonical HOG pathway model can be attributed to the input phosphorylation data and background network, not the TPS algorithm.
After confirming the TPS osmotic stress model agrees well with existing models, we investigated novel candidate pathway members. The TPS model captured the cascade Hog1 → Rck2 → Eft2 and predicted additional Rck2 targets (Figure 4B). To test these predictions, we compared them to a recent phosphoproteomic study of an RCK2 mutant subjected to osmotic stress. All four proteins that TPS predicts are activated by Rck2 have defective phosphorylation on at least one phosphosite in rck2Δ five minutes after osmotic insult. Thus, Rck2 likely directly phosphorylates Fpk1, Pik1, Rod1, and YLR257W upon osmotic stress, as TPS predicts. In addition to the four activated substrates, TPS predicts that Rck2 directly regulates seven additional proteins with an ambiguous sign. Three of these seven predicted targets—Mlf3, Sla1, and YHR131C—have a phosphosite that is dependent on Rck2 during osmotic stress, supporting the TPS predictions. The three protein-protein edge signs are ambiguous because some phosphosites on the proteins exhibit a significant increase in phosphorylation and others decrease. Similarly, we verified that 67 out of 91 (74%) predicted Cdc28 targets have at least one phosphosite with defective phosphorylation following Cdc28 inhibition.
The high-quality TPS osmotic stress pathway demonstrates the algorithm is broadly useful beyond our own EGF stimulation study. It not only recovers many major elements of the classic HOG pathway representation but also prioritizes condition-specific kinase targets that are supported by independent perturbations.

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
High-throughput proteomic assays illuminate the amazing breadth and complexity of the signal transduction pathways that cells employ to respond to extracellular cues. These technologies can quantify protein abundance or post-translational modifications (PTMs). Mass spectrometry, in particular, offers a broad view of PTMs, including phosphorylation, ubiquitination, acetylation, and methylation, and is not restricted to a predefined list of proteins. Here, we show how to discover new facets of signaling cascades from complex proteomic data by integrating observed PTMs with existing knowledge of protein interactions.
Many gaps persist in our understanding of phosphorylation signaling cascades. For example, our mass spectrometry experiments show that nearly all proteins that are significantly (de)phosphorylated when the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is stimulated are absent from EGFR pathway maps. The low overlap is consistent with previous temporal phosphoproteomic studies of mammalian signaling. Discordance between mass spectrometry studies and pathway databases can be caused by extensive crosstalk among pathways, context-specific interactions, cell- and tissue-specific protein abundance, and signaling pathway rewiring.
Network inference algorithms can explain the phosphorylation events that lie outside of canonical pathways and complement curated pathway maps. Specialized algorithms model time series data, which inform the ordering of phosphorylation changes and support causal instead of correlative modeling. Temporal protein signaling information can be used to reconstruct more accurate and complete networks than a single static snapshot of the phosphoproteome.
A complementary challenge to interpreting off-pathway phosphorylation is that the cellular stimulus response includes mechanisms that are not captured in phosphoproteomic datasets. There is an interplay between phosphorylation changes and other integral parts of signaling cascades. Phosphorylation can affect protein stability, subcellular localization, and recognition of interaction partners. Phosphoproteomic studies measure only one type of PTM, and not all phosphorylated proteins are detected by mass spectrometry. Additional information is required to infer comprehensive signaling cascades that include non-differentially phosphorylated proteins. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks serve this purpose by identifying interactions that connect observed phosphorylation events.
We present the Temporal Pathway Synthesizer (TPS) (Figure 1), a method to assemble temporal phosphoproteomic data into signaling pathways that extend beyond existing canonical maps. “Synthesizer” refers to applying computational program synthesis techniques to produce pathway models from experimental data, not synthetic biology. TPS overcomes both of the aforementioned challenges in interpreting phosphoproteomic data: modeling signaling events that are not captured by pathway databases and including non-phosphorylated proteins in the predicted pathway structures.
TPS first transforms a PPI graph into a condition-specific network by using mass spectrometry data to filter out irrelevant interactions. Next, TPS finds the orientation and sign of edges in the condition-specific interaction graph based on the order of the phosphorylation events. Phosphorylation timing is modeled separately for each observed phosphorylation site on a protein. TPS systematically explores all signed, directed graphs that may explain how signaling messages propagate from the stimulated source protein. Finally, TPS summarizes the valid graphs into a single aggregate network that explicitly tracks confident and ambiguous predictions. Our temporal pathway visualizer tool interactively visualizes the summary network alongside the temporal phosphoproteomic data.
We study the dynamic signaling responses to human EGF stimulation and yeast osmotic stress. TPS recovers networks that explain how stimulus-responsive proteins are activated or inhibited via chains of physical interactions stemming from the upstream receptors. The highest-confidence TPS predictions are well supported by prior knowledge and consistent with kinase perturbations. These insights into well characterized human and yeast pathways exemplify how TPS can produce condition-specific pathway maps.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The accession number for the raw mass spectrometry proteomics data reported in this paper is PRIDE: PXD006697.
The processed data are in Data S1. TPS (https://github.com/koksal/tps) and our visualization tool for TPS output (https://github.com/koksal/tpv) are available as MIT-licensed open source software. An archival copy of TPS version 2.2, including instructions for running the software, example data, and scripts for linking PCSF and TPS, is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1215177.
Supplementary Material
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
R.B. consults with NVIDIA.
Data and Software Availability
PXD006697
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures, seven figures, two tables, and five data files and can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.08.085.