PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Oocyte; Oocyte
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Elvas oocyte faps

ABSTRACT:
We discovered that mouse oocytes contain novel non-membrane-bound organelles which we named EndoLysosomal Vesicular Assemblies (ELVAs). ELVAs contain endolysosomal and autophagy vesicles as well as Proteasomes held together by a matrix protein. To discover the matrix protein holding ELVAs together we subjected mouse oocyte with fluorescently labelled ELVAs to mechanical lysis followed by Fluorescence-Activated Particle Sorting to enrich for ELVAs. Enriched ELVAs were then subjected to proteomics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mass Spectrometry of FAPS sorted ELVAs by an alternative sorting strategy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
FAPS-sorted samples were spun for 15min at 20000g at 4˚C, the supernatant was carefully removed, and the pellet was resuspended in 10µl 6M guanidinium chloride in 10mM EPPS pH 8.5. Samples were heated at 60˚C for 30min, diluted with EPPS pH 8.5 to 2M Guanidinium chloride and digested with LysC (10 ng/μl) overnight at RT. Samples were further diluted to 0.5M Guanidinium chloride and digested with LysC (10 ng/µl) and trypsin (5ng/μl) for further 8h at 37°C. Samples were acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 10% and desalted with home-made C18 columns. Columns were equilibrated with 100% acetonitrile, then 70% acetonitrile 30% 1% formic acid in milliQ water, 30% acetonitrile 70% 1% formic acid, and finally 100% 1% formic acid. For all steps 30µl were loaded and spun at 2000g for 10min or until columns were empty. Samples were applied to equilibrated columns and spun at 2000g until empty. Columns were washed 2x100µl with 1% Formic Acid and peptides eluted with 20µl 30% Acetonitrile 70% 1% Formic Acid, then with 20µl 70% Acetonitrile 30% 1% Formic Acid. Eluates were pooled and stored at -20˚C until processing for LC-MS. Samples were analyzed using a Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark). Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75μm, packed with 2μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Chromatographic gradients started at 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min and gradually increased to 25% buffer B and 75% A in 79 min and then to 40% buffer B and 60% A in 11 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 10 min with 100% buffer B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.4 kV and source temperature at 305°C. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1400 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to ‘standard’ and injection time to ‘auto’. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 2E4, and an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and a maximum injection time of 12ms were used. Digested bovine serum albumin (New England Biolabs, P8108S) was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

DATA PROCESSING:
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot mouse database plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. Peptide quantification data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.3 or 2.5) using 2ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current (XIC). The obtained values were used to calculate protein fold-changes and their corresponding adjusted p-values. For all experiments, only proteins with >1 unique peptide were considered for further analysis.