PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Fomitiporia chilensis; Hgf-1 cells; Uhplc-hrms; Polysaccharides

ABSTRACT:
Fomitiporia species have aroused the interest of numerous investigations that reveal their biological activity and medicinal potential. The present investigation shows the antioxi-dant, anticancer, and immunomodulatory activity of acidic polysaccharides obtained from the fungus Fomitiporia chilensis. The acidic polysaccharides were obtained for acidic precipitation with 2% O-N-cetyl pyridinium bromide. Chemical analysis was performed by FT-IR and GC-MS methods. The antioxidant capacity of acidic polysaccharides from F. chilensis was evaluated by the scavenging of free radicals with the ABTS and DPPH as-says. Macrophages proliferation and cytokine production assays were used to determine the immunomodulatory capacity of the polysaccharides. Anti-tumor and cytotoxicity ac-tivity was evaluated with MTT assay in the U-937, HTC-116, and HGF-1 cell lines. The ef-fect of polysaccharides on the cell cycle of the HCT-116 cell line was determined for flow cytometry. Fourier Transform-infrared characterization revealed characteristic absorption peaks for polysaccharides, whereas the GC-MS analysis detected three peak correspond-ing to D-galactose, galacturonic acid and D-glucose. The TNF-α proliferation was in-creased when the cell was treated with 2 mg/mL polysaccharides, whereas the IL-6 con-centration was increased with all polysaccharide concentrations evaluated. The cell cycle analysis of HTC-116 treated with polysaccharides evidenced that the acidic polysaccha-rides from F. chilensis induce an increase in the G0/G1 cell cycle phase, incrementing the apoptotic cell percentage. A proteomic analysis suggested some of the molecular mecha-nisms involved in their antioxidant and cellular detoxifying effects and justified their tra-ditional use in heart diseases.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Immunomodulatory, antioxidant, and potential anticancer activity of the polysaccharides of the fungus Fomitiporia chilensis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell Treatment and Protein Extraction: HGF-1 cells were cultured in DMEM without fetal bovine serum and treated with 1 mg mL-1 of polysaccharides for 24 h. Afterward, cells were rinsed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline and solubilized in 200μL of RIPA buffer.  Then, cell extracts were sonicated, centrifuged at 14,000 x g, and purified by a modified trichloroacetic acid protein precipitation procedure (Clean-Up Kit; GE Healthcare, München, Germany). Afterwards, gel-assisted proteolysis was car-ried out. Briefly, the protein solution was entrapped in a polyacrylamide gel matrix before reduc-tion with dithiothreitol and cysteine residue alkylation with iodoacetamide. Then, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and peptides were extracted from the gel and purified using a C18 ZipTip (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) in accordance with the manufacturer's protocol.  Liquid Chromatography High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry: The Ultra-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography and the High-Resolution Mass Spec-trometry analysis were carried out as described elsewhere (Ojeda et al., 2021). Briefly, samples were injected into an Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Pep-tides extracted from the samples were then loaded automatically into a trap column and eluted onto a 50 cm analytical column with a 180 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Data acquisition was performed in electrospray ionization positive mode by a data dependent acquisi-tion method to obtain the corresponding MS/MS spectra.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data Analysis: The acquired raw data were analyzed using Proteome DiscovererTM 2.3 platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For the identification of the MS2 spectra, Sequest HT® was utilized as the search engine (Eng et al., 1994), and the Swiss-Prot part of UniProt for Homo sapiens was used as the database. Protein assignments were validated using the Percolator® al-gorithm (Käll et al., 2007) by imposing a strict cut-off of 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Label-free quantitation was implemented using the Minora feature of Proteome Discover-erTM 2.3. Abundances were based on precursor intensities. Normalization was performed based on total peptide amount. Protein abundance ratios were calculated based on unique peptides as median of all possible pairwise ratios calculated between replicates of all connected peptides. Abundance ratio p-values were calculated by ANOVA based on background population of pep-tides and proteins. Proteins with ANOVA p < 0.05 and Log2 fold change > 0.5 were considered as significantly deregulated. The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) (https://www.string-db.org) was used to perform a protein-protein interaction networks functional enrichment bioinformatics analysis. Functional pathways were analyzed using the Kyoto Ency-clopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http:// www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html).

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Materials and Reagents
Standard monosaccharides (D-galactose, D-glucose, D-mannose, L-rhamnose, X-fructose, Y-apiose, D-xylose, and myo-inositol) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA. The following reagents were of analytical grade: 1,1-diphenyl-2-picry-hydrazyl (DPPH*), and ABTS (2,20-Azinobis- (3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulphonate). All other chemicals (pyridine, hexane, and methanol/3 M HCl solution) were analytical grade and were purchased from either Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) or Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All water was obtained from a Milli-Q system (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Other materials were purchased from local suppliers.
4.2. Collection, Authentication of Basidiocarps and Mycelial Culture
The carpophore of Fomitiporia chilensis was collected from a Cryptocarya alba (Peumo) specimen in the Coyanmahuida Park, in Commune of Florida, province of Concepción (Biobío Region, Chile). The identity of the basidiome was confirmed based on macro- and micro-morphological features as described in by CR (co-author of the aforementioned publication). A representative voucher specimen (Accession CONC-F 1926) was deposited at the herbarium in the same department of the University of Concepción. The mycelial culture was maintained using YMG agar medium (0.5% w/v yeast extract (B.D. Biosciences, San José, CA, USA), 1% w/v malt extract (B.D. Biosciences, San José, CA, USA), 1.5% w/v glucose, and 2% w/v agar) by culturing at 20 ± 2 °C. Later, mycelium fragments were transferred to liquid YMG medium (1% w/v glucose, 1% w/v malt extract, 0.4% w/v yeast extract) at pH 5.8 and incubated at 20 °C for 1 to 2 months under constant agitation (120 rpm). Finally, the mycelium was lyophilized (Lyophilizer Cryodos, Telstar, Terrasa, Spain).
4.3. Extraction of Polysaccharides
Polysaccharide extraction was conducted by Parages et al. (2012). In total, 10 g of lyophilised F. chilensis biomass was suspended in 400 mL of 80% (v/v) EtOH (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and agitated at room temperature for 16 h. After this pre-treatment, the solution was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant of the solution was removed before resuspension of the pellet in 400 mL of 80% EtOH. To extract lipophilic pigments, this suspension process was repeated multiple times until we obtained a colorless supernatant. The final pellet was re-suspended in 300 mL of distilled water and stirred at 100 °C. Once boiling temperature was reached, the heating process was terminated, and the solution was agitated for more than 30 min. This procedure was performed thrice. The resulting mixture was subsequently centrifuged (3000 rpm) for 15 min. The presence of phenols was confirmed using the Folin-Ciocalteu reagent. Thereafter, polyvinylpyrrolidone precipitation and centrifugation (at 3000 rpm for 5 min) were used to eliminate the phenols. The extraction of polysaccharides from the supernatant involved selective precipitation using 2% O-N-cetyl pyridinium bromide (Cetavlon, Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA), as described in Casas-Arrojo et al., 2021. The acid polysaccharides precipitated were purified with 4 M NaCl, then flocculated with 96% (v/v) EtOH (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and centrifuged at 4500 rpm for 10 min. The recovered pellet was dialyzed overnight at low osmotic pressure (0.5 M NaCl) and undertook agitation at 4 °C on a dialysis membrane (Dialysis Tube Cellulose, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Following dialysis, the entire membrane content was retrieved and rinsed with 96% EtOH. The mixture was maintained at a temperature of 4 °C until the flocculation of the polysaccharides occurred. Subsequently, a final centrifugation of 2 min at room temperature was conducted at 3000 rpm to retrieve the polysaccharides. Next, the polysaccharides were frozen at a temperature of −80 °C and then subjected to lyophilization with the Cryodos Lyophilizer from Telstar, Terrasa, Spain. 
4.4. Total Carbon (C), Hydrogen (H), Nitrogen (N), and Sulfur (S), and Protein Content
The total carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and sulfur (S) contents were analyzed in the dry biomass of F. chilensis and extracted polysaccharides, utilizing the total combustion method according to Abdala-Díaz et al.. This technique is based on the complete and instantaneous oxidation of the sample by pure combustion with controlled oxygen at a temperature of 1050 °C (C, H, N, S), followed by pyrolysis at 1300 °C (O) for decomposition of O as CO and oxidation to CO2. The resulting combustion products, CO2, H2O, SO2, and N2, were subsequently quantified using the selective I.R. absorption detector (C, H, S), as well as the TCD (N) differential thermal conductivity sensors of the LECO TruSpec Micro CHNSO-elemental analyzer (St. Joseph, MI, USA). The result obtained for each element (C, H, N, S) was expressed in percentages (%) concerning the weight of the sample. Once the samples were analyzed with the Perkin-Elmer 2400 Mar Biotechnol analyzer (Perkin-Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). The protein content was calculated by multiplying the N% by the N-Prot factor. Since for F. chilensis the factor was not determined, the global mean N-Prot factor of 6.25 for casein of milk was used.
4.5. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR)
Self-supporting pressed disks (16 mm in diameter) composed of a mixture of the polysaccharides and KBr (1% w/w) were made with a hydrostatic press at a force of 15.0 tcm−2 for 2 min. The FT-IR spectra of the polysaccharides fraction of F. chilensis were acquired using a Thermo Nicolet Avatar 360 IR spectrophotometer (Thermo Electron Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) having a resolution of 4 cm−1 with a DTGS detector and using an OMNIC 7.2 software (with a bandwidth of 50 cm−1 and an enhancement factor of 2.6). The region of 400–4000 cm−1 was utilized for the measurements. Baseline adjustment was performed using the Thermo Nicolet OMNIC software to flatten the baseline of each spectrum. Furthermore, the OMNIC correlation algorithm was used to compare sample spectra with those of the spectral library (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
4.6. Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)
4.6.1. Derivatization of Polysaccharides
Polysaccharides extracted from F. chilensis (2 mg), and monosaccharide standards underwent the same procedure. Initially, 100 µL of the standard stock solution containing 1 mg mL−1 of each monosaccharide was dried under nitrogen gas flow. The polysaccharide samples, along with a mixture containing standard monosaccharides from the I.S., were treated in a 2 mL HCl 3 M solution in MeOH at 80 °C for 24 h. The saccharides were washed using methanol and dried under a flow of nitrogen gas. Following this, the trimethylsilyl reaction was carried out using 200 µL of Tri-Sil HTP (Thermo Scientific). Each vial containing the sample was heated to 80 °C for 1 h. After the sample was derivatized, it was cooled to room temperature and dried using nitrogen. The dry residue was then extracted with 2 mL of hexane and centrifuged. Finally, the solution of silylated monosaccharides in hexane was concentrated, reconstituted (200 µL), and filtered before being transferred to a GC-MS autosampler vial. The sample was prepared and analyzed in triplicate. 
4.6.2. Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) Analysis
GC-MS analyses were carried out using a gas chromatography Trace GC (Thermo Scientific), autosampler Tri Plus, and DSQ mass spectrometer quadrupole (Thermo Scientific). The column was ZB-5 Zebron, Phenomenex (5% Phenyl, 95% Dimethylpolysiloxane, Torrance, CA, USA), of dimensions 30 m × 0.25 mm i.d. × 0.25 µm. The column temperature was programmed from 80 °C (held 2 min) and 5 °C min-1 to a final temperature of 230 °C. The carrier gas was helium (flow 1.2 mL/min). The injection volume was 1 µL in a splitless mode at 250 °C. The source and M.S. transfer line temperature were at 230 °C. A Select Ion Monitoring Program (SIM) in electron ionization mode was set at 70 electron volts (eV) in the mass spectrometer. The TMS-derivatives were identified using characteristic retention times and a mass spectrum compared to those of authentic standards. The compounds were identified by comparing the mass spectra with those in the library of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST, 2014). 
4.7. Antioxidant Activity (ABTS) Free-Radical Method in Biomass from F. chilensis
The ability of the polysaccharides to scavenge free radicals was evaluated using an ABTS assay according to Re et al. (1999), with a few modifications. Antioxidant capacity as 2,2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS)) Assay Scaveng-ing of Free Radical in polysaccharides. An aqueous solution containing 7 mM ABTS (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was mixed with 2.45 mM potassium persulfate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 16 h in the dark at room temperature. After incubation, the well-mixed solution was diluted to an absorbance of 0.7 at 727 nm with deionized water. The final concentrations of polysaccharide solution were: 25, 50, 75, 100, 150, 200, 300, 400, and 500 μg mL−1. A total of 50 μL of these samples were mixed with 950 μL of ABTS solution. The resulting mixture was measured spectrophotometrically at 727 nm (Micro Plate Reader 2001, Whittaker Bioproducts, Walkersville, MD, USA). ABTS radical scavenging capacity was calculated according to the following Equation: where A0 is the absorbance of the ABTS radical in phosphate buffer at time 0 and A1 is the absorbance of the ABTS radical solution mixed with the sample after 8 min. All determinations were performed in triplicate (n = 3). 
4.8. In Vitro Immunomodulatory Activity Assay
4.8.1. Cell Culture
In this study, five cell lines were utilized, including the colon cancer cell line (HCT-116, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), the human leukemia cell line (U-937, Manassas, VA, USA), the human monocytes cell line (THP-1, Manassas, VA, USA), the murine macrophages cell line (RAW 264.7, ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), and the human gingival fibroblasts cell line (HGF-1, primary culture). RAW 264.7, HCT-116, and HGF-1 cells were routinely cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Biowest, Nuaillé, France) that was supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Biowest, Nuaillé, France), a 1% penicillin-streptomycin solution 100 UI/mL (Biowest, Nuaillé, France), and 0.5% of amphotericin B (Biowest, Nuaillé, France). Meanwhile, while U-937 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin-streptomycin solution 100 UImL−1, and 0.5% of amphotericin B and THP-1 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Biowest, Nuaillé, France) which was supplemented with 0.05 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% penicillin-streptomycin solution 100 UI mL−1, and 0.25 μg mL−1 of amphotericin B. Cells were maintained sub-confluent at 37 °C in a humid atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Cultured cells were collected using gentle scraping when confluence reached 75% in HTC-116 and HGF-1, as they are adherent cells. Scrapping of U-937 cells was not performed because these cells are in suspension. These cells were collected using centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 5 min.
4.8.2. Cell Viability Assay of Lines Raw 264.7, U-937, HTC-116, and HGF-1
The Raw 264.7, U-937, HTC-116, and HGF-1 cells were incubated with different concentrations of FcPs (0–100 μg mL−1). The experiment was conducted individually for each cell line in a 96-well microplate for 72 h (37 °C, 5% CO2 in a humid atmosphere). As a positive control, the same cell lines were used without treatment. An MTT assay (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) was utilized to estimate the proliferation of these cell lines (Abdala Díaz et al., 2011). A volume of 10 μL of the MTT solution (5 mg mL−1 in phosphate-buffered saline) was added to each well. Incubation of the plates was then carried out at 37 °C for 4 h. Formazan was dissolved with the addition of acid-isopropanol (150 μL of 0.04 N HCl-2- propanol) and measured using spectrophotometry at 550 nm (Microplate reader, Biotek, Synergy HT, VT, USA). The cell viability was expressed as the mean percentage of viable cells compared with untreated cells. Four replicates were performed for each concentration tested across three independent experiments.
The selectivity index determines the cytotoxic selectivity of the compounds tested and is calculated by the ratio between the IC50 as indicated in the following formula: 
According to Indrayanto et al., a selective compound presents a SI over 3.
4.8.3. Cell Cycle Analysis by Flow Cytometry (HCT-116 Human Cancer Cell)
HCT-116 cells were seeded in six-well plates and incubated at 37 °C in a humidified chamber with 5% CO2 until subconfluence. Subsequently, the corresponding treatment was added to the fresh complete culture medium, and cells were incubated at the same conditions for 16h. Following the treatment, cells were harvested and centrifuged. Pellets were washed with PBS supplemented with 1% FBS and HEPES 10 mM and then fixed using 70% EtOH, for 1 h at −20 °C. Finally, the cells were centrifuged and washed twice with PBS supplemented with 1% FBS and HEPES 10 mM. They were then suspended in a propidium iodide staining solution containing 40 μg mL−1 propidium iodide, 0.1 mg mL−1 RNase-A, and EDTA 2 mM in PBS supplemented with 1% FBS and HEPES 10 mM. Subsequently, they were incubated for 30 min at 37 °C in a light-protected chamber. The samples were measured using a FACS VERSETM flow cytometer (B.D. Biosciences), and the results were analyzed using the Kaluza analysis software version 2.1 (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA).
4.8.4. Determination of Cytokines with RAW 264.7 Cell Line
The RAW 264.7 cells were cultured in 96-well microplates (5  104 cells well−1) using Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) at a temperature of 37 °C, 5% CO2, and a humid atmosphere, and in the presence of different concentrations (0–100 μg mL−1) of polysaccharides in a total volume of 100 µL. Conditioned media from the untreated and treated RAW cells over 24 h were collected. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) present in these conditioned media was quantified by using a mouse IL-6 ELISA Ready-SET-Go Kit (Affymetrix, EBioscience, Madrid, Spain), following the supplier’s instructions.
4.8.5. Determination of Cytokines with THP-1 Cell Line
Human THP-1 cells were seeded in 96-well microplates (5 × 104 cells per well−1) and differentiated into macrophages after a 10 ng mL−1 PMA stimulation for 48 h. Subsequently, wells were washed with fresh medium and exposed to different concentrations of the polysaccharide for 24 h. Human TNF-α present in the conditioned media was quantified by using a Human TNF alpha uncoated ELISA kit (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Madrid, Spain).
4.9. Proteomics Analysis (UHPLC-HRMS Analysis for Differential Protein Expression Detection in Treated HGF-1 Cells)
An analysis using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography high-resolution mass spectrometry (UHPLC-HRMS) was conducted on HGF-1 cells to investigate the effects of polysaccharides obtained from F. chilensis on protein expression levels in non-cancerous cells.
4.9.1. Cell Treatment and Protein Extraction 
HGF-1 cells were cultured in DMEM without fetal bovine serum and treated with 1.0 mg mL−1 of polysaccharides for 24 h. Afterward, cells were rinsed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline and solubilized in 200 μL of RIPA buffer. Then, cell extracts were sonicated, centrifuged at 14,000× g, and purified using a modified trichloroacetic acid protein precipitation procedure (Clean-Up Kit; G.E. Healthcare, München, Germany). Afterward, gel-assisted proteolysis was carried out. Briefly, the protein solution was entrapped in a polyacrylamide gel matrix before reduction with dithiothreitol and cysteine residue alkylation with iodoacetamide. Then, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), and peptides were extracted from the gel and purified using a C18 ZipTip (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) using the manufacturer’s protocol.
4.9.2. Liquid Chromatography High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry
The Ultra-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography and the High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry analysis were carried out as described elsewhere (Ojeda et al., 2021). Briefly, samples were injected into an Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides extracted from the samples were then loaded automatically into a trap column and eluted onto a 50 cm analytical column with a 180 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nL min−1. Data acquisition was performed in electrospray ionization positive mode using a data-dependent acquisition method to obtain the corresponding MS/MS spectra.
4.9.3. Data Analysis
The acquired raw data were analyzed using the Proteome DiscovererTM 2.3 platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). For the identification of the MS2 spectra, Sequest HT® was utilized as the search engine, and the Swiss-Prot part of UniProt for Homo sapiens was used as the database. Protein assignments were validated using the Percolator® algorithm by imposing a strict cut-off of 1% false discovery rate (FDR).
Label-free quantitation was implemented using the Minora feature of Proteome DiscovererTM 2.3. Abundances were based on precursor intensities. Normalization was performed based on total peptide amount. Protein abundance ratios were calculated based on unique peptides as the median of all possible pairwise ratios calculated between replicates of all connected peptides. Abundance ratio p-values were calculated using ANOVA based on background population of peptides and proteins. Proteins with ANOVA p < 0.05 and Log2 fold change > 0.5 were considered to be significantly deregulated.
The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins (STRING) (, accessed on 14 November 2022) was used to perform a protein-protein interaction network functional enrichment bioinformatics analysis. Functional pathways were analyzed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (, accessed on 14 November 2022).
4.10. Statistical Analysis 
Means ± standard deviation (S.D.) was used to express all values. Differences among treatments with polysaccharides were evaluated using a one-way ANOVA. When significant differences were found, a post hoc Tukey HSD test was conducted to compare the means among treatments. Differences were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05. All statistical analyses were performed using the Statistica 7.0 software. Figures were generated using SigmaPlot version 12.0, 2015 (Systat Software Inc., Richmond, CA, USA).

RESULTS:
2. Results
2.1. Authentication of Basidiocarps
The identity of the basidiome used in this research was confirmed based on macro and micromorphological features, compared with the holotype and other numerous specimens (paratypes) of the species originally described from the same locality and through its host relationship, and because F. chilensis is the single species of Fomitiporia recorded in Chile.
2.2. Polysaccharides Characterization/Chemical Assessment
2.2.1. Total Carbon (C), Total Hydrogen (H), Total Nitrogen (N), Total Sulfur (S), and Total Protein
In the present study of F. chilensis, an elemental analysis was performed on the extracted fungal polysaccharides. Fomitiporia chilensis polysaccharides (FcPs) displayed a high percentage of carbon (40.03%), followed by nitrogen (2.14%), hydrogen (6.08%), and sulfur (0.97%). Table 1 shows the elemental analysis of FcPs and protein content (Table 1).
Accordingly, the obtained molar (C/N ratio) value was 21.8 in FcPs. 
2.2.2. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) 
The FT-IR spectra in the wavenumber range of 400 cm−1 to 4000 cm−1 were utilized for data analysis. The FT-IR data indicated that the polysaccharides exhibit typical carbohydrate patterns, allowing for the identification of specific functional groups and molecular arrangements (Figure 1). 
2.2.3. Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS)
Based on the GC-MS sugar analysis method, the monosaccharides identified in FcPs are presented in Figure 2. Four main peaks were detected at 27.77, 28.62, 28.87, and 29.28 min, integrated to 53.02%, 16.02%, 6.83%, and 6.27%, respectively. Analysis of the mass fragmentations confirmed the assignation of the peaks to galactose (Gal), galacturonic acid (GalA), and glucose (Glc) isomer α and β, respectively, indicating the presence of a galactan containing lateral chains formed by galacturonic acid and glucose (Table 2).
2.3. Biological Assessment 
2.3.1. Antioxidant Activity (ABTS Method)
Antioxidant activity was evaluated in different concentrations of polysaccharide from F. chilensis. In the total antioxidant capacity (expressed as a percentage of the radical scavenging capacity), all samples showed activity (Figure 3). The concentration at 25 µg mL−1 and 50 µg mL−1 polysaccharide showed the lowest activity with 6.5 ± 0.3% and 6.99 ± 0.5% of scavenging effects, respectively. Moreover, the high concentration at 500 µg mL−1 of the polysaccharide had the greatest activities, with approximately 23.55 ± 0.9% scavenging effects. Significant differences (p ≤ 0.05) were observed between the antioxidant activity of concentrations of polysaccharides (Figure 3). 
2.3.2. Cell Viability of Lines RAW 264.7, U-937, HTC-116, and HGF-1 
The cytotoxic effects of the FcPs on RAW 264.7, U-937, HTC-116, and HGF-1 cells were determined using the MTT assay. After 72 h of incubation, the IC50 values were calculated at a maximum concentration of 100 µg mL−1. The IC50 values for each cell line were as follows: RAW 264.7 (598.83 µg mL−1) (Figure 4a), U-937 (3177.09 µg mL−1) (Figure 4b), and HTC-116 (1154.63 µg mL−1) (Figure 4c). However, the IC50 for HGF-1 could not be determined, since this value was not reached at the polysaccharide concentrations studied (shown in Figure 4d). The MTT assay results indicated that the tested polysaccharides inhibited cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner for RAW 264.7, U-937, and HTC-116 cell lines. This study demonstrated that the FcPs induced potent cytotoxicity in RAW 264.7, U-937, and HCT-116 cells. Among the cancer cell lines tested, RAW 264.7 and HCT-116 showed the highest susceptibility to treatment with the FcPs, resulting in increased growth inhibition. 
2.3.3. Determination of Cytokines (IL-6 and TNF-α) in RAW 264.7 and THP-1 Cell Line
This trial evaluated the production of proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α. For this purpose, the RAW 264.7 mouse macrophage and THP-1 human cell lines were used with the following polysaccharide concentrations: 1 μg mL−1, 5 μg mL−1, 25 μg mL−1, 50 μg mL−1, 75 μg mL−1, and 100 μg mL−1 for IL-6 and 0.1–2.5 mg mL−1 for TNF-α, respectively. For the positive control, E. coli lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was used at a concentration of 0.5 μg mL−1. The maximum concentration of IL-6 obtained within the concentrations studied in RAW 264.7 cells was 7132 ± 552 pg mL−1 when a concentration of polysaccharides of 25–100 μg mL−1 (Figure 5a) was applied. In the case of the production of TNF-α by THP-1 cells, the maximum was 9028 pg mL−1 at the concentration of 2.0 mg mL−1 (Figure 5b). Both Figures show that for IL-6 and TNF-α, the synthesis and accumulation by both cell lines increased as a higher concentration of FcPs was applied. Specifically, IL-6 synthesis increased from 4244 ± 869 to 7209 ± 484 pg mL−1 as it passed a polysaccharide concentration of 5 to 25 μg mL−1. Similarly, TNF-α production increased from 2124 ± 1250 to 9028 ± 3590 pg mL−1 when the polysaccharide concentration increased from 1.0 to 2.0 mg mL−1. However, in none of the cases did the cytokine levels become saturated.
2.3.4. HCT116 Cell Cycle Analysis Using Flow Cytometry
Cell cycle analysis was conducted on HCT116 cells treated with 0.5, 1.0, or 2.0 mg mL−1 of FcPs. The analysis revealed that these polysaccharides induced a significant increase in Sub G0/G1 phase with a 10.4 ± 1.4%, 14.5 ± 3.2%, and 16.6 ± 4.2% apoptotic population (at 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 mg mL−1, respectively) induced by these polysaccharides, indicating that it is driven HCT116 cells towards apoptosis. The increase in apoptotic population was accompanied by a concomitant decrease in the G2/M phase, as depicted in Figure 6.
2.3.5. Proteomic Analysis in HGF-1 Cells
The proteomic analysis of HGF-1 cells allowed for the high-confidence identification of 1877 proteins (<1% false discovery rate). Table 3 and Figure 7 present the proteins significantly deregulated post-treatment with FcPs (Log2 fold-change > 0.5, p-value < 0.05).
2.4. STRING Analysis of Protein Networks
A protein-protein interaction networks functional enrichment analysis of the significantly deregulated proteins was carried out using STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins). The STRING database assembles information about both the known and predicted protein-protein interactions based on numerous sources, including experimental repositories, computational prediction methods, and public text collections. This analysis revealed that post-treatment differentially expressed proteins have functional associations and are involved in different biological processes, as shown in Figure 8, mainly related to viral life cycle, viral processes, host-virus interaction, response to cytokine, and TGF-beta signaling pathways. In addition, we used the STRING database to look for known functional interactions among the significantly deregulated proteins and the key immunological markers IL-6 and TNF-α (Figure 9), whose expressions were induced when TPH1 cells were treated with polysaccharides from F. chilensis, as shown by the results obtained using ELISA. Several deregulated proteins functionally interact with IL-6 and TNF-α (see Table Inside Figure 9), more of them were over-expressed (eight), and only one was under-expressed.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
The genus Fomitiporia, initially described by Murrill, belongs to the Hymenochaetaceae Donk family (Hymenochaetales, Agaricomycetes Basidiomycota) and comprises a varied and complex group of polypore fungi with worldwide distribution. The species in this genus inhabit the wood of numerous forest species and act primarily as pathogens, inducing white rot and canker. Nevertheless, certain mushrooms within this genus have potential medicinal properties and are used in traditional medicine to treat heart diseases and gastrointestinal cancer.
Fomitiporia chilensis Rajchenb. & Pildain is a species with a perennial basidioma of irregular shape. It typically grows on stumps, fallen branches, and dead tissue of Peumus boldus (boldo) and Cryptocarya alba (peumo), causing white and fibrous wood rot. The species’ distribution is constrained by its host plants, resulting in endemism limited to the sclerophyllous forests of central Chile. This area is characterized by its resistant vegetation adapted to the drought conditions of the region’s Mediterranean climate, and was recognized as one of the 25 biodiversity hotspots. In recent years, Fomitiporia species have aroused the interest of numerous investigations focused on their taxonomic and phylogenetic position; however, studies that reveal its biological activity and medicinal potential are scarce. Triterpenes extracted from a specimen of the species Fomitiporia aethiopica collected in Kenya exhibited notable cytotoxicity against several mammalian cell lines. Specifically, the triterpenes exhibited an effect against MCF-7, A431, and PC-3 with IC50 values of 16, 14, and 8 µg mL−1, respectively. Previous studies have reported that the total extract of the species Fomitiporia ellipsoidea, a polypore from southern China, presents antioxidant components with great activity. The phelligridin K exhibited the highest Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) against the ABTS radical at a concentration of 3.56 mM of Trolox. In comparison, inoscavin C, and inonoblin B, when tested, exhibited results equivalent to 2.82 and 2.04 mM Trolox, respectively. Additionally, significant antioxidant activity was registered in the G1 fraction of polysaccharides obtained from Fomitiporia punctata, evaluated by the increase in inhibition of erythrocyte hemolysis dependent on the concentration of polysaccharide used, reaching up to 73.58% inhibition. Furthermore, this study revealed that concentrations of 250 and 200 µg mL−1 of polysaccharide led to 51% and 68.57% absorption of the DPPH and superoxide radicals, respectively. The activities of fungi that are immunomodulatory, antioxidant, antitumor, anti-inflammatory, and antiviral are primarily linked to their polysaccharide content and structural characteristics. Accordingly, high molecular weight polysaccharides can directly activate leukocytes and stimulate their phagocytic and cytotoxic capacity. 
Fomitiporia species exhibit a wide range of biological activities, from cytotoxicity to antioxidant and immunomodulatory effects, highlighting their potential for medicinal uses. Understanding the mechanisms behind these activities could lead to developing new therapeutic interventions using the bioactive compounds found in these fungi. This research aimed to determine the antioxidant, anticancer, and immunomodulatory activity of acidic polysaccharides obtained from the fungus F. chilensis. Through a comprehensive analysis involving various assays and studies, the objective is to evaluate the therapeutic potential of these acidic polysaccharides and contribute to understanding their biological effects, particularly in the context of potential medicinal applications.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
Data are contained within the article. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD048361.