PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Fibroblast; Mesenchymal cell; Kidney cell
diseases: Renal fibrosis
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; phosphorylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Time-points; Network modeling; Multi-omics; Secretomics; Proteomic; Transcriptomics; Phosphoproteomics; Kidney fibrosis; Extracellular matrix

ABSTRACT:
Kidney fibrosis, characterized by excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, is a progressive disease that, despite affecting 10% of the population,  lacks specific treatments and suitable biomarkers. Aimed at unraveling disease mechanisms and identifying potential therapeutic targets, this study presents a comprehensive, time-resolved multi-omics analysis of kidney fibrosis using an in vitro model system based on human kidney PDGFRβ+ mesenchymal cells. Using computational network modeling we integrated  transcriptomics, proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and secretomics with imaging of the extracellular matrix (ECM). We quantified over 14,000 biomolecules across seven time points following TGF-β stimulation, revealing distinct temporal patterns in the expression and activity of known and potential novel renal fibrosis markers and modulators. The resulting time-resolved multi-omic network models  allowed us to propose mechanisms related to fibrosis progression through early transcriptional reprogramming. Using siRNA knockdowns and phenotypic assays, we validated predictions and elucidated regulatory mechanisms underlying kidney fibrosis. Notably, we demonstrate that several early-activated transcription factors, including FLI1 and E2F1, act as negative regulators of collagen deposition and propose underlying molecular mechanisms. This work advances our understanding of the pathogenesis of kidney fibrosis and provides a valuable resource for the organ fibrosis research community.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Dynamic multi-omics and mechanistic modeling approach uncovers novel mechanisms of kidney fibrosis progression

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Quantitative proteomics, phosphoproteomics (IMAC enrichment) and secretomics experiments were performed on human kidney PDGFRβ+ mesenchymal cells using TMT-quantification. A detailed description of the used methodology can be found in the related publication.

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteomic data was searched using MSFragger and further downstream analysis and integration was performed in the R programming environment. A detailed description of the used methodology can be found in the related publication.