PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Affinity proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Purine nucleotides; Guanylate kinase 1 (guk1); Metabolic dependency; Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (tki); Lung cancer; Non-small cell lung cancer (nsclc); Guanosine diphosphate (gdp); Tumor metabolism; Ras; Signaling; Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (alk)

ABSTRACT:
Little is known about metabolic vulnerabilities in oncogene-driven lung cancer. Here, we performed a phosphoproteomic screen in anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-rearranged (“ALK+”) patient-derived cell lines and identified guanylate kinase 1 (GUK1), a GDP-synthesizing enzyme, as a novel target of ALK signaling in lung cancer. We demonstrate that ALK binds to and phosphorylates GUK1 at tyrosine 74 (Y74), resulting in increased GDP biosynthesis. Spatially resolved mass spectrometry imaging of ALK+ patient tumor specimens shows enhanced phosphorylation of GUK1 that significantly correlates with guanine nucleotides in situ. Abrogation of GUK1 phosphorylation reduces intracellular GDP and GTP pools and decreases MAPK signaling through impaired Ras-GTP loading. A GUK1 variant that cannot be phosphorylated (Y74F) decreases tumor proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Beyond ALK, we determined that other oncogenic fusion proteins in lung cancer also regulate GUK1 phosphorylation. These studies may pave the way for the development of new therapeutic approaches by exploiting metabolic dependencies in oncogene-driven lung cancers.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
GUK1 activation is a metabolic liability in oncogene-driven lung cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Phospho-tyrosine site analyses of ALK+ and ALK- lung cancer cells. Phospho-tyrosine enrichment was done with phospho-tyrosine (P-Tyr-1000) immunoaffinity beads (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 8803) and adapted from method previously described51. Briefly, approximately 2 x 108 cells were grown for each condition and treated with either DMSO or lorlatinib (1 uM) for 1 hr. Cells were washed once with 1 x PBS and lysed in 10 mL of urea lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM b-glycerophosphate) at RT. Cell lysates were passed through a 21-guage needle for ten times and centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min at RT. The cleared cell supernatant (protein extract) was subject to reduction/alkylation. Protein was reduced using 5 mM Pierce neutralized TCEP (cat #77720) for 15 min at RT, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (cat # I6125) for 30 min in dark at RT and excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 min at RT. Samples were diluted 4-fold with 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0 to a final concentration of 2 M urea for protease digestion. 1/100 volume of 1 mg/mL of trypsin-TPCK (Worthington) stock in 1 mM HCl was used overnight at RT with shaking for protease digestion. Next, purification of the lysate peptides was performed on C18 revered-phase columns at RT. Peptides were first acidified with 1/20 volume of 20% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to the digest for a final 1% TFA and incubated for 15 min at 4ºC. Acidified peptide solution was centrifuged at 1,780 x g for 15 min at RT to remove precipitate and debris. C18 column was pre-wet with 5 mL 100% acetonitrile and washed sequentially with 1 ml, 3 ml, and 6 mL of 0.1% TFA. The acidified, peptide-containing supernatant was then loaded onto the C18 column and washed sequentially with 1 mL, 3 mL, and 6 mL of 0.1% TFA. The column was washed one more time with 2 mL of solvent containing 0.1%TFA and 5% acetonitrile. The purified peptides were eluted with a sequential wash of 3 x 2 mL of solvent containing 0.1% TFA and 40% acetonitrile. The elute was frozen at -80ºC for 2 hr and the frozen peptide solution was lyophilized for 48 hr.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectra were processed using a SEQUEST-based software pipeline. Data were searched against the UniProt human database (pY December 2018, GUK1 mutant November 2021) with a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein-level analysis and 0.02 Da product ion tolerance. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Additionally, for phosphopeptide analysis, deamidation (+0.984 Da) of asparagine and glutamine, as well as phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine, were included as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were identified, quantified, and filtered to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. A 0.003 Da (3 millidalton) window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion was scanned, and the maximum intensity closest to the theoretical m/z was used. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMT reagents according to manufacturer specifications and normalized to normalize ratios across labeling channels. Finally, for each protein, the signal-to-noise (S:N) measurements of the peptides were summed and normalized to 100 across all samples, resulting in a relative abundance (TMT RA) measurement.