PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell suspension culture; T cell
diseases: Acute leukemia
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Normalized Spectral Abundance Factor - NSAF
keywords: Tax; Kdr; Vegfr2; Htlv-1

ABSTRACT:
Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is linked to the development of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) and the neuroinflammatory disease, HTLV-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP). The HTLV-1 Tax oncoprotein regulates viral gene expression and the NF-kB pathway to promote the survival of HTLV-1 infected T cells. In thsi study, we utilize a kinome-wide shRNA screen to identify the tyrosine kinase KDR/VEGFR2 as an essential survival factor of HTLV-1-transformed T cells. Inhibition of KDR induces apoptosis of Tax expressing HTLV-1-transformed cell lines and CD4+ T cells from HAM/TSP patients. Phosphoproteomics analysis of HTLV-1 transformed cells treated with a KDR inhibitor revealed inhibition of the phosphorylation of multiple receptors/cell surface proteins, ubiquitin conjugating systems, proteases, phosphatases, apoptotic regulatory factors, adhesion/extracellular matrix proteins and viral proteins. This work suggests that HTLV-1 Tax has hijacked KDR kinase activity to promote Tax stability and the proliferation and survival of HTLV-1 infected cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
KDR-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation in HTLV-1 transformed cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The HTLV-1 transformed cell line MT-2 was treated with vehicle or the KDR inhibitor SU 1498+leupeptin for 24 hours. Cells were lysed in Urea Lysis Buffer containing 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 9.0 M Urea, 1 mM activated sodium orthovanadate and 1 mM beta-glycerol-phosphate. Cell lysates wree sonicated 3 x 15 sec. at 15W output power using a probe sonicator with 1 min. on ice between bursts, centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min. and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Phosphoproteomics was performed by Cell Signaling Technology as previously described (Stokes et al. Complementary PTM Profiling of Drug Response in Human Gastric Carcinoma by Immunoaffinity and IMAC Methods with Total Proteome Analysis. Proteomes 3(3), 160-183, 2015). Lysates were digested with trypsin and enriched by immunoprecipitating with PTMScan Phosphotyrosine pY-1000 Motif Antibody (Cell Signaling Technology; #38572) immobilized to Protein A/G agarose. Peptides were eluted and subjected to LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap-Fusion Lumos, ESI-HSD.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS/MS spectra were evaluated by COMET and the Core platform from Harvard University. Searches were performed against the most recent update of the Uniprot Homo Sapiens database with mass accuracy of +/-50 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions. Results were filtered with mass accuracy of +/-5 ppm on precursor ions and presence of the intended motif.