PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Breast
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Laser microdissection; Proteogenomics; Breast cancer

ABSTRACT:
Breast cancer in women <40, accounting for ~5% of all breast cancer cases diagnosed in the U.S., is more aggressive and associated with worse outcomes compared to breast cancer in older women. We performed a first-ever integrated proteogenomic study from a matched cohort of laser-microdissected tumors of 34 young (<40 years) and 34 older (≥60 years) women to identify molecular features that may underlie the worse outcomes in young women.  Progression-free interval was shorter in young women, and their tumors were enriched for more aggressive molecular subtypes. Our multi-omic analysis identified distinct clusters in luminal, but not basal-like cancers between age groups. Notably, GATA3 mutations were enriched in luminal tumors from young women, while TP53 and PIK3CA mutations more common in luminal tumors from older women. Young women’s tumors exhibited lower estrogen receptor (ER) expression yet paradoxically enhanced ER response pathways and increased expression of tamoxifen-resistance-associated genes (IRS1, FERMT1). Immune pathway activity and immune scores were lower in tumors from young women, whereas proliferative and MYC pathways were notably elevated, identifying potential therapeutic targets. Transcriptomic data from TCGA and METABRIC confirmed our findings, with 10 of 11 observed pathways corroborated. Finally, differential expression of four immune-related surface proteins also suggested potential age-specific responses of immune-based therapies. Together, these findings may contribute to the understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying worse outcomes in young women, and offer new insight to therapeutic strategies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteogenomic characterization of invasive breast tumors in young women

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tumor breast cancer tissue samples were harvested by LMD into 20 µL of 100 mM TEAB/10% acetonitrile, pH 8.0 in MicroTubes (Pressure BioSciences, Inc) and were lysed and digested with a heat-stable form of trypsin (SMART Trypsin, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) employing pressure cycling technology with a barocycler (2320EXT Pressure BioSciences, Inc). Peptide digests were transferred to 0.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes, vacuum dried, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0 and peptide concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equivalent amounts of peptide (40 µg), along with a reference sample generated by pooling equivalent amounts of peptide digests from individual patient samples, were aliquoted into a final volume of 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and labeled with tandem-mass tag (TMT) isobaric labels (TMT11plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Each TMT-11 multiplex was loaded onto a C-18 reversed-phase liquid chromatography trap column in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) and resolved into 96 fractions through development of a linear gradient of acetonitrile (0.69% acetonitrile/min) on a 1260 Infinity II liquid chromatograph (Agilent Technologies). Thirty-six concatenated fractions were generated using 10% of the entire peptide sample for global LC-MS/MS analysis. The remaining 90% of peptides were pooled into 6 fractions for serial phosphopeptide enrichment by metal affinity chromatography (TiO2 and Fe-IMAC). Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses of TMT-11 multiplexes was performed where each concatenated TMT fraction was loaded on a nanoflow high-performance LC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) employing a two-column system comprised of a reversed-phase trap column (AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100, 75 m x 2 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a heated (50 °C) reversed-phase analytical column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, 2 m, 100Å, 75 m × 50 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected online with an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted by developing a linear gradient of 2% mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 32% mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) within 120 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. High-resolution (R=60,000 at m/z 200) broadband (m/z 400-1600) mass spectra (MS) were acquired, from which the top 12 most intense molecular ions in each MS scan were selected for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 34%) acquisition in the Orbitrap at high resolution (R=60,000 at m/z 200). Spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV, S-Lens RF level was set to 40%, and capillary temperature was set to 275 C. Peptide molecular ions selected for HCD were restricted to z = 2-4 and both MS1 and MS2 spectra were collected in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion (t=20 s at a mass tolerance=10 ppm) was enabled to minimize redundant selection of peptide molecular ions for HCD.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide identifications were generated by searching LC-MS/MS data against a publicly available, non-redundant human proteome database (Swiss-Prot, Homo sapiens, downloaded 12-01-2017, http://www.uniprot.org) appended with porcine trypsin using Mascot (v2.6.0; Matrix Science) and Proteome Discoverer (v2.2.0.388; Thermo Fisher Scientific) software using the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages, static modification for TMT reporter ion tags (229.1629 Da) on N-termini and lysyl residues, and dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues. The resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using an FDR <1.0% (q-value <0.01), as determined by the Percolator node of Proteome Discoverer. TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted using Proteome Discoverer at a mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and PSMs lacking a TMT reporter ion signal in TMT channel m/z 126 (pooled study reference), PSMs lacking TMT reporter ion intensity in all TMT channels, or PSMs exhibiting an isolation interference of ≥50% were excluded from downstream analyses. Log2-transformed TMT reporter ion ratios corresponding to individual patient tissue samples were calculated for each PSM against the pooled reference standard. Log2-transformed PSM abundance distributions were normalized by calculating the mode-centered z-score transformation for each channel in the TMT-11 multiplex as follows: normalized PSM (Log2Ratio) = [PSM (Log2Ratio) – ModeCenter PSM (Log2Ratio) / σ PSM (Log2Ratio). For global protein-level abundance, the abundances of proteins identified by a unique PSM (i.e. in which a PSM maps uniquely to a single protein accession) were determined by calculating the median log2-transformed abundance ratios of all such PSMs. The abundances of PSMs mapping to multiple proteins (i.e. “multi-mapper” PSMs) were compared to mapped unique protein abundances using a mean-squared-error approach to assign them to unique proteins based on comparative abundance analyses. Multi-mapper PSMs were assigned to the corresponding unique protein accessions exhibiting the smallest difference in relative abundance levels comparatively and candidates not identified by a unique PSM were excluded from downstream analyses. Protein-level abundance was calculated from normalized, median log2-transformed TMT reporter ion ratio abundances from a minimum of two PSMs corresponding to a single protein accession. Normalized log2-transformed protein-level abundances for each TMT-11 multiplex were merged, and protein-level abundances for proteins not quantified in all patient samples, but in ≥50%, were imputed using a k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) strategy using the impute (v1.30.0) R (v3.6.0) package.

METHODS:
Methods
Cohort selection
This research involving human material and data has been performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All patients included in this study provided voluntary, informed consent using HIPAA-compliant, IRB-approved protocols from Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Anne Arundel Medical Center, and Joyce Murtha Breast Care Center to participate in the Clinical Breast Care Project (CBCP), established in 2000. Female participants who had both a source for germline DNA and OCT-embedded (Optimal Cutting Temperature compound) invasive breast tumor specimens available for molecular analyses were selected. A total of 34 retrospectively collected, untreated primary breast tumor specimens from young women (<40), with an equal number of tumors from older women (≥60), matched by race and IHC subtypes (based on ER, PR, HER2, Ki67), were selected for study from the CBCP. Stage IV cases were purposely excluded. Similarly, 63 pairs and 52 pairs of primary tumors from young and older women matched by race and IHC subtypes (based on ER/PR/HER2) from TCGA and METABRIC, respectively, were selected to corroborate the findings.
We chose to perform one-to-one matching of older to younger patients to ensure that each comparison was as balanced and controlled as possible. This method allows for a direct comparison between age groups, minimizing confounding variables and ensuring that each younger patient’s data is directly comparable to an older patient’s data.
APOLLO clinical subtyping of BRCA is based on immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays for the estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), and a proliferation marker Ki67. The tumors are therefore classified into triple-negative (TN; ER−/PR−/HER2−), HER2+ (ER−/PR−/HER2+), LA (ER+/HER2−/Ki67−), LB1 (ER+/HER2−/Ki67+) and LB2 (ER+/HER2+). ER and PR are positive if nuclear staining is ≥ 1%; HER2 is positive if IHC = 3+, or IHC = 2+ and FISH positive; and Ki67 is positive if nuclear staining is >15%. The intrinsic subtypes were derived using the PAM50 method based on RNA-seq data. For TCGA BRCA, the ER and PR were defined as positive using 1–10% of nuclear staining due to the variation by different cancer centers. For METABRIC, the ER/PR/HER2 status was estimated using RNA expression-based classification.
Tissue sectioning and LMD
Tissue sections from OCT-embedded breast tumor specimens were cut at 10 µm thickness for DNA, RNA, and MS proteomics and at 8 µm for RPPA using a Leica 3050 S Cryostat (Leica Biosystems, Deer Park, IL) set to −30 °C, applied to polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) membrane slides (Leica Microsystems Inc., Deerfield, IL), and then stored at −80 °C until LMD was performed. Tumor cell populations were denoted by expert pathological review and collected via LMD using the Leica LMD7 system (Leica Microsystems Inc., Deerfield, IL).
To prepare for DNA isolation, PEN membrane slides were removed from −80 °C and allowed to equilibrate to −30 °C in the cryostat prior to fixation and staining at room temperature. Slides were first washed in 95% ethanol, followed by tap water for 1 min each. Next, slides were stained with Hematoxylin 560 (Leica Biosystems, Deer Park, IL) for 3 min and then rinsed under running tap water for 30 s. Slides were then incubated in Define MX-aq (Leica Biosystems, Deer Park, IL) for 20 s and then rinsed under running tap water for 5 min. Next, slides were incubated for 1 min in 95% ethanol and then stained for 20 s in Eosin 515 LT (Leica Biosystems, Deer Park, IL). Residual stain was removed from the slides by washing in 95% ethanol for 1 min, followed by 3 successive washes in 100% ethanol for 1 min each. Slides were then allowed to air dry before beginning LMD. LMD sample elements were collected into 180 µl of Buffer ATL from the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen LLC, Germantown, MD) for DNA isolation.
To prepare for RNA isolation, slides were removed from −80 °C and equilibrated to −30 °C in the cryostat prior to fixation and staining at room temperature. Slides were incubated in 75% ethanol for 30 s and then rinsed for ~10 s in nuclease-free water (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA). Slides were then stained by applying 60 µl of Histogene Staining Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) and allowing the stain to incubate on the slide for approximately 10 s. Residual stain was removed by successive washes in 75% and 95% ethanol for 30 s each, followed by four washes in 100% ethanol for 20–30 s each. Ethanol washes were replaced with fresh solutions whenever they developed a significant purple color. Slides were allowed to air dry for several minutes prior to commencing LMD. LMD sample elements were collected into 100 µl of Lysis Solution from the RNAqueousTM-Micro Total RNA Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) for RNA isolation.
LMD for MS proteomics was done as previously described. Briefly, tumor cell populations were denoted by expert pathological review followed by collection using LMD from fresh-frozen tissue sections (10 micron) on polyethylene naphthalate membrane slides for n = 68 unique patient tumors. Samples were collected into 20 µL of 100 mM TEAB/10% acetonitrile, pH 8.0, in MicroTubes (Pressure Biosciences, Inc.)
To prepare for RPPA, all solutions for fixing and staining the PEN membrane slides were freshly prepared each day. The 70% and 95% ethanol solutions were prepared using DEPC-treated ultra-pure water (KD Medical, Inc., Columbia, MD) and 200 proof, anhydrous ethanol (The Warner Graham Company, Cockeysville, MD). Five cOmpleteTM, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail tablets (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA) were added to 50 mL of each of the following solutions: 70% ethanol (two 50 mL solutions prepared), DEPC-treated ultra pure water (two 50 mL solutions prepared), filtered Mayer’s hematoxylin solution (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA), and Scott’s tap water substitute (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA). Slides were removed from −80 °C, equilibrated to −30 °C in a cryostat, and then fixed and stained at room temperature immediately prior to LMD as follows: 5–30 s in 70% ethanol with protease inhibitors, 10–30 s in DEPC-treated ultra pure water with protease inhibitors, 15–30 s in Mayer’s hematoxylin solution with protease inhibitors, 10 s in DEPC-treated ultra pure water with protease inhibitors, 10 s in Scott’s tap water substitute with protease inhibitors, 10 s in 70% ethanol with protease inhibitors, 10 s in 95% ethanol, 10 s in 100% ethanol, and 1 min in 100% ethanol. LMD sample elements were collected into 45 µl of freshly-prepared RPPA collection buffer as previously described within 30 min of commencing LMD, and stored at −80 °C until further sample processing for analysis.
Nucleic acid and protein isolation
Germline DNA was isolated from either clot tubes (n = 50) or normal breast tissue (n = 18) using the Gentra Puregene Blood Kit (Qiagen LLC, Germantown, MD) or the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, respectively. The purity of the samples was determined by the 260/280 ratio on the NanoDropTM 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) while the sample concentrations were measured on the QubitTM 3.0 fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA) using the dsDNA broad range (BR) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA). Germline samples were normalized to 30 ng/µl for whole genome sequencing (WGS).
Tumor DNA was isolated from tumor cells collected during LMD using the QIAamp DNA Mini kit. After collection into Buffer ATL, the sample was lysed by incubating with proteinase K overnight for ~16 h at 56 °C with shaking at 70 rpm. The optional RNase A treatment step included in the kit protocol was performed to remove any contaminating RNA from the sample. DNA was eluted by incubating the column two times with 50 µl of nuclease-free water for 5 min at room temperature for a total elution volume of ~100 µl. The purity and concentrations of the tumor DNA samples were assayed in the same manner as the germline DNA, and normalized to 30 ng/µl for WGS.
Tumor RNA was isolated immediately following LMD from the collected tumor cells using the RNAqueousTM-Micro Total RNA Isolation Kit following the protocol “RNAqueous-Micro Procedure for LCM”. RNA was eluted 2× with 10 µl of nuclease-free water preheated to 95 °C. The purity of the RNA samples was determined by measuring the 260/280 ratio on the NanoDropTM 2000. The RNA integrity number (RIN) of the samples was determined using the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA) and either the Agilent RNA 6000 Nano or Pico kit (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA). The concentrations of the samples were determined using the QubitTM 3.0 and the RNA broad range (BR) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA), and samples were normalized to 30 ng/µl for Total RNA-Sequencing (Total RNA-Seq).
Whole genome and transcriptome sequencing and analysis
Normal DNA (from peripheral white blood cells) and tumor DNA from LMD samples were prepared into libraries, and whole genomes were sequenced using Illumina sequencers following our published methods. For analysis, sequenced reads were aligned to the hg38 genome, and somatic short nucleotide mutations, somatic copy number variants, and somatic structural variants were identified using Illumina Sequence Analysis Software, following our published methods. Structural variant calls were filtered using the breakpoint inspector (https://github.com/hartwigmedical/hmftools/releases/tag/bpi-v1.7). We quantified gene-level expression using MapSplice alignment to the hg38 genome and HTSeq, following our published methods. We confirmed sample identity by clustering variants from normal DNA sequencing, tumor DNA sequencing, and tumor RNA sequencing across all samples, following our published methods. All samples were clustered with their expected counterparts in a triplicate group. Somatic short nucleotide variants were filtered following our published methods.
Aggregate molecular features of the DNA and RNA data were analyzed. Somatic genome signatures were identified using multi-modal correlated topic models (MMCTM), following our published methods; somatic copy number peaks were identified using GISTIC, as previously described; driver gene mutations were identified using MutEnricher; non-silent BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in whole genome sequencing of normal specimens were classified by InterVar and ClinVar.
To analyze young and old patients’ aggregate molecular features, the probabilities of each somatic signature between young and older patient groups were compared using GLM analysis, adjusted by PAM50 subtype and histology as covariates. SCNA focal peaks from GISTIC between young and older patient groups were compared using GLM analysis, adjusted by PAM50 subtype and histology as covariates. Although GISTIC-derived peaks are annotated with a single cytoband, we performed manual curation and found that some of the peaks spanned multiple cytobands. Therefore, for the discussion of the amplification of specific genes, such as MYCT1, we used the coordinates of these wide peak boundaries to achieve more accurate annotations.
All categories of structure variation count between young and older patient groups were compared using negative binomial regression analysis, adjusted by PAM50 subtype and histology as covariates. Maftools was used for generating oncoplots and the tumor mutational burden, which is a count of non-synonymous mutations. The upper quartile normalized RNA expression of the biomarker was used to generate a heat map using the complexheatmap package.
Specimen preparation for proteomics
LMD samples were digested, tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplexes were prepared and offline, basic reversed-phase liquid chromatographic (bRPLC) fractionation was performed as previously described. Briefly, samples were lysed and digested with a heat-stable form of trypsin (SMART Trypsin, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) employing pressure cycling technology with a barocycler (2320EXT, Pressure BioSciences, Inc.). Peptide digests were transferred to 0.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes, vacuum dried, resuspended in 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0, and the peptide concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA assay). Forty micrograms of the peptide from each sample, along with a reference sample generated by pooling equivalent amounts of peptide digests from individual patient samples, were aliquoted into a final volume of 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and labeled with tandem-mass tag (TMT) isobaric labels (TMT11plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Each TMT-11 multiplex was loaded onto a C-18 trap column in 10 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) and resolved into 96 fractions through the development of a linear gradient of acetonitrile (0.69% acetonitrile/min) on a 1260 Infinity II liquid chromatograph (Agilent Technologies, Inc.). Concatenated fractions (36 pooled samples representing 10% of the entire peptide sample) were generated for global LC–MS/MS analysis. The remaining 90% of peptides were pooled into 6 fractions for serial phosphopeptide enrichment by metal affinity chromatography (TiO2 and Fe-IMAC). Briefly, peptide fractions were vacuum dried, re-suspended in TiO2 binding/equilibration buffer, and bound to TiO2 affinity spin columns (High-Select TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.). Sample flow-through and washes were reserved for subsequent enrichment by Fe-NTA (nitrilotriacetic acid) affinity chromatography (High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.).
Mass Spectrometry-based Proteomics and Data Analysis
Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) and analyses of TMT-11 multiplexes were performed as previously described. Briefly, each concatenated TMT fraction (5 μL, ~600 ng) was loaded on a nanoflow high-performance LC system (EASY-nLC 1200, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) employing a two-column system comprised of a reversed-phase trap column (AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 Å, C-18, 20 mm length, nanoViper Trap column, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) and a heated (50 °C) reversed-phase analytical column (AcclaimTM PepMapTM RSLC C-18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 500 mm, nanoViper, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) connected online with an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF-X, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.). Peptides were eluted by developing a linear gradient of 2% mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 32% mobile phase B (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) within 120 min at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. High-resolution (R = 60,000 at m/z 200) broadband (m/z 400–1600) mass spectra (MS) were acquired, from which the top 12 most intense molecular ions in each MS scan were selected for high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy of 38%) acquisition in the Orbitrap at high resolution (R = 50,000 at m/z 200). Monoisotopic precursor selection mode was set to “Peptide” and MS1 peptide molecular ions selected for HCD were restricted to z = +2, +3, and +4. The radio frequency (RF) lens was set to 30%, and both MS1 and MS2 spectra were collected in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion (t = 20 s at a mass tolerance = 10 ppm) was enabled to minimize redundant selection of peptide molecular ions for HCD. Analyses of TMT global and phosphoproteome data were performed as previously described. Briefly, peptide identifications were generated by searching LC–MS/MS data against a publicly available, non-redundant human proteome database (Swiss-Prot, Homo sapiens, downloaded 12/01/2017) using Mascot (v. 2.6.0, Matrix Science, Inc.) and Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.2.0.388, ThermoFisher Scientific, Inc.) with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 0.05 Da, a maximum of two tryptic miscleavages, static modification for TMT reporter ion tags (229.1629 Da) on N-termini and lysyl residues, and dynamic modifications for oxidation (15.9949 Da) on methionine residues, as well as phosphorylation (79.9663 Da) on seryl, threonyl or tyrosyl residues for phosphoproteome analyses. The resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered using an FDR < 1.0% (q-value < 0.01), as determined by the Percolator module of Proteome Discoverer. Phosphoproteome search results were further analyzed by the ptmRS node within Proteome Discoverer as a confidence measure for post-translational modifications identified. TMT reporter ion intensity data were extracted by Proteome Discoverer and global protein and phosphosite-level abundances were assembled using in-house tools as previously described. Briefly, normalized log2-transformed protein-level abundances for each TMT-11 multiplex were merged, and protein-level abundances for proteins not quantified in all patient samples, but in ≥50%, were imputed using a k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) strategy adapted from Mertins et al. using default settings in the impute (v.1.30.0) R package. Raw and global normalized log2-transformed phosphosite-level abundances were similarly generated, and phosphosites quantified in ≥75% of patient samples were imputed as described above. TMT sample multiplexes, including eight technical replicate channels in which identical total peptide amounts for samples chosen at random were labeled in duplicate. High quantitative correlation of co-quantified protein abundances was observed across technical replicate channels; Spearman Rho = 0.82 ± 0.07, 7.98% CV.
Reverse phase protein array (RPPA)
RPPA was performed as described previously. Briefly, LMD lysates were prepared and printed in triplicate spots (~10 nL per spot) onto nitrocellulose-coated slides (Grace Biolabs, Bend, OR, USA) using a Quanterix 2470 Arrayer (Quanterix, Billerica, MA, USA). Standard curves of control cell lysates were included for quality assurance purposes. A total of 289 antibodies (representing 218 proteins), including 155 against phosphorylated epitopes (representing 124 phosphoproteins), were used in RPPA experiments and listed in Table S5C. RPPA antibody identifiers were mapped to Uniprot protein accessions and HGNC identifiers through manual inspection of commercial antibody names and corresponding human protein entries curated within the UniProt resource (uniprot.org). Pan-specific antibodies were assigned to multiple protein isoform accessions, and residues for modified proteins were mapped to curated protein model positions. Antibodies used on the RPPA were validated before use by confirming the presence of a single band at the appropriate molecular weight with a panel of control cell lysates using conventional western blotting. Immunostaining was performed by probing each slide with one primary antibody targeting the protein of interest. Biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) (1:7500, Vector Laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA) or rabbit anti-mouse IgG (1:10, DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA, USA) were used as secondary antibodies. Signal amplification was performed using a tyramide-based avidin/biotin amplification system (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, CA, USA) followed by streptavidin-conjugated IRDye 680 (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE, USA) for visualization. Negative controls were stained with secondary antibody alone. Total protein was measured using Sypro Ruby protein blot staining per manufacturer’s instructions (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA). RPPA data were generated directly from images acquired using a Tecan PowerScanner (Tecan, Mannedorf, Switzerland) and analyzed with MicroVigene software Version 5.1.0.0 (Vigenetech, Carlisle, MA, USA). Total protein intensities for each sample were calculated by averaging the Sypro staining intensity of the three replicate spots. For each sample/endpoint, the final signal intensity was calculated by: (1) subtraction of negative control spot intensity from primary antibody spot intensity, (2) averaging the resulting net intensities for the three replicate spots, and (3) dividing by the total protein intensity value for each sample.
Differential molecular analysis
Global quality of the expression data from transcriptomics, proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and RPPA was assessed through sample-wise mRNA-protein and phosphoprotein correlation across the cohort. Differential gene expression (DEG) was performed using limma-voom. Differential protein (DEP) and phosphoprotein expression were performed using limma. To compare the DEG results with a comparable cohort, we downloaded RNA-Seq raw count data from TCGA Breast cancer through the harmonized database using the Genomic Data Commons (GDC) data portal (dbGaP Study Accession: phs000178 for TCGA-BRCA), utilizing the TCGAbiolinks Bioconductor package. METABRIC microarray gene expression data were obtained from the corresponding publication. After applying the same criteria to match by IHC subtype and race, we identified 63 and 52 matched pairs for TCGA and METABRIC, respectively.
RPPA data from TCGA were downloaded via the UCSC Xena browser. Of the 126 matched pairs (63 pairs) in TCGA, RPPA data were available for 105 samples (50 old, 55 young). Antibodies with more than 30% missing values were excluded, resulting in a final dataset of 221 antibodies across 105 samples. Missing values were imputed using KNN (K = 5). Differential expressions were analyzed using the limma package.
Fold change thresholds vary by data type due to each technique’s sensitivity and dynamic range. In proteomics and phosphoproteomics, challenges in mass spectrometry detection often led to a 1.2-fold change threshold, capturing subtle but crucial shifts in protein abundance. Separately, RPPA also adopts a 1.2-fold change, reflecting its unique detection nuances. RNA-Seq, boasting a broad dynamic range, typically employs a 2.0-fold change to emphasize biologically meaningful alterations. Conversely, microarray, with its historically narrower range, leans toward a 1.5-fold change. These standards effectively balance technical variability with genuine biological shifts, always highlighting the interplay of fold change and statistical significance.
Differential mutated genes (DMG) were performed using firth logistic regression. Significant DMG across age categories was selected using 3 criteria: (1) p < 0.1, (2) at least 3 patients had mutations in at least one of the two age groups, (3) the gene is expressed in RNA-seq data. Covariate adjustments of PAM50 subtype and histology were used in differential expression and mutation analyses to minimize the effect of confounder variables. The covariate adjustment for SCNA, IHC, and normalized phosphopeptide was conducted using the generalized linear model (GLM) framework using the glm (family = Gaussian) function in R. The proportional Venn diagram was performed using the venndir package in R. The unsupervised clustering was performed using the complexheatmap package using one minus the Pearson correlation coefficient as distance and the ward agglomeration method.
Somatic copy number correlation analysis
To identify candidate SCNA driver genes, we selected all genes located in the six cytoband peaks that showed significant differences between age groups. For these genes, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient between copy number values and their corresponding RNA and protein levels across the cohort. We applied a cutoff of an absolute correlation coefficient greater than 0.3 and an FDR of <0.05, consistent with previous studies. Additionally, these genes had to show significant differences between age groups (GLM or Limma, p < 0.05) in an overall comparison, accounting for covariates such as PAM50 and histology. SCNA differentials were tested using a GLM, RNA differentials were assessed through DEG analysis using Limma Voom p-values, and protein differentials were evaluated using DEP analysis with Limma p-values.
Stromal and immune score analysis
Stromal and immune scores and cell types were analyzed using the xCell algorithm after upper-quartile normalized gene expression data. xCell integrates over 9000 genes to estimate 64 distinct cell types, including 14 stromal and 33 immune cell populations, along with other TME cell components. It also reports the composite Stromal Score and Immune Score. We used the xCell tool to estimate stromal and immune cell abundances due to its robustness in distinguishing these populations in bulk transcriptomic data, as previously demonstrated in the original xCell publication.
ESTIMATE uses 141 genes each to calculate Stroma and Immune Scores, but does not report individual cell types.
MCP-counter employs 524 transcriptomic markers to quantify 10 cell types (8 immune and 2 stromal cell types).
CIBERSORT uses the LM22 signature comprising 547 genes to report on 22 human hematopoietic cell phenotypes.
To assess whether the xCell scores in this LMD dataset reflect a true biological signal rather than tool-specific artifacts, we performed orthogonal validation using three independent deconvolution methods:
The Wilcoxon rank sum test in R was used for statistical analysis of the numerical scores. Covariate adjustment of stromal, immune, and cell-type scores comparison across age categories was done using the GLM. The scores for the 14 different stromal cell types and 33 immune cell types were computed for the total samples in the cohort and each subtype. If the Wilcoxon rank sum test was significant (p < 0.05) and the median scores were above 0.001 for the total samples or a subtype, the cell type was included in the result. Multiple hypothesis correction for the analysis of immune and stromal subsets inferred from RNA-seq was not performed, as the number of multiple comparisons was low (33 and 14, respectively)
To examine the surface proteome for chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy (CAR-T), antibody–drug conjugates (ADC), and T-cell engager therapies with significant differences between age groups, we identified 62 genes from the relevant references (Table S5A). We assessed whether SCNA, RNA, and protein levels differed between age groups. SCNA differences were tested using a generalized linear model (GLM), RNA differences were evaluated through differential gene expression (DEG) analysis using Limma Voom p-values, and protein differences were analyzed using differential expression of proteins (DEP) with Limma p-values. These overall comparisons accounted for covariates such as PAM50 and histology. Individual subtype-level comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon test.
Survival analysis
Kaplan–Meier (K–M) plots were created to compare the survival difference of the young and the older groups, and log-rank test was used to test the significance of the survival difference using the survival package in R. The Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to calculate the hazard ratio of the young compared to the older. Progression-free interval (PFI) was used as the primary outcome endpoint, which was recommended in TCGA-CDR. Overall survival (OS) and disease-specific survival (DSS) were also analyzed as supplemental results. All statistical tests were 2 sided, and p-values ≤ 0.05 were considered significant unless otherwise specified.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
GSEA was used on transcripts or global protein expression data for Cancer Hallmark Pathway analysis (database h.all.v2023.1.Hs.symbols.gmt). The differentially expressed gene or protein list and the corresponding statistic t were used as input in the GSEA Preranked tool in GSEA software, where t values were used for ranking the genes. The default FDR < 0.25 was applied to get significant pathways.
Multi-omics gene set analysis (MOGSA)
The multi-omics gene set analysis (MOGSA) software package (version 1.22.1) in R was used to perform multivariate single-sample gene-set analysis as previously described. Briefly, we calculated the integrated single-sample gene-set scores (GSS) of MSigDB hallmark gene-set pathways from transcriptomic and global proteomic data using the first 5 principal components (PC). To identify pathways enriched in the young and older groups, we first selected pathways in which individual sample GSS FDRs were <0.01 in 50% of all samples. From these pathways, we used GLMs adjusted for histology and PAM50 subtype to estimate the difference in sample GSS values between the two groups, and a p-value < 0.05 was used to identify significantly different pathways. The direction up/down in a group was determined by the sign of the t-value from the GLM model.
Kinase substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) and kinase–substrate interaction network analysis
We first carried out the differential expression analysis of the substrates using phosphoproteomics and RPPA data separately between young vs. old groups, adjusted by PAM50 subtype and histology. The p-values and fold changes of the differential expression analysis were then used as input for the kinase–substrate analysis using KSEAapp with kinase–substrate annotations sourced from PhosphoSitePlus. Kinases were considered significant if there were at least three measured substrates, with abs(z-score) > 1.25 and FDR < 0.25.
A two-step procedure was used to construct the kinase–substrate interaction network. In the first phase, an association analysis between kinases and substrates for both young and older groups was performed separately. Kinase expression was sourced from proteomics data, while substrate expression was gathered from imputed global phosphorylated proteomics data and RPPA data, respectively. Known kinase and substrate pair information was obtained from the PhosphoSitePlus database (https://www.phosphosite.org/homeAction.action), and GLMs were utilized for the association analysis. Kinase–substrate pairs with an FDR < 0.25 and positive correlations in the GLMs were deemed significant and used to construct the interaction network. In the second step, the R igraph package was employed to generate the kinase and substrate networks.
Multi-omics integration and visualization in cancer subtyping (MOVICS)
The clusters in the APOLLO cohort were comprehensively characterized using the MOVICS R package, which facilitates multi-omics integration and provides a consensus ensemble approach by aggregating results from multiple algorithms. The default parameters for these algorithms were employed. The features used for clustering included six types of multi-omics data: differential somatic mutations, differential somatic signatures, differential SCNA, differentially expressed genes from transcriptomics, differentially expressed proteins from proteomics, and differential gene set scores obtained from MOGSA. All these differential features were derived by comparing young and older age groups. To determine the optimum number of clusters (k), we ran the function with k ranging from 2 to 8. Based on three different parameters—cluster index, gap statistics, and silhouette plot—as well as visual inspection, a cluster size of four was found to be optimal. Hotspot mutations were annotated using the Cancer Hotspots database described by Chang et al., Cancer Discovery (2018), and are highlighted in Fig. 2 and S3. The annotated MAF file used to generate the oncoplot is available as Supplementary Table S2E.

RESULTS:
Results
All the analyses described hereafter in the results refer to APOLLO data unless otherwise specified. Each dataset was analyzed individually, except for the subtype-specific survival analysis, where the datasets were combined.
Clinical and pathological characteristics
Thirty-four pre-treatment primary breast tumor specimens from young women (<40) were selected from the CBCP population, then matched 1:1 by patient race and tumor IHC subtype (based on ER, PR, HER2, Ki67) to tumors from older women (≥60). These tumors were retrospectively analyzed to explore the underlying clinicopathologic and proteogenomic differences between the two groups (Fig. 1A and Table S1). Patients diagnosed at ages 40–59 were excluded from this study to minimize confounding contributions from pre- and peri-menopausal women in the older group and to separate the two groups more clearly. Stage IV cases were excluded. Selected datasets from The Cancer Genome Atlas-Breast Cancer study (hereafter referred to as “TCGA”) and Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC), similarly matched 1:1 for young and older women by patient race and tumor IHC subtypes, were analyzed for comparison with the APOLLO dataset (Fig. S1A). There are 26.5% and 23.8% black patients in APOLLO and TCGA, respectively, but no black patients in METABRIC.
Despite matching for IHC subtypes, there was a trend in enrichment of basal-like tumors in young women when analyzed by gene-expression based PAM50 subtypes, both in the APOLLO (p = 0.13) and the METABRIC (p = 0.053) cohorts (Fig. 1A). These differences were not observed in the TCGA cohort, which may be caused by inconsistent IHC thresholds for ER/PR and HER2 from the different tissue contributors. Most of the patients had invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) across the 3 datasets. Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) cases were rare in young women and mainly seen in older women (Fig. 1A) in these cohorts, as has been previously reported. Histologic subtype was significantly different in two cohorts (TCGA: p < 0.001 and METABRIC: p = 0.047) or exhibited a trend (APOLLO: p = 0.120) between the two age groups, mainly driven by the distributions of IDC and ILC (Fig. 1A). Detailed data elements from the APOLLO cohort for the 34 matched patients are shown in Table S1. To mitigate potential confounding effects from PAM50 subtype and histology type on the clinical outcomes and molecular differences between the young and older patients, subsequent analyses adjusted for these two factors.
Progression-free interval (PFI) was significantly shorter in young patients in APOLLO (HR = 2.67, p = 0.041), similar to earlier studies. After adjustment for covariates, the difference remained significant (HRadj = 3.33, padj = 0.033), suggesting that other factors contribute to this PFI difference (Fig. 1B). Similar results were seen in METABRIC (HR = 2.57, p = 0.003; HRadj = 3.03, padj = 0.001) (Fig. 1B). In TCGA, the difference before or after the adjustment was not significant (HR = 1.68, p = 0.251; HRadj = 1.65, padj = 0.343), which may be explained by TCGA’s relatively short median follow-up period (2.3 years) compared with APOLLO (7.0 years) or METABRIC (10.0 years). A trend in worse disease-specific survival (DSS) was seen for young patients in APOLLO (HR = 2.94, p = 0.095) and was significantly worse in young patients in METABRIC (p = 0.010, HR = 2.34) but not different in TCGA (Fig. S1B). To evaluate PFI in intrinsic subtypes, we combined the cases from the three datasets to maximize the sample size for analysis (Fig. S1C). A significantly shorter PFI was observed in young versus older women with LumA, Lum B, or Basal subtypes. Young and older women with the Her2 subtype, with the fewest number of cases, had similar PFI.
Molecular characterization and multi-omics clustering
Tumors underwent LMD to enrich for cancer cells and to limit the variability in molecular features due to different amounts of surrounding stroma. To derive a comprehensive understanding of the molecular features of the tumors from young and older women, whole genome sequencing (WGS), total RNA-sequencing, global proteomics, phosphoproteomics, and reverse-phase protein array (RPPA) were performed on all samples. Differential analyses were performed to identify differences in DNA (somatic mutations, somatic mutational signatures, copy number alterations), RNA, protein, and pathways between tumors from young and older women.
To integrate the results of all of these differential analyses in the APOLLO samples, we performed consensus clustering of the tumors using the Multi-Omics integration and VIsualization in Cancer Subtyping (MOVICS) method. The tumors were segregated into four clusters (Fig. 2), consisting predominantly of basal and luminal tumors (Fig. 2, Cluster 1 vs. Clusters 2–4). Cluster 1 contained basal tumors from both age groups. Cluster 2 contained predominantly tumors from older patients and is more distant from Clusters 3 and 4. Cluster 3 contained mostly tumors from young patients, and Cluster 4 contained tumors from both age groups. Thus, the clearest distinction between tumors from young and older patients is seen in the luminal tumors (Cluster 3 vs. Cluster 2).
There are insufficient publicly available proteomic data on tumors from young women to enable us to perform a parallel multi-omic clustering analysis of the public data for comparison (the two CPTAC studies on breast cancer only contained 11 young patient cases). However, public transcript data are available, and we were able to perform a similar clustering analysis using gene expression data from APOLLO, TCGA, and METABRIC (Fig. S2A–C). Five clusters were identified from all of these datasets. Although the detailed clustering structures are not exactly the same as in Fig. 2, all datasets showed a separation of young and older luminal cases (Fig. S2A–C; Clusters 4 vs. 1 plus 2 in APOLLO, 4 vs. 1 in TCGA; and 1 vs. 3 in METABRIC). Similar to Fig. 2, basal tumors from young and older patients formed a single cluster separated from luminal in each of the three transcriptomic datasets.
Mutational landscape of tumors
Germline mutations in the breast cancer predisposing genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 were observed in young but not in older women in APOLLO (Fig. S3C), similar to previous reports. Tumor mutational burden (TMB) was significantly lower in tumors from young women (median TMB = 0.82 per MB) compared to those from older women (median TMB = 1.1 per MB) (Wilcoxon p = 0.049) (Fig. S3D), which is similar to recent pan-cancer studies.
In somatic mutational analysis (Fig. 2 Somatic Mutation), after adjusting for the covariates PAM50 and histology, GATA3 was the only gene with mutations enriched in tumors from young women (Firth p < 0.1) (Figs. 2, S3E, Table S2A and S2B). The majority of GATA3 mutations occurred in PAM50 luminal A (LumA) tumors. All of the GATA3 mutations from young women and 3 of 4 from older women were frame shift insertions or deletions (Fig. S3E). These observations have been previously reported. Conversely, we identified 11 genes with significantly more somatic mutations in tumors from older women (Figs. 2, S3E, Table S2B). Among them, TP53 was the most frequently mutated gene in the APOLLO cohort (Figs. 2, S3E, Table S2B). Despite the comparable mutation frequencies in the two age groups, after adjusting for PAM50 subtype, TP53 was more frequently enriched in tumors from older women. Six TP53 mutations were seen in the luminal tumors from older women, while none were seen in the luminal tumors from young women, accounting for the enrichment seen in older patients. In contrast, TP53 was mutated in a similar proportion of basal-like tumors from both younger and older patients in the APOLLO cohort. We also observed significantly (firth p = 0.009) differentially mutated TP53 in the TCGA-matched cohort, primarily due to the enrichment of TP53 mutations in the luminal subtype among older patients.
To investigate this further, we compared outcomes between TP53-mutated and non-mutated luminal tumors within the older cohort. While TP53-mutated luminal cancers did show a numerically worse outcome compared to their non-mutated counterparts, the difference did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.384; HR = 2.19, using non-mutated as the reference group; Fig. S4).
Overall, PIK3CA mutations were significantly (firth p = 0.024; OR = 0.24) more frequent in tumors from older women (15/34; 44%) compared to those from young women (5/34; 15%) (Figs. 2 and S3E, and Table S2B). In luminal tumors, PIK3CA mutations were seen in 12 of 28 (43%) from older women compared to 4 of 19 (21%) from young women. In non-luminal tumors, 3 of 6 (50%) older women harbored PIK3CA mutations compared to 1 of 15 (7%) in young women. Interestingly, GATA3 mutations rarely co-occurred with PIK3CA or TP53 mutations. Other genes more frequently mutated in tumors from older women were mediator of DNA damage checkpoint 1 (MDC1), trans-Golgi network protein 2 (TGOLN2), and histone-lysine N-methyltransferase 2C (KM2TC). In TCGA data from matched patients, three of these genes (GATA3, TP53, and KMT2C) were differentially mutated, with KMT2C being the only differentially mutated gene among the 173 genes sequenced in the original METABRIC study.
Somatic indel signatures and copy number alterations also contributed to the MOVICS clustering (Fig. 2, Somatic Signatures and SCNA). One indel somatic signature was significantly enriched in tumors from young women (Indel_Unknown), and two were enriched in tumors from older women (Indel_DNASlippage and Indel_MMRd). In contrast, canonical single nucleotide variant (SNV) signatures associated with known mutational processes, including SBS1 (aging-related deamination), SBS3 (homologous recombination deficiency), SBS13 (APOBEC-related activity), and SBS10b (polymerase epsilon-related mutagenesis), were detected but showed no significant differences between age groups (logistic regression p > 0.3 for all).
We identified one SCNA peak in cytoband 15q13.1 that exhibited frequent low-level copy number gains in tumors from young women (Fig. S5). Five other SCNA cytobands were more frequently associated with copy number loss in tumors from young women (19p13.3, 6q27, 11q24.3, Xq23, and 16p13.3) (Table S2A, Fig. S5). The genes located within the SCNA regions are provided in Supplemental Table S2C. We identified four genes within the deleted regions (ATM, FOXRED1, and USP28 from 11q24.3; and CPPED1 from 16p13.3; Table S2D) with significantly lower expression of both RNA and protein in tumors from young women. Notably, ATM and USP28 are established tumor suppressor genes; ATM plays a crucial role in DNA repair, while USP28 is a deubiquitinating enzyme involved in tumor suppression, particularly through the regulation of c-Myc and the DNA damage response. Interestingly, low FOXRED1 expression has been linked to poor prognosis in colorectal cancer. CPPED1, a protein phosphatase, has been shown to promote apoptosis and inhibit tumor growth in bladder cancer models, and lower expression is associated with reduced recurrence-free survival in patients with non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.
Differentially expressed RNA and protein
Differential analyses were performed across all the gene and protein expression platforms (Table S3A–F). In differential gene and protein expression analysis, the total number of analytes detected includes 21,230 (including 29.29% non-coding) genes by RNA-seq and 7459 proteins by global proteomics (representing 7451 genes). Global analysis of the correlation of gene-wise mRNA-to-protein yielded a median Pearson correlation coefficient of r = 0.54. Differential expression analysis using RNA sequencing data yielded 307 significantly (|logFC| > 1, i.e., FC of 2 and FDR < 25%) differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (79 upregulated and 228 downregulated; Fig. 2 and Table S3A) in tumors from young vs older women. Interestingly, 57.3% of the DEGs were non-protein-coding transcripts. There was limited overlap in DEGs between APOLLO, TCGA, and METABRIC (Fig. S2D). The differential expression analysis of global proteomics data yielded 17 significantly (|logFC| > 0.263, i.e., FC of 1.2 and FDR < 25%) differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) (4 upregulated and 13 downregulated; Fig. 2 and Table S3B) in tumors from young women compared to those from older women. FERM domain-containing kindlin 1 (FERMT1) and insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS1) were both identified as upregulated DEGs and DEPs (Fig. 2 and Table S3A, B). IRS1 was also identified as upregulated in tumors from young women by RPPA (Table S3D). Both FERMT1 and IRS1 have been implicated in resistance to endocrine therapy.
Pathway analysis
Integrated pathway analysis of the transcript and protein expression data of the APOLLO data was performed using multi-omics gene-set analysis (MOGSA, Fig. 2 Gene Set Scores). MOGSA is a single-sample gene set enrichment analysis method for integrative pathway analysis using multiple molecular data platforms. MOGSA identified 11 significant Cancer Hallmark pathways (Fig. 2, Tables 1, and S4A), among which five were upregulated in the young patients (ESTROGEN_RESPONSE_EARLY, ESTROGEN_RESPONSE_LATE, ADIPOGENESIS, OXIDATIVE_PHOSPHORYLATION, and MYC_TARGETS_V1) and six were downregulated in the young group (INTERFERON_ALPHA_REPONSE, INTERFERON_GAMMA_RESPONSE, TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB, INFLAMMATORY_RESPONSE, ALLOGRAFT_REJECTION, and IL6_JAK_STAT3_SIGNALING) compared to the older group. Ten of the 11 pathways were confirmed by gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of either transcriptomic data alone or proteomic data alone from APOLLO (more details in Table S4A–C). Ten of the 11 pathways were supported by transcriptomic data from TCGA and/or METABRIC (Table S4A, S4D and S4E). Of these 11, the five upregulated pathways were associated with proliferation, metabolism, signaling, and development. Interestingly, five of the six downregulated pathways were involved in immune processes and the sixth was a signaling pathway (TNFα/NFκB signaling) often active in immune processes. This finding of elevated proliferative pathways aligns with observations from a recent pan-cancer study by Shah et al..
In contrast to the limited overlap in DEGs between APOLLO, TCGA, and METABRIC (Fig. S2D and E), when comparing GSEA results from just the transcriptomic data from the three datasets, 14 of the 27 significantly upregulated and 3 of 4 downregulated cancer hallmark pathways identified in the APOLLO transcriptome (Table S4B) were also identified in the transcriptome data from TCGA and METABRIC (Fig. S6A and B).
Kinase activity
Kinase–substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) uses the enrichment of phosphorylated substrates to infer kinase activities. KSEA of APOLLO data identified eight enriched kinases from phosphoproteomic data (Fig. 3A) and six from RPPA data (Fig. 3B). Among the enriched kinases inferred from phosphoproteomic data, four had increased (MAPKAPK2, PRKACA, PRKD1, and AKT1) and four had decreased (MYLK, ROCK1, CDK1, and CDK2) kinase activities in tumors from young vs. older patients. In the RPPA data, two kinases (PRKACA and AKT1) had increased activity and four (CDK1, PRKDC, CDK6, and PDPK1) had decreased activity in the young versus older groups. These kinases and their substrates are shown in Tables S4F and S4G. There were three enriched kinases in both phosphoproteomic and RPPA data, with PRKACA and AKT1 showing increased kinase activities and CDK1 showing decreased activity in the young group.
To explore the kinase–substrate network, we studied the positive associations between kinase expression (based on global proteomic data) and phosphorylation of their known substrates (based on phosphoproteomic and/or RPPA data) in tumors from young and older patients separately (Table S4H). Distinct kinase–substrate networks in the young and older groups were observed, each containing associated kinase and substrate pairs (Fig. 3C and D). Of 45 kinase–substrate pairs, 17 were common to the two age groups, with 12 unique pairs in the young and 16 unique pairs in the older age group. CDK1 formed a network node in both young and older groups with common substrates (LIG1, NPM1, NCL, MAP2K1, KIF4A, and AHNAK) and unique substrates (AR and TP53BP1 in young women, and CHEK1 and VIM in older women). Of the common CDK1 substrates, LIG1, NCL, and NPM1 were also common substrates for CDK2 in both young and older groups. In tumors from older patients, CDK2 also had unique substrates compared to those from young patients (SF3B1, FOXM1, and CHEK1). Note that CHEK1 was a common substrate for CDK1 and CDK2 in tumors from older patients. Similar to CDK1, PLK1 formed a network node in both young and older groups with both common and unique substrates. Additionally, kinase–substrate pairs unique to tumors from young or older patients were also identified, e.g., CDK11A–CDK11B in the young group, and ROCK1–VIM and ROCK1–PPP1R12A in the older group. These data suggest that, even when protein levels are similar in tumors from young and older patients, their interaction networks may be distinct. These kinase networks warrant further investigation as age-specific therapeutic targets in breast cancer patients.
LIG1 (DNA ligase 1), a key enzyme involved in DNA replication and base excision repair, was a substrate of CDK1 and CDK2 within both age groups in our cohort. The deletion of LIG1 (19q13.3) was previously reported to be associated with chemotherapy resistance in TNBC. We found that LIG1 was more frequently deleted in tumors from young women, showing a trend toward significance but not reaching statistical significance in the overall comparison (p = 0.057) and in the Basal subtype (p = 0.056) (Fig. S7A), though it was statistically significant in the LumA subtype (p < 0.001). Protein levels were significantly lower in the Basal subtype (Fig. S7C). These observations, though relevant to prior findings, are based on a small sample size, especially in the Basal subtype, and warrant further investigation in larger cohorts.
Estrogen receptor levels and activity
Estrogen receptor gene (ESR1) and its protein (ER) expression are hallmarks of the luminal subtypes and an important therapeutic target. We explored the multi-omic expression of ESR1 adjusted for the covariates PAM50 subtype and histology type. When comparing all cases together regardless of subtype, ESR1 SCNA (FC = 0.72, p = 0.034) and mRNA (FC = 0.60, p = 0.091) in APOLLO data were significantly lower or trended lower in tumors from young women compared to older women (Fig. 4A, B), as previously reported. We report for the first time that ER protein expression was significantly lower in tumors from young women, measured by both MS-based global proteomics (Fig. 4C, FC = 0.71, p < 0.001) and RPPA data (Fig. 4D, FC = 0.91, p = 0.029). No significant difference was observed in the percentage of ER+ cells by IHC staining, although there was a difference observed before adjusting for the covariates (Fig. 4E). In the tumor data from matched patients in TCGA and METABRIC, ESR1 mRNA was lower in tumors from young women in TCGA (Fig. 4F, p < 0.001) and METABRIC (Fig. 4G, p = 0.04), as previously reported.
We further evaluated ER differences in PAM50 subtypes from the APOLLO dataset, acknowledging that the number of tumors in many subsets was small. As expected, differences were more prominent in ER-positive LumA and LumB subtypes. Within the LumA tumors, ESR1/ER differences were significant (p < 0.05) in all omics data comparisons in APOLLO as well as in transcriptomic data in TCGA and METABRIC (Fig. 4A–D, F and G). In the LumB tumors, ESR1/ER differences were significant in APOLLO RNA, APOLLO global proteomics, and in TCGA and METABRIC RNA (Fig. 4B, C, F, and G). No significant differences were seen in LumB tumors using APOLLO SCNA or RPPA data (Fig. 4A and D).
While ESR1/ER levels were lower in tumors from young women, pathway analyses indicated elevations of early and late estrogen response in all three datasets (Fig. 2 Gene Set Score, Table 1). To evaluate ER activation/phosphorylation in APOLLO samples, we analyzed ER phosphopeptide S118 levels normalized to total ER protein levels and found a significant elevation in LumA tumors from young women (Fig. 4H, p = 0.023). While there was numerical elevation in LumB tumors from young women, the difference was not significant, likely due to the low sample size for this subtype.
PR and Ki67 did not vary significantly between young and older APOLLO patients. In the APOLLO and TCGA cohorts, HER2 transcript expression in the HER2-enriched tumors was consistently numerically higher in young women, although not statistically significant, likely due to the smaller sample size of the HER2 subtype (Fig. S8B and E). However, in the METABRIC cohort, HER2 mRNA expression was significantly higher in tumors from young women compared to older women (Fig. S8F). This elevated expression of HER2 in tumors from young women warrants further investigation.
In summary, our data confirm and extend previously reported results in ESR1/ER in tumors from young and older patients. While the RNA and protein expression was lower in luminal tumors in young women, ER phosphorylation and downstream pathways were enhanced.
Immune and stromal characteristics
The observed reduced immune pathway activities in tumors from young women identified from the MOGSA analysis prompted evaluation of immune scores in APOLLO expression data using the xCell tool. The immune score, defined as the harmonized enrichment scores of 33 immune cell types, was significantly lower in LumA tumors from young women (Fig. 5A, p = 0.039). Among the immune cell types, activated dendritic cells, basophils, and class-switched memory B-cells were significantly or borderline significantly lower in tumors from young women (p = 0.032, 0.062, 0.039, respectively; Fig. 5B–D). Specifically, activated dendritic cells and basophils were significantly lower in LumA tumors from young women (p = 0.011 and 0.038, respectively; Fig. 5B and C). In contrast, type 2 T-helper cells were significantly higher in LumB tumors from young versus older women, despite the small sample size for this subtype (Fig. 5E, p = 0.042). None of the other immune cell types showed significant differences in the overall cohort or within individual intrinsic subtypes.
To contextualize these findings, we also assessed immune scores from TCGA and METABRIC across and within intrinsic breast cancer subtypes. In the TCGA cohort, no significant immune score differences were observed between age groups in either the overall cohort or in any subtype (Fig. 5F). Similarly, no differences were noted in the overall METABRIC cohort; however, within the LumB subtype, young patients had significantly lower immune scores (Fig. 5G).
We also evaluated the stromal score, defined as harmonized enrichment scores of 14 stromal cell types in these LMD-processed APOLLO tumors (Fig. 5H). The stromal score was significantly higher in LumA tumors from young women, and numerically higher in the overall cohort as well as in the HER2 and LumB subtypes, though not statistically significant. Among the 14 stromal cell types, smooth muscle, endothelial cells, and mesenchymal stem cells were significantly higher in LumA tumors from young women (Fig. 5I–K), suggestive of a remodeled vasculature. The smooth muscle cells were significantly enriched, and mesenchymal stem cells trended towards enrichment in tumors from young women in the overall cohort after adjusting for covariates (Fig. 5I–K). None of the other stromal cell types showed any significant difference in the overall cohort or in tumor subtypes. Similar stromal score analyses in the TCGA and METABRIC datasets revealed no significant differences, except for a higher stromal score in the LumB tumors from young patients in TCGA (Fig. 5L).
The different observations in both immune scores and stromal scores in LMD-enriched tumors from matched APOLLO patients compared with bulk tumors from either matched TCGA patients or matched METABRIC patients may be partially attributed to the LMD enrichment of cancer cells in the APOLLO study (Fig. S9A). Indeed, the stromal score in APOLLO tumors was very low compared with stromal scores in bulk tumors from either matched TCGA or matched METABRIC patients (Fig. S9B).
To evaluate the robustness of these findings and validate the immune and stromal profiles inferred from LMD RNA data, we compared xCell-derived scores with those from other tools. xCell’s stromal score showed a modest but non-significant correlation with ESTIMATE’s stromal score (r = 0.22; Fig. S10A), while its immune score correlated strongly with ESTIMATE’s immune score (r = 0.70; Fig. S10B). At the cell-type level, the xCell mesenchymal stem cell score, a stromal component, showed strong correlations with both ESTIMATE stromal scores (r = 0.61; Fig. S10C) and MCP-counter fibroblasts (r = 0.72; Fig. S10H). Similarly, xCell macrophages M1 scores correlated strongly with ESTIMATE immune scores (r = 0.79; Fig. S10D), MCP-counter macrophages (r = 0.70; Fig. S10F), and CIBERSORT macrophages M1 (r = 0.50; Fig. S10I), while xCell macrophages M2 scores correlated with CIBERSORT macrophages M2 (r = 0.42; Fig. S10J). Additionally, endothelial cell signals were consistent between xCell and MCP-counter (r = 0.59; Fig. S10G). These cross-method validations support the presence of residual stroma and immune cell signals in the LMD RNA profiles (Fig. S10).
To explore potential age-related differences in cell surface proteins targeted by immunotherapies, we examined 62 genes (Table S5A) relevant to chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapy, antibody–drug conjugates (ADC), and T-cell engager therapies, assessing whether their SCNA, RNA, or protein expression levels varied between age groups in APOLLO. Sixteen genes showed significant differences in at least one of the three omics levels, either in the overall comparison or at the subtype level (Table S5B). Four of the 16 genes (CD46, CSPG4, CD72, and ICAM1) exhibited differences at the protein level (Fig. S11). CD46, a promising target for T-cell engagers and antibody–drug conjugates, showed significantly higher protein expression in tumors from young women overall (Limma p = 0.048) and specifically in the LumB subtype (Wilcoxon p = 0.024; Fig. S11A). CSPG4, a potential CAR-T target, exhibited significantly higher protein expression in tumors from young women in the LumA subtype (Fig. S11B). Additionally, CD72 and ICAM1, both potential CAR-T targets, showed significantly lower protein expression in tumors from young women in the LumB subtype (Fig. S11C and D).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Breast cancer is among the most common cancers diagnosed in women and the second leading cause of cancer death in women in the United States. Overall, 1 in 8 (12%) women will develop breast cancer in their lifetime; however, only 5% of breast cancers are diagnosed in women ≤40. Despite this low incidence, breast cancer accounts for 30% of cancers diagnosed in women between 15 and 39 years of age. Clinically, women diagnosed with breast cancer prior to age 40 have worse outcomes than older women, including higher rates of recurrence, lower disease-free and overall survival, and higher breast cancer disease-specific mortality. Women diagnosed at ages ≤40 are 30% more likely to die from breast cancer compared to women diagnosed between the ages of 51–60.
Compared to older women, young women are diagnosed at more advanced stages of disease, with tumors that have less favorable pathology features, including larger size, higher grade, increased lymphovascular invasion, higher proliferation index, and greater lymph node involvement. Young women are more likely to be diagnosed with more aggressive subtypes, with higher rates of hormone-receptor negative, HER2-overexpressing, or triple negative (TN) cancers. Even after receiving aggressive treatment, the responses and clinical outcomes in women ≤40 are worse than older women with breast cancer.
Factors beyond differences in subtype distribution between younger and older patients seem to contribute to the worse prognosis in young women with breast cancer. After adjusting for subtype, tumor size, nodal status, and grade, young women ≤40 still had worse relapse-free survival compared to those diagnosed at >40. In another study, after controlling for multiple demographic factors, tumor characteristics (e.g., stage, grade, and subtype), and treatment differences, young women still demonstrated increased breast cancer-specific mortality compared to women diagnosed between ages 51–60, particularly for patients with either luminal A or luminal B subtypes. Preclinical studies support the influence of host age on the incidence and aggressiveness of breast cancer, in agreement with these findings.
Many studies have sought to clarify the drivers of age-associated differences in breast cancer using DNA or gene expression-based analyses with mixed results. After adjusting for tumor size, nodal status, histology, and breast cancer subtype, Azim et al. reported in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) breast cancer dataset that tumors from young patients harbored fewer somatic mutations and somatic copy number alterations (SCNA) than those from older patients. Only mutations in GATA3 and the deletion of chr6q27 were associated with young age. However, Stephens et al. found no correlation between somatic mutation burden and age at diagnosis in either ER-positive or ER-negative disease. In ER-negative tumors, they observed a significant positive correlation between age and C > T substitutions at CpG (N(C → T)G) sites. A recent large-scale genomic study of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer in young women found increased homologous recombination deficiency, PIK3CA mutations associated with SCNA, and SCNA themselves as factors linked to poor prognosis in this population.
Gene expression studies examining age-associated differences in breast cancer have yielded varying results. For example, one study, analyzing gene expression data from 39 publicly available datasets, found biological processes related to immature mammary cell populations and growth factor signaling were enriched in women ≤40 while apoptosis-related genes were downregulated. The study by Azim et al. found higher expression of gene signatures related to proliferation, stem cell features, and endocrine resistance in tumors from young women. In contrast, Anders et al. found no age-associated gene expression differences in younger (≤45) vs. older (≥65) breast cancer patients after adjusting for subtype.
The lack of consistent molecular findings across studies makes it difficult to identify potential treatment targets to improve outcomes among young women with breast cancer. Such inconsistencies could be partially due to varying tumor cellularity, as prior studies profiled the entire breast cancer tumor sample. Furthermore, existing datasets lack proteomic studies of tumors from young women. To address these gaps, we conducted a focused, proteogenomic investigation using tumor-enriched samples obtained by laser microdissection (LMD), enabling a more precise molecular comparison of breast cancers from young (<40 years) and older (≥60 years) women. Cases were carefully selected to be matched by immunohistochemistry (IHC)-defined subtype and patient race, minimizing confounding contributions to the results due to these factors. This study was conducted as part of the Applied Proteogenomic OrganizationaL Learning and Outcomes (APOLLO) Research Network. This strategy, coupled with integrative analyses, allowed us to identify molecular features and candidate molecular drug targets unique to breast tumors in young women. These results from the first APOLLO breast cancer cohort provide greater insight into the differential tumor biology between young and older women with breast cancer, potentially providing new insight into therapeutic strategies for breast cancers in young women to improve clinical outcomes.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary information
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
These authors contributed equally: Jianfang Liu, Anthony R. Soltis, Nicholas W. Bateman, Qingrong Chen, Lori A. Sturtz.
A list of authors and their affiliations appears at the end of the paper.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41523-025-00793-0.
Data availability
The DNA sequencing, RNA sequencing, and proteomic data generated in this study are deposited at the NCI Cancer Research Data Commons at https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-data/publications/APOLLO-BRCA-2025 with the dbGaP study accession phs003636.v1.p1, and the ProteomeXChange with the identifier PXD066224.
Code availability
Requests for analysis code, resources, or reagents should be directed to the lead contact, Hai Hu (H.Hu@wriwindber.org).