PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap; Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Stress granules; Mass spectrometry; In-cell lip; Structural proteomics; Limited proteolysis; Arsenite treatment; Rapamycin

ABSTRACT:
To study protein structures directly within cells, we developed in-cell limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry (in-cell LiP-MS). Conditions for introduction of proteinase K into human cells using electroporation were optimized and validated for intracellular cleavages. In-cell LiP-MS captured the known binding of rapamycin to FKBP1A within the cell and detected global protein structural alterations upon sodium arsenite treatment. It captured the structural dynamics of hundreds of proteins from biomolecular condensates with peptide level resolution and within live human cells such as structural alterations of individual sites on the involved proteins, such as known RNA-binding and intrinsically-disordered regions, and dissected the timing of the different events. We detected known and novel structural alterations of proteins from stress granules as well as from nuclear speckles and validated alteration of nuclear speckles by fluorescence microscopy. Our dataset provides a resource describing the structural changes of human proteins in response to cellular arsenite stress and pinpoints structurally altered regions. Further, comparison of LiP-based structural fingerprints before and after cell lysis revealed which human proteins are susceptible to structural change upon cell lysis, therefore guiding the design of future experiments requiring native protein structures.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry captures proteome-wide protein structural alterations and biomolecular condensation in living cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HEK293 cells (ATCC #CRL-1573) and Flp-In T-Rex 293 cells (Thermo Fisher R78007) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum and 5% Penicillin/Streptomycin at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in a humidified environment. HEK293 cells were passaged prior to confluency in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4. Cells were transfected at approx. 70% confluency on 150 mm culture dishes. Medium was exchanged prior to transfection. Per plate, 1200 μl jetPrime buffer were mixed with 25 μg plasmid DNA (ECFP-TevS-YPET), and 50 μl jetPrime reagent. After incubation for 10 min, the mixture was added to the cells. For intact cells: HEK293 cells were detached from culture dishes 2-3 days after transfection, washed with PBS, and resuspended in PBS at a concentration of 33.3 * 106 cells/ml. Prior to fluorescence analysis, 90 µl cell suspension (corresponding to 1E6 cells) were mixed with 30 μl water or 30 μl of a 400 μM PK solution PK (solubilized in water). For electroporation, 100 μl of the solution were electroporated with one 25 ms pulse at 1000 V using a Neon Transfection System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and transferred to a 96-well plate. Control cells without electroporation were directly transferred after mixing PK and cells.  For in-cell LiP-MS, 90 μl of treated or untreated cells (approx. 3x1E6 cells) were mixed with 30 μl ice-cold PK solution (100 μM final PK concentration except in optimization experiments, PK dissolved in water). To determine the effect of PK on cells, 30 μl water were added instead. For electroporation, 100 μl of the cell suspension were electroporated using Neon Transfection System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Electroporation was usually carried out with one 25 ms pulse at 1000 V, except for optimization experiments when 1-3 pulses and 800 V to 1400 V were tested. Exactly 15 seconds after electroporation, samples were heated to 37 °C, and incubated for 2 min (during optimization, 1 min to 5 min incubation were tested). For washing, 1 ml PBS pre-warmed to 37 °C was added, and cells were pelleted by centrifugation for 1 min at 4000 x g. The supernatant was removed, and cells were washed a second time with 1 ml PBS. For protease inactivation, 100 μl of 7 M guanidinium hydrochloride dissolved in water was added to the cells, and the samples were heated to 98 °C for at least 5 min. Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before cell lysis. We used guanidinium hydrochloride for protease inactivation since we determined that sodium deoxycholate, which is used for this purpose in classical LiP-MS, does not sufficiently quench proteinase K activity within cells. Samples were thawed on ice, and sonicated two times 30 sec using a Hielscher UP200St-G-Ultrasonic generator coupled to a UP200St with VialTweeter. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 10,000xg for 5 min.  Tryptic digestion: Disulfide bonds were reduced by incubation with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride) (TCEP) shaking for 40 min at 37 °C. Subsequently, samples incubated 30 min in the dark at room temperature with 40 mM. Samples were then diluted using 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) to achieve a final guanidinium chloride concentration of 0.5 M, or 1% sodium deoxycholate, or < 2 M urea. Proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin at an enzyme substrate ratio of 1:100 shaking overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic digest was stopped by adding formic acid to a final pH of approx. 2. C18-Cleanup was performed on 96-well C18 Micro-Spin plate. Samples were resuspended in buffer A supplemented with iRT peptides and analyzed by mass spectrometry. DIA acquisition: Samples were injected into either (i) an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Waters nanoAQUITY UPLC System or (ii) an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Waters nanoAQUITY UPLC System or (iii) Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 system or (iv) Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a VanquishNeo System . The HPLC separation was performed using a linear gradient from 3-35% B (Eluent A: 0.1% formic acid, Eluent B: 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 120 minutes at a flowrate of 300 nL / min. The MS1 scans ranged from 350 to 1400 m/z with an Orbitrap resolution of 120000 and an AGC target of 50% or 100 ms injection time. The DIA method consisted of 41 variable width windows with 1 m/z overlap.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data was searched using Spectronaut 17 (Biognosys), with libraries built from the DIA files. The digestion type was set to semi-specific and peptide minimum length was adjusted to 6. The data was searched against the human reviewed UniProt database and the sequence of PK (retrieved on April 16, 2023). Data analysis was performed with Spectronaut via a classical DIA analysis using a targeted library-based search with the following modifications: a single-hit was defined by modified sequence, and single-hit proteins were excluded. Quant 2.0 was selected for label-free protein quantification, samples were normalized globally on the median, and PTM localization was selected. Only peptides with a quantity > 1 were considered for statistical analysis using R version 4.2.2. A Welch’s t-test was used for statistical analysis. P-values were adjusted to multiple testing using the Benjamini Hochberg method. We used cutoffs of FC > 1.5 and of q-value < 0.05 for all proteomics experiments, except for the rapamycin datasets, where a p-value < 0.01 was used because no significant changes were detected after adjustment to multiple testing. For gene ontology enrichment analysis, the topGP package (version 2.50.0) was used in R (https://git.bioconductor.org/packages/topGO). Gene ontology annotations were obtained from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org, retrieved on May 17, 2022). Enrichment analysis was performed with the Fishers exact test using the elim algorithm in topGO. Significance was set at the p-value level < 0.01.