PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Pulldown; Affinity-purification ms; Lfq; Phosphorylation; Pyrophosphorylation

ABSTRACT:
Reversible protein phosphorylation serves as a pivotal signaling mechanism in eukaryotic cells, contrasting with the poorly understood protein pyrophosphorylation, a posttranslational modification (PTM) whose functions in living organisms remain elusive. Unlike kinase-mediated protein phosphorylation, pyrophosphorylation is thought to be installed non-enzymatically, when a highly phosphorylated inositol pyrophosphate (PP-InsPs) transfers its high energy β-phosphoryl group onto the pre-existing phosphoryl group of a protein substrate. Our group recently presented the initial evidence of endogenous protein pyrophosphorylation in mammalian cell lines, including N-acetylglucosamine kinase (NAGK). Here we report, the first site-selective pyrophosphorylation of NAGK, strategically modified at its endogenous site to evaluate the modification's impact on protein activity. Biochemical evaluation revealed a significant reduction in GlcNAc kinase activity upon phosphorylation and near-complete inactivation upon pyrophosphorylation at serine 76 (S76), highlighting pyrophosphorylation’s unique regulatory function facilitated by an ATP-mediated autocatalytic process. ppS76-NAGK demonstrated notable stability in mammalian cell lysates, hinting at alternative functional outcomes. Proteomic examination unveiled distinct protein-protein interactions for ppS76-NAGK, suggesting involvement in diverse cellular pathways. In summary, this study enhances our comprehension of protein pyrophosphorylation and its significance for kinase regulation and protein-protein interactions, paving the way for further exploration of pyrophosphorylated kinases.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
An Uncommon Phosphorylation Mode Regulates the Activity and Protein Interactions of N-Acetylglucosamine Kinase

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Lyophilized samples were resolubilized in 50 mM TEAB with 8 M Urea. Samples were subsequently reduced and alkylated with 5 mM TCEP and 20 mM CAA at 37 °C for 1 h. LysC was added in an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:200 (wt/wt) and incubated with the sample for 2 h at 37 °C. After dilution of the sample to 2 M Urea, Trypsin was added at an enzyme:protein ration of 1:100 (w/w) to digest overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin was quenched with 1% FA and centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 x g. The supernatant was collected and desalted using C18 StageTips and lyophilized. Peptides were quantified using BCA peptide quantification (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures after tryptic digest were analyzed by a reversed-phase capillary liquid chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 NCS-3500RS Nano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For sample loading, a PepMap C18 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) of 75 µm ID x 50 mm length, 3 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size was used. The loading mobile phase A contained 1% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA acid in water, and mobile phase B 0.1% TFA acid in acetonitrile. Reversed-phase separation was performed using a 50 cm analytical column (in-house packed with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm, Agilent Technologies) with mobile phase A containing 0.1% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The gradient started with 4% buffer B reaching 80% buffer B, with total run time of 80 or 120 min including column wash and equilibration at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. For standard protein identification and quantification, MS1 scans were acquired in a range of 375 to 1500 m/z with 50 ms max. injection time, a resolution of 120,000 and an AGC target value of 4e5. Precursor ions with charge states 2-4 were isolated with a mass selecting quadrupole (isolation window m/z 1.6) with 40 s dynamic exclusion. MS2 scans were recorded with a linear ion trap in rapid mode with dynamic maximum injection time and mass range, standard AGC target and an NCE of 30% (1 s duty cycles). For pyrophosphorylation studies, settings were kept the same apart from the following changes: MS1 scans were recorded with a mass range of 380 to 1400 m/z and isolated with a dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Precursors were fragmented with 25% CID and recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 with 100 ms maximum injection time and 1e4 AGC target. If a targeted loss of 177.9432 Da (± 25 ppm) was detected, the precursor was again isolated and fragmented in the MS2 with 30% EThcD, 2000 ms max. injection time, 1e5 AGC target, at a resolution of 120,000 in a m/z range of 200–3000 (2-3 s duty cycles). For phosphorylation studies, no prior CID-MS2 scans and targeted loss trigger were performed and all precursors have directly been fragmented by EThcD.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were analyzed and processed using MaxQuant. Protein identification was performed with default settings. Search parameters included two missed tryptic cleavage sites, fixed cysteine carbamidomethyl modification, and variable methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation. Label-free quantification and match between runs were enabled. Database search was performed against the Human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database with common contaminants. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both peptide and protein level. The analysis of the quantitative proteomic data was carried out using Perseus.   7 Proteins were filtered to exclude reverse database hits, potential contaminants, and proteins only identified by site. Proteins were further filtered by rows, requiring valid values for at least two out of four technical replicates. Data was imputed using Perseus default parameters. Volcano plots were generated using a t test (number of randomizations: 250).