PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
diseases: Septic shock
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: complex glycosylation
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human serum; Septic shock; O-glycosylation; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) is a serum glycoprotein that binds and delivers anti-inflammatory cortisol to inflammatory sites through neutrophil elastase (NE)-mediated proteolysis of an exposed reactive centre loop (RCL) on CBG. Timely and tissue-specific delivery of cortisol is critical to alleviate inflammation including in life-threatening septic shock conditions. Important for the cortisol delivery mechanism, which is facilitated by proteolytic cleavage of RCL of CBG and conformational changes to the protein, we recently identified novel O-glycosylation events within the RCL and documented their inhibition of RCL proteolysis (Chernykh et al., 2023). While these observations are of significance as they implicate RCL O-glycosylation as a potential regulator of cortisol delivery, the link to septic shock remains unexplored. To this end, we used mass spectrometry to profile the RCL O-glycosylation of CBG purified from serum of twelve septic shock patients. Serum CBG from all patients exhibited RCL O-glycosylation comprising both sialyl T and/or disialyl T (NeuAc1-2Gal1GalNAc1) O-glycan structures decorating exclusively the Thr342 site. Importantly, relative to less severe cases, individuals presenting with the most severe illness displayed elevated RCL O-glycosylation upon ICU admission, suggesting a previously unknown link to septic shock severity. Overall, we have elucidated RCL O-glycosylation events of serum CBG, which improve our understanding of molecular mechanisms governing the timely and tissue-specific delivery of cortisol to inflammatory sites. The work provides clues to molecular aberrations and disease mechanisms underpinning septic shock.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
RCL glycosylation of serum corticosteroid-binding globulin: implications in cortisol delivery and septic shock

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We immuno-affinity purified CBG from blood sera collected at the time of ICU admission of twelve septic shock patients presenting with moderate (n = 6) and severe (n = 6) illness.   The dried CBG protein pellets were dissolved in 23 µl lysis buffer containing 5% (w/v) SDS in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), pH 8.5. Reduction and alkylation were performed using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 45 min at 56 °C and 20 mM iodoacetamide (final concentrations) for 30 min in dark, respectively. Subsequently, 2.5% phosphoric acid (final concentration) and 150 µl binding/wash buffer containing 100 mM TEAB in 90% (v/v) methanol, pH 7.55 was added to CBG. Samples were transferred to S-Trap mini spin columns (Protifi, Fairport NY) and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 30 s. The immobilised CBG was washed three times with binding/wash buffer and centrifuged at 4,000 g for 1 min to remove the binding/wash buffer. Subsequently, 20 µl digestion buffer containing 1 µg trypsin/sample (sequencing grade, Promega) in 50 mM TEAB was added to the S-trap columns. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C. The resultant peptide mixtures were sequentially eluted with 40 µl 50 mM TEAB in water, 40 µl 0.2% (v/v) formic acid in water and 40 µl 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) in water. Eluted fractions were collected after centrifugation, combined and dried. CBG peptides were then de-N-glycosylated using 10 U PNGase F (Promega) in 20 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (16 h, 37 °C), dried and kept in -30 °C until use.  LC-MS/MS CBG peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and loaded on a trap column (0.1 mm inner diameter x 20 mm column length) custom packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 5 μm resin (Dr. Maisch, Germany) operated by an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximately 300 ng CBG peptide material was injected and separated at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min at 45 °C on a custom-made Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ analytical LC column (3 μm particle size, 300 mm column length x 0.075 mm inner diameter column, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The mobile phases were 0.1% FA in 99.9% (both v/v) ACN (solvent B) and 0.1% (v/v) aqueous FA (solvent A). The linear gradient of solvent B increased from 2-15% (v/v) over 5 min, 15-33% (v/v) over 25 min, 33-95% (v/v) over 5 min, and, finally, 6 min at 95% B (v/v). The nano LC was connected to a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion polarity mode. Full MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at full width at half maximum (FWHM) (measured at m/z 200) with a range of m/z 450-2,000. Data-dependant acquisition was used to collect MS/MS data of the 20 most abundant precursor ions in each MS1 full scan utilising higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalised collision energy of 28%. Precursors selected for fragmentation were at least doubly charged (z ≥ +2). Fragment ions were measured at a resolution of 15,000 (FWHM at m/z 200) with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum injection time of 28 ms using a precursor isolation window of m/z 1.2.

DATA PROCESSING:
All LC-MS/MS raw data were browsed using Xcalibur v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HCD- and EThcD-MS/MS data were searched against the canonical sequence of human CBG (UniProtKB, P08185) using Byonic v4.5.2 (Protein Metrics). Decoy and contaminant databases were enabled to establish the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide candidates. The precursor and product ion mass tolerance thresholds were set to 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptides with a semi-specific trypsin cleavage pattern (C-terminal to R/K) were considered with a maximum of one missed tryptic cleavage site per peptide. Searches were performed with carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021 Da) as a fixed modification. Oxidation of Met (+15.994 Da) and deamidation of Asn (+0.9840 Da) were considered as common variable modifications. N-glycosylation of sequon-localised Asn and O-glycosylation of any Thr/Ser residue was considered as rare modification and candidates were identified from predefined glycan databases (182 human N-glycans and 70 human O-glycans). N-glycans were included in the search as a control to ensure complete de-N-glycosylation with PNGase F. One or two rare and a total of two common modifications were permitted per peptide. All searches were filtered to <1% FDR at the protein level and 0% at the peptide level. PEP-2D score < 0.001 was used as a general confidence threshold to filter glycopeptide candidates. The Byonic-identified O-glycopeptide candidates were manually validated to ensure correct annotation. The relative abundance of the observed RCL (glyco)peptides was quantified using area-under-the-curve (AUC) measurements based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) generated from the monoisotopic precursor ions of all identified (glyco)peptide species in all detected charge states using Skyline v21.1. The RCL O-glycoform distribution was established by calculating the proportion of the AUC of the individual O-glycopeptides relative to the total AUC of all RCL O-glycopeptides, an approach commonly employed in quantitative glycopeptide analysis. The total RCL O-glycosylation level was determined as the proportion of the AUC of all O-glycosylated RCL peptides relative to the total AUC of all observed RCL peptides. For the quantitation of the RCL O-glycoform distribution and to determine the overall O-glycosylation levels both the de-N-glycosylated (formerly Asn347-glycosylated) and non-N-glycosylated RCL peptide forms were considered.