PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Microbial proteomics; Sequence alignment; De novo sequencing; Metaproteomics

ABSTRACT:
This dataset was utilized to assess the performance of a novel de novo metaproteomics pipeline, which performs sequence alignment of de novo sequences from complete metaproteomics experiments. Traditionally, metaproteomics data annotation relies on database searching that requires sample-specific databases derived from whole metagenome sequencing experiments. Creating these databases, however, is a complex, time-consuming, and error prone process, which can introduce biases affecting the outcomes and conclusions, highlighting the need for alternative methods. The evaluated approach offers rapid and orthogonal insights into metaproteomics data.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Evaluating sequence alignment for metaproteomics applications

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The Saccharomyces cerevisiae tryptic digest was purchased from Promega (Cat No. V7461). Aeromonas bestiarum was cultured as described in C. Tugui et al., 2024, bioRxiv. The Ca. Kuenenia stuttgartiensis enrichment was prepared as described in Lawson et al., 2019, The ISME Journal. The Ca. Accumulibacter phosphatis enrichment was prepared as described in Kleikamp et al., 2021, Cell Systems. Wastewater microbiome granules were sampled from the aerobic granular sludge wastewater treatment plant in Utrecht, The Netherlands, as described earlier in Kleikamp et al., Water Research, 2023. Cell lysis, protein extraction and proteolytic digestion was performed using the following methods. The wastewater treatment plant granules were freeze-dried and grounded with a mortar and pestle, and 5–10 mg powder were dissolved in TEAB and B-PER buffer. For the other cell cultures, approx. 25–50 mg cell pellet (wet weight) were resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) containing 1% (w/w) NaDOC and 250 µL B-PER™ reagent under vortexing, and subsequently lysed using glass bead beating. For the wastewater microbiome samples additional freeze/thaw cycles (× 3) were performed by freezing the sample at -80°C and subsequently thawing at 95°C in a water bath. For Aeromonas, additional sonication for 15 minutes was performed, followed by a single freeze/thaw cycle by freezing the sample at -80°C for and subsequently thawing the sample at 40°C in a Thermocylcer. The sample was centrifuged and proteins were precipitated by adding Trichloroacetic solution (TCA). The protein pellet was washed with ice-cold acetone and resuspended in 6 M Urea in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The extracted proteins were reduced by addition of 10 mM and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C and under gentle shaking using an Eppendorf ThermoMixer. Subsequently, the proteins were alkylated for 30 minutes at room temperature by addition of 20 mM iodoacetamide. After dilution to <1M urea, proteolytic digestion was performed using sequencing grade Trypsin and incubation at 37°C and 300 rpm overnight. Solid phase extraction was performed with an Oasis HLB 96-well μElution plate, samples were dried in a speed vac concentrator, and then resuspended in H2O, containing 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (resuspension buffer). The commercial proteolytic yeast digest was directly resuspended in resuspension buffer to result in a concentration of 1 µg/µL. The proteolytic digests were analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano-LC 1200 equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm), and an QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The Orbitrap was operated in data dependent acquisition mode measuring peptide signals at 70 K resolution, and continuous fragmentation of top 10 signals using a NCE of 28. Fragments were acquired at 17 K resolution, where unassigned, singly and >6 times charged mass peaks were excluded from fragmentation.

DATA PROCESSING:
The mass spectrometric raw data were processed using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada). Database searching was performed allowing 20 ppm parent ion and 0.02 Da fragment mass error. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Database searching was performed with N/Q deamidation as additional variable modifications, and decoy fusion for estimation of false discovery rates (FDR) and subsequent filtering of peptide spectrum matches for 1% FDR. For yeast, the UniprotKB reference proteome UP000002311 was used, for Aeromonas, the UniprotKB reference proteome UP000224937 was employed. For Ca. Kuenenia stuttgartiensis enrichment and Ca. Accumulibacter phosphatis enrichment, whole metagenome sequencing databases were used, as described in Lawson et al. (2019) in The ISME Journal and Kleikamp et al. (2021) in Cell Systems, respectively. Additionally, for the analysis of wastewater microbiome granules, a whole metagenome sequence was constructed following the methodology outlined in Kleikamp et al., Water Research, 2023.