PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Endothelial cell; Huvec cell
diseases: Chronic kidney disease
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Cardiovascular disease; Chronic kidney disease; Indoxyl sulfate; Proteomics; Endothelial dysfunction; Extracellular vesicles

ABSTRACT:
Introduction: Cardiovascular pathology is the main cause of death in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). CKD is associated with the accumulation of uremic toxins in the bloodstream due to their difficult elimination by renal substitution therapy. Indoxyl sulfate (IS) is one of the most abundant uremic toxins found in the blood of patients with CKD. We conducted an in vitro study to assess the mechanisms underlying IS-induced endothelial dysfunction that could lead to cardiovascular diseases. We studied not only endothelial cells but also their extracellular vesicles (EVs) owing to their capacity to act as messengers that transmit signals through their cargo. Methods: EVs were characterized using nanoparticle tracking analysis, transmission electron microscopy, and flow cytometry, and their tetraspanin expression was evaluated to confirm their identity as EVs. Subsequently, mass spectrophotometry of the protein lysates of cells and EVs was performed, followed by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis to identify the principal altered pathways. Additionally, qPCR and proliferation analyses were performed to confirm proteomic results. Results: Proteomic analysis of endothelial cells revealed that IS causes an increase in proteins related to adipogenesis, inflammation, and xenobiotic metabolism and a decrease in proliferation via mTOR. Inflammation due to TNF signaling via NFкB was confirmed by an increase in the expression of the target genes IL-6, MCP-1, and ICAM-1. Concerning EVs, extracellular matrix elements were reduced, and myogenesis genes were downregulated in response to UV irradiation and inflammation. Fatty acid metabolism also seemingly increases, which, along with adipogenesis and inflammation observed in cells, could be related to atherosclerosis.  Conclusions: Endothelial cells treated with IS had more proteins related to adipogenesis, inflammation, and xenobiotic metabolism and fewer associated with proliferation. Furthermore, EVs from cells treated with IS may mediate endothelial dysfunction, since they present fewer extracellular matrix elements, myogenesis and inflammatory factors, and proteins downregulated in response to UV radiation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic analysis of endothelial cells and extracellular vesicles in response to indoxyl sulfate: mechanisms of endothelial dysfunction in chronic kidney disease

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HUVECs and HUVEC-derived EVs were pooled and preserved as dry pellets at -20 °C (n = 5). The samples were lysed with 400 and 150 µL of 5% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 10 mM chloroacetamide. The lysates were sonicated using an ultrasonic processor UP50H (Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany) for 1 min on ice (0.5 cycles, 100% amplitude) and incubated at 56 °C for 30 min. Protein lysates were centrifuged at 18,400 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Total protein was measured using PIERCE 660 nm reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein digestion was performed on S-Trap columns (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 20 µg of each sample was digested overnight at 37 °C using a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:15. Tryptic peptides were cleaned using in-house made Stage-Tips prepared from Octadecyl C18 Solid-phase Extraction Disks (Empore™, 66883-U), as previously described. The eluted peptides were dried in a speed vacuum and stored at -20 °C until further processing.  Each sample was quantified by fluorimetry (QuBit; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 1 µg was individually analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography coupled with electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS) using an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Exploris™ 240 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a 50 cm × 75 μm Easy‐spray PepMap C18 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 45 °C and separated at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 120-min gradient ranging from 2 to 95% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% FA). Two 40-min blank samples were systematically run between samples to avoid carry-over. Data acquisition was performed using a data-dependent top-20 method in the full-scan positive mode and scanning at 375–1200 m/z. MS1scans were acquired at an orbitrap resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, with a normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target of 300%, a radio frequency lens of 80%, and an automatic maximum injection time (IT). The most intense ions from each MS1 scan were selected and fragmented at a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of 30%. The resolution of the HCD spectra was set to 15,000 at m/z 200, with a normalized AGC target of 50% and an automatic maximum IT. The precursors were isolated at an isolation window of 2 m/z and an exclusion duration of 45 s. Precursor ions with charge states ranging from 2+ to 5+ were included.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v2.5.0.400; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed using four search engines [Mascot (v2.7.0), MsAmanda (v2.4.0), MsFragger (v3.1.1), and Sequest HT] against the Homo Sapiens UniProtKB database (February 19th, 2021; 20,378 sequences) with the most common laboratory contaminants (a cRAP database with 69 sequences). The search parameters were set as follows: cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da), methionine oxidation (M) (+15.994915 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and Gln→pyro-Glu (-17.026549 Da) as variable modifications. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 and 0.02 Da, respectively, and trypsin/P was selected as the protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. The false discovery rate (FDR) for proteins, peptides, and peptide-spectral match peptides was maintained at 1%. Quantitation was also performed in Proteome Discoverer using the “Minora Feature Detector” processing method and the “Feature Mapper” and “Precursor Ions Quantifier” nodes in the consensus step. The “Feature Mapper” node was applied using chromatographic retention time alignment with a maximum shift of 10 min and signal-to-noise threshold of 5. Quantitation was performed using the following parameters: unique + razor peptides, precursor abundance based on intensity, and normalization mode based on the total peptide amount. Protein abundance was calculated by summing the sample abundance of the connected peptide groups. Pairwise-based ratios were calculated, and a t-test background-based statistical test was performed to compare treated cells with untreated cells/EVs. A p-value ≤ 0.05 was adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg method, and a fold change (FC) of at least 25% was set to determine the differentially enriched proteins. Volcano plots were generated using the EnhancedVolcano R package. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) (30) was performed using gene set permutations (n = 1000) for the assessment of significance, signal-to-noise metrics for ranking genes, and hallmark gene set collections defined by the Molecular Signatures Database (31). Known functional interactions among relevant genes were obtained using STRING. Cytoscape software was used to integrate and visualize the network data.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Aims</h4>Cardiovascular pathology is the main cause of death in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients. CKD is associated with the accumulation of uremic toxins in the bloodstream, and indoxyl sulfate (IS) is one of the most abundant uremic toxins found in the blood of CKD patients. We conducted an in vitro study to assess the mechanisms underlying the IS-induced endothelial dysfunction that could lead to cardiovascular diseases. We also studied their extracellular vesicles (EVs) owing to their capacity to act as messengers that transmit signals through their cargo.<h4>Main methods</h4>EVs were characterized by nanoparticle tracking analysis, transmission electron microscopy, flow cytometry, and tetraspanin expression. Cell lysates and isolated EVs were analyzed using liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry, followed by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis to identify the altered pathways.<h4>Key findings</h4>Proteomic analysis of endothelial cells revealed that IS causes an increase in proteins related to adipogenesis, inflammation, and xenobiotic metabolism and a decrease in proliferation. Extracellular matrix elements, as well as proteins associated with myogenesis, response to UV irradiation, and inflammation, were found to be downregulated in IS-treated EVs. Fatty acid metabolism was also found to be increased along with adipogenesis and inflammation observed in cells.<h4>Significance</h4>The treatment of endothelial cells with IS increased the expression of proteins related to adipogenesis, inflammation, and xenobiotic metabolism and was less associated with proliferation. Furthermore, EVs from cells treated with IS may mediate endothelial dysfunction, since they present fewer extracellular matrix elements, myogenesis, inflammatory factors, and proteins downregulated in response to UV radiation.