PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Biliary epithelial cells  chronic liver injury genetically modified mice hepatic stellate cells receptor for advanced glycation end products

ABSTRACT:
Ductular reaction (DR) is the hallmark of cholestatic diseases manifested in the proliferation of bile ductules lined by biliary epithelial cells (BECs). It is commonly associated with increased risk of fibrosis and liver failure. The Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Products (RAGE) was identified as a critical mediator of DR during chronic injury. Yet, the direct link between RAGE-mediated DR and fibrosis as well as the mode of interaction between BECs and hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) to drive fibrosis remain elusive. Here, we delineate the specific function of RAGE on BECs during DR and its potential association with fibrosis in the context of cholestasis. Employing a biliary lineage tracing cholestatic liver injury mouse model, combined with whole transcriptome sequencing, mass spectrometry and in vitro analyses, we investigated the role for BEC-specific Rage activity in fostering a pro-fibrotic milieu. RAGE is predominantly expressed in BECs and contributes to DR. Employing mass spectrometry analyses of soluble factors of in vitro cultured wildtype and RAGE deficient BECs Notch ligand Jagged1 was found to be secreted from activated BECs in a Rage-dependent manner and signals HSCs in trans, eventually enhancing fibrosis during cholestasis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The function of the Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Products (RAGE) in ductular reaction-mediated liver fibrosis during cholestasis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein concentration of collected BEC- growth medium and conditioned medium were measured by Bradford assay. Proteins (30 µg) were run for 4 cm into an SDS-PAGE and 8 pieces (a 0.5 cm height) were cut out and digested using trypsin according to Shevchenko et al. (Shevchenko, Andrej, et al. "In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes." Nature protocols 1.6 (2006): 2856.) adapted to on a DigestPro MSi robotic system (INTAVIS Bioanalytical Instruments AG). A LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) directly connected to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for a total of 60 min. Peptides were online desalted on a trapping cartridge (Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5µm, 300Å wide pore; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min using 30 ul/min flow of 0.05% TFA in water. The analytical multistep gradient (300 nl/min) was performed using a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 200 mm, Waters) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). For 42 min the concentration of B was linearly ramped from 4% to 30%, followed by a quick ramp to 78%, after two minutes the concentration of B was lowered to 2% and a 10 min equilibration step appended. Eluting peptides were analyzed in the mass spectrometer using data depend acquisition (DDA) mode. A full scan at 120k resolution (380-1400 m/z, 300% AGC target, 45 ms maxIT) was followed by up to 2 seconds of MS/MS scans. Peptide features were isolated with a window of 1.4 m/z, fragmented using 26% NCE. Fragment spectra were recorded at 15k resolution (100% AGC target, 54 ms maxIT). Unassigned and singly charged eluting features were excluded from fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant (1.6.14.0, Tyanova, Stefka, Tikira Temu, and Juergen Cox. "The MaxQuant computational platform for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics." Nature protocols 11.12 (2016): 2301) using an organism specific database extracted from Uniprot.org (mouse reference database, containing 22,276 unique entries from 20th December2017, bos Taurus, containing 6,008 entries, from 10th of February 2020 and human target protein FASTA containing 2 unique entries). Settings were left at default with the following adaptions. Match between runs (MBR) was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across RAW files based on accurate retention time and m/z. All bands of a lane were merge to a sample(Experiment). Fractions were set in a way that MBR was only performed within adjacent bands within each sample. Label free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with default settings. The iBAQ-value (Schwanhäusser, B., Busse, D., Li, N. et al. Global quantification of mammalian gene expression control. Nature 473, 337–342 (2011)) (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) generation was enabled.