PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Mesenchymal cell
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Surface markers; Mesenchymal stem cells; Tissue regeneration; Human dermal fibroblasts adult; Cell-based therapy; Proteome profiling

ABSTRACT:
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are an essential tool in cell-based therapies. One of the most crucial factors for efficacy in regenerative medicine is the source of MSCs. Tissue origin has long been suggested as a potential determinant of MSC properties. Human dermal fibroblasts share similar characteristics to MSCs, and the question of whether fibroblasts are functionally equivalent to MSCs is still debated. The present work used proteomic and phenotypic analyses to compare human dermal fibroblasts, dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs), and adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (AD-MSCs). We observed similarities and differences in morphology, cell surface markers, differentiation, and proteomic profile. Proteome was profiled by nano liquid chromatography and comprehensively quantified by ion mobility-enhanced mass spectrometry. Fibroblasts and MSCs shared similar surface markers, growth kinetics, and differentiation capacity. Proteomic analysis reproducibly identified and quantified 3051 proteins, 109 of them were differentially abundant according to strict statistic criteria. We showed that CD13, CD9, and CD105 could potentially distinguish MSCs of different origin and fibrobrasts. GO term and GSEA enrichment analysis of differentially accumulated proteins identified signaling pathways characteristic to individual cell types. Particularly, we highlighted signaling pathways involved in cell migration, adhesion, and Wnt signaling as downregulated in fibroblasts in comparison to DPSCs. Angiogenesis and vascularization were specifically associated with AD-MSCs.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic study revealed a clear distinction between human dermal fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells from different sources

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells were harvested in biological triplicates on a day when cells reached 80‒90% confluence. Then, cells were washed with ice-cold DPBS and scraped off from flasks using SDT buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.6, and 100 mM dithiothreitol) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Then, lysates were transferred to the tubes, incubated on ice for 15 min, and sonicated (3 × 5 s, 20% pulse), followed by 20 min centrifugation (14,000 × g) at 13 °C. The final supernatant was aliquoted and stored at −80 °C until use. Protein concentration was determined. Protein digestion was performed on beads. Aliquots of 60 µg of protein samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature and 600 rpm on thermoshaker and quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol. Next, the mixture (1:1) of beads was prepared: Sera-Mag Carboxylate-Modified Beads, hydrophilic solids 50 µg/µL, and hydrophobic solids 50 µg/µL. On the magnetic rack, the beads were pelleted for 1 min, and the supernatant was removed by pipette. Off the rack, the beads were reconstituted in bidistilled water and pipette-mixed. Following, 30 μL (60 µg) of the bead stock was added to the alkylated/quenched protein samples and pipette-mixed. For binding, 70 μL of 100% ethanol was added to the suspension to achieve 50% ﬁnal ethanol concentration. The tubes were incubated in the thermoshaker for 10 min at room temperature and 1000 rpm. The beads were pelleted for 2 min, and the supernatant was discarded. Bond proteins were washed 5 times with 140 μL of 80% ethanol. Next, 10 μL of 0.1 μg/μL trypsin and 50 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added. The samples were incubated in the thermoshaker for 18 h at 37 °C and 1000 rpm. Consequently, the beads were pelleted for 2 min, and the supernatant was recovered into a fresh 2 mL tube, followed by a second elution with 60 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptide concentration was measured with a microvolume spectrophotometer. Chromatographic separation was done on Vanquish Neo at 35 °C and flow rate 250 nL/min. Peptides were desalted on PepMap Neo trap C18, 300 μm × 5 mm, 5-μm particle size at 50 µL/min and profiled on EASY-Spray PepMap Neo C18, 75 μm × 500 mm, 2-μm particle size in 2-step gradient 2–24% in 100 min and 24–40% in 20 min of mobile phase (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Mass spectra were collected on Orbitrap Exploris 240 in data-dependent mode with 2 s cycle at top speed and 2 kV on capillary with internal mass calibration at run start. Parent scan 350–1,700 m/z was done at 120,000 resolution with an AGC target 200% and a maximum injection time 50 ms. The precursor intensity threshold was set to 5 × 104 with 60 s exclusion and 30% HCD fragmentation. Fragments were acquired at a resolution 30,000, an AGC target 300%, and a maximum injection time 200 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
The generated dataset was processed in MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 with Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylation C was set as a permanent modification, and oxidation M plus deamidation N/Q were selected as variable modifications. Peptide tolerance in the first search was 10 ppm, and in the main search after recalibration was 2 ppm, while the fragment tolerance was 10 ppm. Based on the reverse decoy database search, the false discovery rate for peptides and proteins was 1%. Match between the runs and label-free quantification (LFQ) were activated. Human proteome sequences (104,573 entries) downloaded from UniProt in May 2024 were used for the database search. Statistical analysis of proteomic data was done in Perseus v1.6.15 using ANOVA corrected for multiple testing by permutation followed by Tukey’s posthoc test. The output protein Group table from MaxQuant was filtered for the reverse proteins, the contaminants, and the low-confidence proteins. After log2 transformation of the LFQ intensities, only proteins with 3 valid values in at least 1 experimental group were retained, and missing values were imputed from a lower range of the normal distribution curve. The principal component analysis was used to evaluate sources of variability among samples and replicates.