PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Urine
diseases: Urinary tract infection
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetic acid derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Urinary tract infection; Bacteriphages

ABSTRACT:
Despite much promise to overcome drug-resistant infections, clinical studies of bacteriophage anti-bacterial therapy have failed to show durable effectiveness. Although lysogeny plays an important role in bacterial physiology, its significance in diverse microbiomes remains under-studied. Here, we tested the hypotheses that 1) urinary microbiome phage populations switch to a higher relative proportion of temperate phages and 2) the activity of the phage recombination machinery (integration / excision / transposition) is higher during human urinary tract infections (UTIs) than in non-infected urinary tracts. Using human urine, model organisms, mass spectrometry, gene expression analysis, and the phage phenotype prediction model BACPHLIP, the results support our hypotheses at the functional protein and gene level. From a human health perspective, are temperate phages part of the problem and not the defenders we wished them to be? These data support the use of lysogenic phages as a therapeutic Trojan Horses.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Urinary bacteriophage cooperation with bacterial pathogens during human urinary tract infections supports lysogenic phage therapy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Urinary proteome affinity capture.  Dipstick urinalysis was performed on all the urine samples using a Multistix 10 SG reagent strip. Urine was then divided into 40 mL aliquots. A preliminary centrifugation step for 15 minutes at 3.5 rcf was performed to eliminate cryoprecipitates and cellular debris. The acidity of the urine was adjusted to pH~6 using 10 mM hydrochloric acid. Chicken lysozyme (10 ng) was spiked in each sample as an internal control. Urine samples were then enriched with 200 µL of the poly(NIPAm/AA/RBB) particles (10 mg/mL) and incubated for 45 minutes at room temperature. After that, the urine samples were centrifuged at 19 rcf (Beckman Avanti JXN-26 Centrifuge) for 45 min. The pellet was then washed twice with 1 mL of 18 MΩ-cm water and centrifuged at 16,100×g for 20 min. Supernatant was discarded and the particle pellet was resuspended in 20 µL of elution buffer solution obtained by dissolving 1 mg of RapiGest (Waters Corporation) in 190 µL of 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate additioned with 10 µL of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Thermo Scientific). The elution buffer was allowed to incubate for 20 min at room temperature. Samples were finally centrifuged at 16.1 rcf for 20 min. Eluates were processed for mass spectrometry.     Mass spectrometry analysis. The Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Exploris 480 was operated in a data dependent mode consisting of one full MS scan (60,000resolution) from 300 Da to 1500 Da followed by up to 20 MS/MS acquisitions of the most abundant precursor ions dynamically selected by Top Speed and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 27%. Peptides were separated using a reversed-phase PepMap RSLC 75 μm i.d. × 15 cm long with 2 μm, C18 resin LC column (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The mobile phase was 0.1 % aqueous formic acid (mobile phase A) and 0.1 % formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (mobile phase B). After sample injection, the peptides were eluted by using a linear gradient from 5% to 50 % B over 15 min and ramped to 100 % B for an additional 2 min.  The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. Peptide Monoisotopic Precursor Selection” and “Dynamic Exclusion” (8 sec duration), were enabled, as was the charge state dependency so that only peptide precursors with charge states from +2 to +4 were selected and fragmented by HCD. Precursor mass tolerance was set at 2 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 0.05 Da.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data was analyzed allowing for variable oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.0215) as a fixed modification. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens, uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC), Escherichia coli 0157, Escherichia coli O25b, Enterobacter cloacae, Enterococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus agalactiae, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Klebsiella pneumoniae IS43UP, and Bacteriophages NCBI and Uniprot databases with the Proteome Discoverer 3.1 software using tryptic cleavage constraints. The following parameters were used: Xcorr versus charge 1.9, 2.2, 3.5 for 1+, 2+, 3+ ions respectively; ΔCn > 0.1; probability of randomized identification e0.01, and 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used. 