PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Urine
instruments: Q Exactive; Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: SWATH MS; Shotgun proteomics
quantification: product ion intensity
keywords: Urine; Variability; Extracellular vesicle; Dia-ms; Stability

ABSTRACT:
Urinary extracellular vesicles (EVs) are an attractive source for the detection of disease biomarkers. Mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics is increasingly used for urinary EV proteome profiling and protein biomarker discovery. However, little is known about the consistency and stability of urinary EV proteins within individuals over time and between different individuals. In this study we profiled the urinary EV proteome of 8 healthy individuals over 6 months at 9 timepoints (total 72 samples) using DIA-MS. We identified a total of 1802 proteins with high correlation amongst all samples. While a minor fraction (10%) of the total urinary EV proteome was shown to play a role in determining personal expression patterns, most of the urinary EV proteins was found to be stable with >90% of the proteins detected in more than 1 person at all timepoints. The variability of urinary EV proteome between different individuals was shown to be significantly higher than personal variation as a result of a small subset (<20%) of proteins. The core interaction network of proteins identified in all individuals revealed EV proteins involved in signaling and localization and sub-clusters enriched for glycolytic activity, protein synthesis, and immune function. Gender-specific expression patterns were detected in the urinary EV proteome, mostly related to hormonal and reproduction pathways. In summary, our findings indicate that the urinary EV proteome is stable in longitudinal samples of healthy subjects, underscoring its potential as a reliable source for protein biomarkers.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Longitudinal landscape of urinary EV proteome reveals stable protein expression patterns within and between individuals

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
DDA DDA Raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot FASTA file downloaded Feb 2019. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 4.5 and 20 p.p.m., respectively. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered with both the peptides and proteins filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications.   DIA DIA raw files were searched in Spectronaut version 13.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). The MaxQuant msms.txt file from the DDA search result was imported into Spectronaut to generate a project-specific spectral library with parsing rule: UniProt FASTA and decoy method: mutated. Modifications were the same as for the MaxQuant DDA search. Identifications were filtered to a Q-value of 1% which is equivalent to an FDR of 1% in the DDA experiments. The search result was exported at the fragment ion level for MaxLFQ protein quantification (Pham, Henneman, and Jimenez 2020).

DATA PROCESSING:
DDA DDA Raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot FASTA file downloaded Feb 2019. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 4.5 and 20 p.p.m., respectively. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered with both the peptides and proteins filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications.   DIA DIA raw files were searched in Spectronaut version 13.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland). The MaxQuant msms.txt file from the DDA search result was imported into Spectronaut to generate a project-specific spectral library with parsing rule: UniProt FASTA and decoy method: mutated. Modifications were the same as for the MaxQuant DDA search. Identifications were filtered to a Q-value of 1% which is equivalent to an FDR of 1% in the DDA experiments. The search result was exported at the fragment ion level for MaxLFQ protein quantification (Pham, Henneman, and Jimenez 2020).

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Urine collection and informed consent
The study was approved by the Amsterdam University Medical Center (Amsterdam UMC, Location VUMC) local Medical Ethical Committee (METC reference number #2018.657). Urine was collected after a signed informed consent was obtained from each participant. All methods and experiments were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations, which is in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The workflow for collecting and processing urine samples is depicted in Fig. 1a. Urine (50–150 mL) was collected and aliquoted into sterile polypropylene tubes and centrifuged for 10 min at 500 × g at 4 °C. Subsequently the supernatant was centrifuged for 20 min at 2000 × g at 4 °C and divided in 50 mL aliquots which were immediately frozen at − 80 °C until processing for proteomics.
Urinary EV isolation
Urinary EVs isolation was performed as previously reported using the Vn96 peptide capture method that precipitates EVs via binding to HSPs at the EV surface. 50 mL of urine for each sample was thawed O/N at 4 °C. Briefly, urine samples were centrifuged at 2000 × g for 20 min to remove THP-polymers from the urine that have been formed by cold conditions. Subsequently, 0.05% Nonidet P40 Substitute (NP40, Sigma- Aldrich, Zwijndrecht, The Netherlands) was added to the urine. 50 mL urine per sample was concentrated to 1 ml using a 100 kDa cutoff filters (Amicon Ultra, Millipore, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). To prevent degradation by proteases, protease inhibitor cocktail was added (PIC, #10,276,200, Roche). To remove small debris and large protein complexes, urine was centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C in a tabletop centrifuge. Subsequently 40 µl of the VN-96 peptide (Microvesicle Enrichment kit, New England Peptide, #W1073-2, USA) was added, and incubated on a rotation wheel for 1 h at RT. EVs were isolated after centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 × g. The pellet was washed with PBS and centrifuged again for 15 min at 16,000 × g to obtain the final sample. All the centrifugation steps were performed at 4 °C. The urinary-EV pellets were dissolved in LDS sample buffer (containing 10% Dithiothreitol, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, cat No:NP0008) for proteomics experiments.
Spectral library generation and DDA-LC-MS/MS measurement
For library generation for DIA-measurement, aliquots were taken from all samples to make two pools, one consisting of samples from males and one from females that were used as input for EV isolation. The pooled EV samples were loaded on gradient gels from Invitrogen (NuPAGE 4–12% Bis–Tris gel, 1 mm × 10 wells). The gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and in-gel digested as previously described. In brief, gels were washed twice in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and dehydrated twice in 50 mM ABC/50% acetonitrile (ACN). Cysteine bonds were reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC at 56 °C for 1 h and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM ABC at room temperature (RT) for 45 min. After washing sequentially with ABC and ABC/50% ACN, the whole gel was sliced in 10 bands for each lane. Gel parts were sliced into cubes of 1mm3, which were incubated overnight with 6.25 ng/mL trypsin (Promega, sequence grade V5111). Peptides were extracted once in 1% formic acid and twice in 5% formic acid/50% ACN. Subsequently, the extract volume was reduced to 50 µL in a vacuum centrifuge. The sample was filtered using a 0.45 µm filter to remove gel particles and contaminants prior to LC–MS analysis.
Extracted peptides were separated on a 75 µm × 42 cm custom packed Reprosil C18 aqua column (1.9 µm, 120 Å) in a 90 min. gradient (2–32% Acetonitrile + 0.5% Acetic acid at 300 nl/min) using a U3000 RSLC high pressure nanoLC (Dionex). Eluting peptides were measured on-line by a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode. Intact peptide ions were detected at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200) and fragment ions at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200); the MS mass range was 350–1,400 Da. AGC Target settings for MS were 3E6 charges and for MS/MS 1E6 charges. Peptides were selected for Higher-energy C-trap dissociation fragmentation at an underfill ratio of 1% and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da, peptides were fragmented at a normalized collision energy of 28.
Processing of individual samples for DIA-LC-MS/MS
For proteomics analysis of individual urine EV samples, each sample was loaded on gradient gels (Invitrogen, NuPAGE 4–12% Bis–Tris gel, 1 mm × 10 wells), similar as described above. The gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250 (Pierce, Rockford, IL), reduced by 10 mM DTT/50 mM ABC at 56 °C for 1 h and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM ABC at room temperature (RT) for 45 min. After washing sequentially with ABC and ABC/50% ACN, the whole gel lanes were sliced in 3 bands per sample. Gel parts were sliced into cubes of 1 mm3, which were incubated overnight with 6.25 ng/mL trypsin (Promega, sequence grade V5111). Peptides were extracted once in 1% formic acid and twice in 5% formic acid/50% ACN. The extracts of three fractions were pooled per biological sample. Volume was reduced to 100 µl in a vacuum centrifuge to evaporate acetonitrile and samples were desalted using a 10 mg OASIS HLB column (Waters, Milford). after washing in 0.1% TFA. Samples were eluted in 80% ACN/0.1% TFA and were dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Peptides were redissolved in 20 µl loading solvent (4% ACN in 0.5% TFA) for LC-MS analysis.
DIA-LC-MS/MS measurement
Peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), equipped with a 50 cm × 75 µm ID nanoViper fused silica column packed with 1.9 µm 120 Å Pepmap Acclaim C18 particles (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 3 μm 120 Å Pepmap Acclaim C18 at 0% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water) and separated at 300 nl/min in a curved 10–52% buffer B gradient in 120 min (140 min inject-to-inject). Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of + 2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Data was measured using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) protocol. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 350 to 1400 m/z at 120,000 resolution (AGC target of 3E6 and 60 ms injection time). For MS2, 24 variable size DIA segments were acquired at 30,000 resolution (AGC target 3E6 and auto for injection time). The DIA-MS method starting at 350 m/z included one window of 35 m/z, 20 windows of 25 m/z, 2 windows of 60 m/z and one window of 418 m/z, which ended at 1400 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set at 28. The spectra were recorded in centroid mode with a default charge of 3 + and a first mass of 200 m/z.
Raw data processing
DDA Raw files were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.4.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Swissprot FASTA file downloaded Feb 2019. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 4.5 and 20 p.p.m., respectively. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered with both the peptides and proteins filtered to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications. DIA raw files were searched in Spectronaut version 13.10 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with default settings. The MaxQuant msms.txt file from the DDA search result was imported into Spectronaut to generate a project-specific spectral library. Modifications were the same as for the MaxQuant DDA search. The search result was exported at the fragment ion level for MaxLFQ protein quantification. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD022983.
Data analysis
All analysis was done using log2-transformed intensities in R version 4.0.2 (https://www.R-project.org/). All the clustering analyses were performed using R package ComplexHeatmaps version 2.5.5. For the data presence heatmap, proteins ordered on the number of identified data points (high-to-low) and average log2-normalized intensity (high-to-low) over the 67 individual samples was plotted. For intra- and inter-individual sample clustering, the Spearman correlation of the normalized intensities was calculated for whole urinary EV proteome per sample, and the correlation coefficient was plotted. For protein clustering of top 10% most variable proteome, the protein abundancies were normalized to zero mean and unit variance for each individual protein. Subsequently, the Spearman distance measure was used for clustering. R package ggplot2 version 3.3.2 (https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org) was used for all plots other than heatmaps and networks. Intra-individual CV was calculated amongst all timepoints per person; while inter-individual coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated amongst all 67 individual samples. Gene Ontology (GO) term analyses of the core urinary EV proteome were performed using ClueGO version 2.5.7. Redundant GO terms were manually collapsed into one parent term and were presented in the GO barplots. Protein networks for the core urinary EV proteome were created using STRING version 11 and visualization was further modified using Cytoscape version 3.8.0. Significantly connected protein clusters were extracted using ClusterONE version 1.0, and further annotated in detail for implicated biological processes using BINGO version 3.0.3. Differential statistical analysis to compare the protein expression between female and male samples was performed using R package Limma version 3.45.14. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed using R package fgsea version 1.15.2.

RESULTS:
Results
Longitudinal urinary EV proteome profiling in healthy subjects
To investigate the temporal stability of the urinary EV proteome within and between individuals, as well as its biology, we collected urine from 8 healthy individuals (4 males and 4 females) at 9 timepoints spanning 6 months (see Fig. 1a for a schematic overview). Urinary EVs were isolated using the Vn96 peptide capture method that enables reproducible high-throughput profiling. The characterization and validity of VN96 peptide-based EV capture method has been addressed in previous studies for cell culture supernatants, blood and urine [Erozenci et al. 2021, submitted manuscript 2, Submission ID a4f6d1e6-ce2f.-483a-927b-3da8b2083095]. These studies showed that the EV fraction captured is in the size range (30 to 100 nm), enriched for exosome markers and is largely comparable to EVs isolated by ultracentrifugation. For urinary EV profiling by DIA-MS, we generated a project-specific spectral library using two gender-specific pools of urinary EVs. These pools were analyzed by in-depth proteomics based on 10 band gel-fractionated samples coupled to shot gun proteomics (DDA-MS) (Fig. 1a). The final spectral library consisted of 3166 proteins. Subsequently, all 72 individual samples were measured using single-shot DIA-MS (Fig. 1a). The total urinary EV proteome consisted of 1802 proteins. Five samples were excluded from further downstream analysis, because the number of identified proteins was below 2 standard deviations of the mean (indicated in Supplementary Fig. 1). The whole urinary EV proteome of 1802 proteins were identified with a mean of ~ 1355 proteins per urinary EV sample (ranging between 905 and 1587) and with > 75% of data points present across all 67 samples (Fig. 1b,c). Selected common exosome markers such as tetraspanins (CD9, CD63, CD81), TSG101, PDCD6IP (ALIX) and heat-shock proteins (HSPs) (HSP90AA1, HPS90AB1, HSPA8) were detected in all individuals at almost all timepoints at median-to-high abundance (Fig. 1d). Closer inspection of these EV markers revealed that day-to-day variation within the same donor was low, especially for HSPs (median CV = 0.58), TSG101 and PDCP6IP (CV 0.74 and 0.70) and showed comparable abundance levels in different individuals (Fig. 1d). The level of CD9, CD63 and CD81 exosome markers was more variable compared to the HSPs, most notably between different individuals (median CV = 1.15) (Fig. 1d), with donor “Male5” showing the highest expression, suggesting that inter-individual differences in EV subpopulations might be present in the urine.
Highly stable personal urinary EV proteomes with larger inter-individual variation
To investigate the intra- and inter-individual stability of urinary EV proteome, an unsupervised correlation analysis was performed on the whole urinary EV proteome of 1802 proteins (Fig. 2a). Unsurprisingly, the highest correlations were observed within individuals, even over a longer period of time (6 months) (average intra-individual r = 0.77) (Fig. 2a), indicating a high stability of personal urinary EV proteomes. The correlation of protein profiles between individuals was lower than within individuals (average inter-individual r = 0.54) (Fig. 2a), indicating that each individual has their own level of abundance of the proteins that are present in urinary EVs. The lowest correlation was observed between donor “Male 5” to the other individuals (minimum r = 0.38), which also exhibited slightly different levels of EV markers as compared to the other subjects (Fig. 1d).
To investigate the potential effect of protein variation in normal urinary EV proteome, we focused on the most variable and most stable proteins. The protein variation was calculated on the total urinary EV proteome (1802 proteins) amongst all data points of 8 individuals. Unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis of the top 10% most variable proteins separated the samples mostly related to individual protein profiles (Fig. 2b). This indicates that the most variable proteins determined the majority of the personal urinary EV proteomes (Fig. 2b). Importantly, 37 of the top 100 ExoCarta exosome-associated proteins were identified in the top 10% most stable proteome of urinary EVs; including HSPs, multiple RAB proteins, ACTB, ANXA2, and several members of the 14–3-3 protein family, indicating the stability of the proteins within the urinary EVs over time and between individuals. Examples for the stable Exocarta proteins, the top 15 most stable proteins and the top 15 most variable proteins are provided in Supplementary Fig. 2a–c.
The composition of the personal urinary EV proteomes were found to be highly similar in time with > 90% of the whole urinary EV proteome of 1802 proteins present in more than 1 timepoint per person (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, of the 1314 protein groups (i.e. excluding the protein isoforms), only a small number of proteins were unique to one individual, ranging from 3 to 45 proteins, with 90% of the identified proteome (1174 proteins) overlapping in any 2 or more individuals (Fig. 2d, Supplementary Fig. 3); revealing that the composition of urinary EV proteome is similar and comparable between different individuals. To examine EV consistency within and between individuals, we analyzed the core urinary EV proteome of our dataset, defined as the 516 proteins that were common to all 8 individuals at all timepoints measured (Fig. 2d, Supplementary Fig. 3). No difference was observed between the day-to-day variation of the donors (Fig. 2e). The median CV of the core proteome of 8 individuals over the 6-month period was 0.604 (ranging from 0.34 to 1.43) (Fig. 2f). The donor-donor variation was significantly higher than the day-to-day variation of the proteome with a median of 0.79 (ranging from 0.402 to 4.35; p < 2.2e−16) (Fig. 2f). However, this larger donor-donor variation was mostly based on a small subset of ‘outlier’ proteins that also had a high intra-individual CV (which represents less than 20% of the core proteome). Hence, most of the proteins within the urinary EVs are highly stable between days over a long period of time and also between different individuals. No relation between protein intensity and variation was observed, indicating that high abundant proteins do not necessarily have the lowest CV or vice versa, which is in agreement to previous observations reporting about variation of the entire human urinary proteome using DDA-MS (Fig. 2g).
Together, this analysis shows that the majority of the urinary EV proteome is stable and highly comparable within and between individuals.
Biological functions of the core urinary EV proteome
To investigate the functions of urinary EV proteins, we focused on the proteins that were consistently identified in all individuals (the core urinary EV proteome, Fig. 2d, Supplementary Fig. 3). Gene ontology (GO) analysis showed that almost all detected proteins were associated with the cellular component term extracellular exosome and vesicle, underlining the EV nature of our samples (Fig. 3a). In addition, the majority of the core urinary EV proteins were found to be involved in biological processes that are vesicle-related such as vesicle-mediated transport and exocytosis (Fig. 3b).
In order to have a deeper understanding of the implicated general GO terms, we annotated in detail the biological pathways as well as functional protein clusters on the core urinary EV proteome. Cluster analysis using ClusterONE identified significantly connected protein complexes including EV-, immune- and metabolism-related proteins within the large urinary EV protein–protein interaction network (Fig. 3c; for details see Supplementary Fig. 4). A vesicle-linked cluster containing EV-related proteins such as ALIX, TSG101, HSPs, RABs and members of ESCRT-III (endosomal sorting complex required for transport III) was one of the significantly enriched subnetworks (p = 2.540E−4) in urinary EVs (Fig. 3d); indicating that urinary EVs contain several members of the EV biogenesis machinery. In addition, proteins involved in the regulation of cytoskeleton organization and signal transduction, in particular small GTPase-mediated and RAS signaling, were connected with the EV-associated network cluster (Fig. 3d), suggesting the presence of a signal transduction network in the core urinary EV proteome intertwined with the vesicle-linked protein cluster.
Other significantly enriched protein network clusters in the core urinary EV proteome were related to immunity (p = 3.834E−8) and metabolism (p = 6.738E−5). The immune subnetwork included proteins involved in innate and acute inflammatory response, complement factors, and immunoglobulin family of proteins among others (Supplementary Fig. 4), suggesting that urinary vesicles may be derived at least in part from immune cells. The most predominant metabolic subnetworks contained proteins involved in carbohydrate/alcohol and protein metabolism, with a smaller cluster functioning in lipid metabolism (Fig. 3c; Supplementary Fig. 4). Detailed examination revealed that the molecular function of these proteins is mainly enzymatic, with a remarkable enrichment in glycolytic enzymes as each step of the reaction was represented in the core urinary proteome together with several enzymes involved in pentose phosphate pathway (Fig. 3e; Supplementary Fig. 5). In addition, many enzymes required for the subsequent amino acid biogenesis from the intermediary metabolites were identified in the core urinary EV proteome (Fig. 3e; Supplementary Fig. 5).
Taken together, our functional data mining of core urinary EV proteins showed an enrichment for EV biogenesis, metabolism and immune-related processes that are consistently identified in time and within all donors. These processes are frequently deregulated in diseases, underlining the potential for the use of urinary EVs for the detection of disease.
Gender-distinct patterns are detected in urinary EVs
Besides intra- and inter-individual variation, we also investigated whether gender differences can be detected in the urinary EV proteome. A complete list of differentially expressed proteins in females and males are provided in Supplementary Table 1. Comparison of female- versus male-derived urinary EV proteomes by Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) showed that the androgen response pathway and spermatogenesis are enriched in males, whereas females show increased estrogen response processes (Fig. 4a). Moreover, blood- and oxygen-related pathways such as hypoxia, coagulation, angiogenesis and heme metabolism were enriched in females compared to males (Fig. 4a), further suggesting that reproductive system-based differences are detectable in the urinary EV proteome.
Further inspection of the proteins underlying these signatures showed that multiple hemoglobin subunits were significantly increased in females when compared to males (Fig. 4b,c; Supplementary Fig. 6a); whereas in males, prostate-associated protein KLK2 was present only in male-derived urinary EVs and prostate-implicated proteins such as SPOCK1 and TMPRSS were upregulated in males (Fig. 4b,c; Supplementary Fig. 6a). Furthermore, we also inspected 3 male specific and 3 female specific proteins from the Human Protein Atlas (http://www.proteinatlas.org). All three prostate-secreted proteins (KLK3/PSA, TGM4, ACPP) were significantly increased in male-derived urinary EVs; whereas vagina/cervix-associated proteins SERPINB3 and FABP5 were significantly increased in females, and CNFN uniquely expressed in female urinary EVs (Fig. 4b,c; Supplementary Fig. 6a).
Finally, network visualization of the gender-enriched proteins revealed an inter-connected network mostly within gender, and to a lesser degree between genders (Supplementary Fig. 6b). Analysis of individual protein clusters showed enrichment of immune-related processes and carbohydrate metabolism in female urinary EVs; while enzymes involved in protein metabolism were identified in male-derived urinary EVs (Fig. 4d). Interestingly, in addition to prostate-secreted proteins (ACPP, TGM4, KLK2, KLK3/PSA), several vesicle-related proteins such as RABs and VAMPs, as well as tetraspanins CD9 and CD63 were significantly increased in male urinary EVs, underlining the secretory function of the prostate gland in males (Fig. 4d).
Together this analysis demonstrates that gender-specific proteins and functions can be detected in the urinary EV proteome.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Urine is a biofluid that has raised great interest as a biomarker source for the detection of disease, since it can be collected in large volumes, in a non-invasive manner. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are small vesicles that are secreted by most cell types of the human body into biofluids, including blood and urine. Circulating EVs are biomarker-rich organelles as they, at least in part, represent their cell-of-origin. Importantly their molecular cargo (DNA, RNA, miRNA, protein) is protected by the EV bilayer membrane from degradation by enzymes present in biofluids. Advances in mass spectrometry-based proteomics over the past decade have allowed for in-depth analysis of proteins in clinical samples, including urinary EVs. The proteome cargo of urinary EVs has been the subject of several biomarker studies. Previous studies on the whole urinary proteome reported a high level of variation within individuals over time (intra-individual variation), as well as between individuals (inter-individual variation); which hampers biomarker applications. On the contrary, it was reported that the urinary EV proteome of few donors was stable in a short time period. The stability of urinary EV proteome was never investigated in a comprehensive manner with multiple individuals and longitudinal sampling over an extended period of time.
In the present study, we assessed the stability of the urinary EV proteome using a highly reproducible next generation proteomics approach based on liquid chromatography on-line coupled to data-independent acquisition (DIA)-MS. This mass spectrometry approach combines the benefits of global discovery proteomics with the quantitative precision of targeted mass spectrometry with dynamic range over 3 order of magnitude, and hence provides a pathway for large-scale clinical proteomics. To this end, we measured a longitudinal cohort of eight different healthy subjects (four females, four males) of whom urine samples were collected at 9 different timepoints over 6 months (see Fig. 1a for a schematic overview). The stability of the urinary EV proteome over time, as well as the consistency between individuals was examined. Moreover, biological functions and core expression networks of EV proteins identified in all subjects were investigated, and gender-specific processes were explored.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
Publisher's note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-021-95082-8.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD022983.