PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: deamidated residue; disulfide crosslinked residues
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Faims; Disulfide; Ethcd; Mab; Scrambling

ABSTRACT:
Recombinant expression of proteins, propelled by therapeutic antibodies, has evolved into a multi-billion-dollar industry. Essential here is quality control assessment of critical attributes such as sequence fidelity, proper folding, and post-translational modifications (PTMs). Errors can lead to diminished bioactivity and, in the context of therapeutic proteins, an elevated risk for immunogenicity. Over the years, many techniques were developed and applied to validate proteins in a standardized and high-throughput fashion. One parameter has, however, so far been challenging to assess. Disulfide bridges, covalent bonds linking two Cysteine residues, assist in the correct folding and stability of proteins and thus have a major influence on their efficacy. Mass spectrometry promises to be an optimal technique to uncover them in a fast and accurate fashion. In this work, we present a unique combination of sample preparation, data acquisition and analysis facilitating the rapid and accurate assessment of disulfide bridges in purified proteins. Through microwave-assisted acid hydrolysis (MAAH), the proteins are digested rapidly and artifact-free into peptides, with a substantial degree of overlap over the sequence. The nonspecific nature of this procedure, however, introduces chemical background which is efficiently removed by integrating ion mobility preceding the mass spectrometric measurement. The nonspecific nature of the digestion step additionally necessitates new developments in data analysis, for which we extended the XlinkX node in Proteome Discoverer (XlinkX/PD) to efficiently process the data and ensure correctness through effective false discovery rate correction. The entire workflow can be completed within one hour, allowing for high-throughput, high-accuracy disulfide mapping

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Fast and Accurate Disulfide Bridge Detection

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
dry protein sample was dissolved in 40 µL 25% TFA in a 1.5mL low-binding polypropylene vial (Eppendorf). The vial was sealed with a micro tube cap lock (Scientific Specialties) and additionally secured with tape before placing it in a bubble rack, which was placed in a 1000mL beaker containing 200mL demineralized water. The beaker was positioned off-center in a household microwave oven (General Electrics, model PEM31DMWW) and hydrolysis was performed using the standard setting at 800W for 15 minutes. Hydrolyzed protein was quickly dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in LC-MS loading solvent (0.1% TFA) prior to injection on the mass spectrometer.  Samples were separated by reverse phase-HPLC using a Thermo Scientific™ Vanquish™ Neo system connected to an EASY-Spray™ PepMap™ RSLC C18 column (0.075 mm x 250 mm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) at 250 nL/min flow rate. The hydrolyzed samples were analyzed on the Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer coupled with FAIMS Pro Duo interface. Reverse phase separation was accomplished using a 20-, 30- or 60- min separation gradient (plus 10 – 20 min equilibration phase) of 4 – 40% solvent B (A: 0.1% FA; B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA).  FAIMS was set ast standard resolution with 3.9 L/min total carrier gas flow with 2 CV (-50,-60) method. Samples were analyzed using an EThcD-MS2 acquisition strategy with 20% SA collision energy. MS1 and MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a respective mass resolution of 120,000 and 60,000. MS1 scan range was set to m/z 375 – 1400, standard AGC target, 246 ms maximum injection time and 60 s dynamic exclusion. MS2 scans in data dependent acquisition mode (top speed  1.5 sec/cv) were set to an AGC target of 2e5, 118 ms max injection time, isolation window 1.6 m/z. Only precursors at charged states +3 to +8 were subjected to MS2.

DATA PROCESSING:
All data analysis, unless otherwise stated, was performed in Proteome Discoverer v. 3.1.0. Shortly, the processing workflow consists of the nodes (1) 'Spectrum files’ to connect the workflow to the raw files. (2) “Spectrum Selector” to extract the fragmentation spectra with accurate precursor m/z and charge states. Standard settings applied. (3) Linear peptide search engine, for which we used a development version of the open search linear peptide search engine described in the publication. As FASTA file we used one containing the protein under investigation, that is in silico digested with non-specific cleavage restraints, with a minimal peptide length of six and 20 miss cleaved sites allowed. No fixed modification was set. Methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation and asparagine & glutamine deamidation were set as dynamic modifications. (4) “Target Decoy PSM Validator” was used to control for false positives at 1% (5) “Spectrum Confidence Filter” was then used to remove all spectra that were confidently identified with the linear peptide search. Setting ‘Worse Than High’. (6) Finally, the XlinkX/PD nodes “XlinkX/PD Detect”, “XlinkX/PD Search”, and “XlinkX/PD Validate” were connected. To define the disulfide bridge, we set up a cleavable crosslinker as  H(-2). The ETD cleavage products (or diagnostic ions) are defined as follows: S-S symmetrical as PeptideA=”H(1)” and PeptideB=”H(1)”, C-S asymmetrical PeptideA=”H(2)” and PeptideB=””, S-C asymmetrical full PeptideA=”” and PeptideB=”H(1) S(1)”. As ‘Acquisition strategy’ open search was used. The same protein database, and fixed and variable modifications were used as defined in the linear peptide search. All protein structures were visualized with ChimeraX and the disulfide bridges mapped with the plugin XMAS