PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Tear
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Tear film; proteomics; biomarkers; dry eye disease; ocular surface; mass spectrometry

ABSTRACT:
Proteomic analysis of tear fluid is challenging mainly due to a wide dynamic range of proteins and small sample volume. However, recent advancements in mass spectrometry have revolutionized the field of proteomics through its unprecedented depth, speed, and accuracy even with small sample volumes. In this study using the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer, we compared four different mass-spectrometry workflows for proteomic analysis of human tear fluid.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Comparison of Different Mass-Spectrometry Workflows for the Proteomic Analysis of Tear Fluid

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tear samples were collected using Schirmer strips. The strips were cut in half lengthwise into two equal pieces and each half was used separately for two protein digestion methods (post-extraction protein digestion and In-strip digestion). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation techniques for both methods.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw MS data were processed via the Proteome Discoverer software (ver 2.2) and submitted for SequestHT search against the SwissProt human database. SequestHT search parameters were set as 10 ppm precursor and 0.6 Da product ion tolerance, with static carbidomethylation (+57.021 Da) for cysteine, dynamic oxidation for methionine (+15.995 Da). The percolator peptide spectrum matching (PSM) validator algorithm was used for PSM validation. Proteins unable to be distinguished based on the database search results were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. A protein report was generated containing the identities and number of PSM for each protein group, which were further utilized for spectral counting based semi-quantitative analysis.

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Sample Collection
Tear samples were collected from 11 healthy subjects at the Department of Ophthalmology, Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University. The demographic information of the subjects is shown in Table 1. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Augusta University (IRB Project ID# 1458143-12, Approval Date: 13 July 2021). Schirmer strips (TearFlo, HUB Pharmaceuticals, Scottsdale, AZ, USA) were used to collect the tear samples because of their previously reported ability to collect a greater number of unique proteins than capillary tubes. Also, patients generally prefer their use over capillary tubes, as Schirmer strips are safer and perceived as less invasive. First, each Schirmer strip was folded to a 90° angle at the 0 mm mark. The rounded end of the strip was inserted into the lateral portion of the lower conjunctival sac of the right eye for 5 min. The subjects’ eyes remained closed while the strips were in place. Upon removal, the strips were cut in half lengthwise into two equal pieces, and each half was placed in a separate cryogenic vial (#5000-0020, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA); each half was used separately for the two protein digestion methods, as described in 4.2. The samples were kept at −80 °C until processed further.
4.2. Protein Digestion
Two distinct protein digestion methods were compared. For each strip collected from a single subject, proteins from one half of the Schirmer strip were extracted prior to protein digestion, as previously described (Method A), while the other half was subjected to our newly developed method of in-strip protein digestion (Method B) (Figure 1). Thus, there were 11 biological replicates in each digestion group. For post-extraction protein digestion, 450 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 50 mM sodium chloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added to the strip and mixed for 4 h at 25 °C. The samples were then centrifuged in a centrifugal filter unit (#74-3840, Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) at 7500 rpm for 5 min, after which the strip was removed. The extracted proteins were lyophilized and re-dissolved in 60 µL of 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). For in-strip protein digestion, the Schirmer strip halves were first lyophilized to dryness. Each strip was then cut into 5 mm × 2.5 mm pieces, and 120 µL of 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 8) was added. Both sets of samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested using MS-grade trypsin (#90057, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at a 1:20 trypsin to protein ratio (w/w) overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides were cleaned using C18 spin columns (#744101, Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA, USA) and then lyophilized before being analyzed on the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
4.3. LC–MS/MS
Four microliters of reconstituted peptides (in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) were loaded and washed on a Pepmap100 C18 trap (5 µm, 0.3 × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 20 µL/min using 2% acetonitrile in water (with 0.1% formic acid) for 10 min and then separated on a Pepmap100 RSLC C18 column (2.0 µm, 75 µm × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) using a gradient of 2 to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 40 °C. Eluted peptides were introduced into the Orbitrap Fusion MS via a nano-electrospray ionization source with a temperature of 300 °C and spray voltage of 2000 V by data-dependent acquisition in positive mode using Orbitrap MS analyzer for precursor scan at 120,000 FWHM from 400 to 2000 m/z and ion-trap MS analyzer for MS/MS scans in top speed mode (3 s cycle time) with dynamic exclusion settings (repeat count 1, repeat duration 15 s, and exclusion duration 30 s). All samples from Method A (n = 11) and Method B (n = 11) were subjected to LC–MS/MS twice to compare the efficacy of two common fragmentation methods, CID and HCD, using a normalized collision energy of 30%. 
4.4. Protein Identification and Analysis
Raw MS data were processed via the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and submitted for SequestHT search against the SwissProt human database. SequestHT search parameters were set as 10 ppm precursor and 0.6 Da product ion tolerance with static carbidomethylation (+57.021 Da) for cysteine and dynamic oxidation for methionine (+15.995 Da). The percolator peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) validator algorithm was used for PSM validation. Proteins unable to be distinguished based on the database search results were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. A protein report was generated containing the identities and number of PSM for each protein group, which were further utilized for spectral counting based semi-quantitative analysis.
4.5. Statistical Analysis
The average protein and peptide counts per sample identified in all four workflows were compared via two-way ANOVA, and subsequent pairwise comparisons were performed using Tukey’s multiple comparison test in order to control the family wise error rate. The PSM values generated from LC–MS/MS analysis were log2 transformed to remove skewness. Proteins were allocated into groups using their mean expression level and detection in a proportion of samples. The ubiquitous proteins (detected in more than 50% of samples) were examined in further detail. The proteins were associated with biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components using gene ontology (GO) enrichment analyses. All statistical analyses were performed using R version 4.0.3. Further, network analyses were performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to visualize the interactions between these proteins and identify the major hubs.

RESULTS:
2. Results
Tear samples were collected from 11 healthy subjects using Schirmer strips. The demographic information of the subjects is detailed in Table 1. A total of four analysis workflows, including two distinct protein digestion methods (post-extraction protein digestion and in-strip protein digestion) and two fragmentation techniques (CID and HCD), were compared.
2.1. In-Strip Protein Digestion Identifies More Proteins Than Post-Extraction Protein Digestion
Post-extraction protein digestion (Method A) identified an average of 489 ± 90 unique proteins per sample after CID fragmentation and 496 ± 85 unique proteins per sample after HCD fragmentation. In-strip protein digestion (Method B) identified an average of 666 ± 161 unique proteins per sample when CID fragmentation was used and 678 ± 180 per sample when HCD fragmentation was used (Figure 2A). Thus, in-strip protein digestion allows for the identification of significantly more proteins using either CID (p-value = 0.0160) or HCD (p-value = 0.0203) fragmentation. Similar trends were observed at the peptide level (Figure 2B). In-strip protein digestion identified significantly more unique peptides when paired with both CID (1720 ± 543 vs. 1167 ± 302; p-value = 0.0266) and HCD (1735 ± 567 vs. 1155 ± 264; p-value = 0.0185) fragmentation. There were no significant differences between the number of unique proteins or peptides identified via HCD and CID fragmentation when the same protein digestion method was used. 
2.2. Proteomic Profiling of Tear Samples
The average protein levels, quantified by the number of peptide–spectrum matches (PSMs), were plotted against the proportion of samples in which they were detected, showing a positive correlation (Figure 3). The total unique proteins identified using the four different workflows are compared in Table 2. Based on their relative occurrence, these proteins were categorized into four groups: high (present in >75% of samples), medium (present in 50–75% of samples), low (present in 25–50% of samples), or rare (present in 5–25% of samples). A total of 3370 unique proteins were identified in the tear samples subjected to in-strip protein digestion and HCD fragmentation (high, n = 182; medium, n = 147; low, n = 373; and rare, n = 2668). Since this workflow identified the greatest number of unique proteins, these 3370 unique proteins were further examined using bioinformatics approaches to determine the characteristics of the proteome of human tear film. The 50 most abundant proteins detected using in-strip protein digestion and HCD fragmentation are listed in Table 3.
2.3. Major Protein Families Identified in Human Tear Samples
Several major protein families are over-represented in the proteomic profile of human tear samples, including immunoglobulins (61 proteins), keratins (26 proteins), complements (17 proteins), myosins (15 proteins), apolipoproteins (11 proteins), heat shock proteins (10 proteins), protein s100 family (9 proteins), annexins (8 proteins), 14-3-3 proteins (7 proteins), cystatins (6 proteins), and peroxiredoxins (5 proteins). Of these families, immunoglobulins had the greatest number of highly-expressed proteins (17 proteins). All identified proteins within these families are listed in Table 4.
2.4. Gene Ontology Analyses of Differentially Expressed Proteins in Tear Fluid
Using in-strip protein digestion and HCD fragmentation, a total of 329 proteins were detected in at least 50% of the tear samples. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was performed to determine biological processes, cellular compartments, and molecular functions associated with these proteins. The most highly enriched GO terms are displayed in Table 5.
2.5. Interaction Network Analyses
The 329 proteins detected in at least 50% of the tear samples were further analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to generate interaction networks and visualize major hubs. A total of 29 proteins connected to more than 15 nodes were considered major hubs of the interaction network (Figure 4A). The proteins with the highest level of interaction with other proteins include two 14-3-3 proteins (YWHAZ and YWHAE), fibronectin (FN1), three heat shock proteins (HSPA8, HSPA5, and HSPB1), two annexins (ANXA1 and ANXA2), and alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1). IPA analyses also revealed four major canonical pathways highly enriched in the tear proteins, including acute phase response signaling, glucocorticoid receptor signaling, LXR/RXR activation, and phagosome formation (Figure 4B–E).

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
The tear film is a 2–6 µm stratified fluid, composed of mucoaqueous and lipid layers, that covers the corneal and conjunctival epithelia of the ocular surface. The mucoaqueous layer contains mucin and aqueous components, with mucin concentration decreasing along a gradient from the epithelium towards the aqueous layer. The mucins of the innermost layer extend large hydrophilic glycans to form the ocular surface glycocalyx. The outermost layer of the tear film is a thin lipid layer that prevents evaporation of the mucoaqueous layer. Proteins and lipids of the tear film safeguard the eye through anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antimicrobial activities. Under healthy conditions, tears also provide nourishment to the apical epithelial cells and lubrication to the ocular surface to remove debris and prevent abrasion. Insufficient secretion of the aqueous or lipid components of tears, laser eye surgery, and inflammatory pathologies, such as Sjögren’s syndrome, can result in tear film disruption, leaving the eye more vulnerable to infection and inflammation. Thus, the integrity of this film is necessary for maintaining normal vision and preventing ocular damage.
Dry eye disease (DED) is a multifactorial disease of the ocular surface in which hyperosmolarity and instability of the tear film trigger inflammation, inducing a positive feedback loop of disease progression that eventually leads to corneal abrasions and ulceration. Although the disease impacts both vision and quality of life, diagnosis of DED remains highly subjective and difficult due to an inconsistent correlation between symptom onset and clinical signs, as well as the absence of definitive diagnostic biomarkers. Tear proteins are a potential source for identification of biomarkers for diagnosing and monitoring DED and its underlying pathophysiology. 
In the past, proteomic analysis of tear fluid was challenging due to its small volume. However, recent technological advancements in mass spectrometry, such as the Orbitrap ion trap mass analyzer, have increased the depth, speed, and sensitivity of protein identification. Beam-type collisional dissociation fragmentation techniques, such as collision-induced dissociation (CID) and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD), allow for high confidence identification of peptides, as well as their potential post-translational modifications. These improvements allow for the precise and high-throughput proteomic profiling of small sample volumes, making it the ideal method for the identification of proteins and peptides in the tear film. To provide high-value proteomic data from tears, rigorous testing of tear protein processing methods coupled with mass spectrometry analysis is required. In this study, we compared four different workflows for the analysis of the tear proteome using mass spectrometry (Figure 1).

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD030990).