PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: SWATH MS
keywords: Lysosome; Ribophagy; Mtor

ABSTRACT:
The lysosome degrades and recycles macromolecules, signals to the master growth regulator mTORC1, and is associated with human disease. Here, we performed quantitative proteomic analyses of lysosomes rapidly isolated using the LysoIP method and find that nutrient levels and mTOR dynamically modulate the lysosomal proteome. We focus on NUFIP1, a protein that upon mTORC1 inhibition redistributes from the nucleus to autophagosomes and lysosomes. Upon these conditions, NUFIP1 interacts with ribosomes and delivers them to autophagosomes by directly binding to LC3B. The starvation-induced degradation of ribosomes via autophagy (ribophagy) depends on the capacity of NUFIP1 to bind LC3B and promotes cell survival. We conclude that NUFIP1 is a receptor for the selective autophagy of ribosomes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification and characterization of a ribosome receptor for starvation-induced ribophagy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were solubilized by the addition of 20% (w/v) SDS to a final concentration of 2% followed by sonication in a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) (5 cycles: 1 min on, 30 sec off, 20°C) at the highest settings. Samples were spun down at 20,800x g for 1 min and the supernatant transferred to fresh tubes. Reduction was performed with 2.9 μL DTT (200 mM) for 15 min at 45°C before alkylation with 200 mM IAA (5 μL, 30 minutes, room temperature, in the dark). Proteins were then precipitated with 4 volumes ice cold acetone to 1 volume sample and left overnight at -20°C. The samples were then centrifuged at 20,800x g for 30 min at 4°C. After removal of the supernatant, the precipitates were washed twice with 500 μL 80% (v/v) acetone (ice cold). After each wash step, the samples were vortexed, then centrifuged again for 2 min at 4°C. The pellets were then allowed to air-dry before being dissolved in digestion buffer (50 μL, 3M urea in 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8) containing 0.1 μg of LysC (Wako), and incubated for 4 h at 37°C with shaking at 600 rpm. Then the samples were diluted 1:1 with milliQ water (to reach 1.5 M urea) and incubated with 0.1 μg trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37 °C. The digests were then acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB μElution Plate 30μm in the presence of a slow vacuum following manufacturer instructions. The samples were then dried in a Speed-Vac and resuspended in 10 μL reconstitution buffer (5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) TFA in water) prior to MS analysis. Peptides were spiked with retention time HRM kit (Biognosys AG), and analyed using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Approx. 1 μg of peptides were loaded for each sample with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μL/min, onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 μL/min, at 40°C, via a nonlinear gradient from 0% to 40% in 90 min. Total runtime was 115 minutes, including clean-up and column re-equilibration. The RF lens was set to 30%. For spectral library generation, 4 pooled samples were generated by mixing equal portions of each sample belonging to a biological condition, and each pool was injected in triplicate (12 runs in total), and measured in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. The conditions for DDA data acquisition were as follows: full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60000. The filling time was set at maximum of 50 ms with limitation of 2 x 105 ions. The “Top Speed” method was employed to take the maximum number of precursor ions (with an intensity threshold of 5 x 104) from the full scan MS for fragmentation (using HCD collision energy, 30%) and quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da window) and measurement in the Orbitrap (resolution 15000, fixed first mass 120 m/z), with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The MIPS (monoisotopic precursor selection) peptide algorithm was employed but with relaxed restrictions when too few precursors meeting the criteria were found. The fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 2 x 10e5 ions or after filling time of 22 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode. Only multiply charged (2+ - 7+) precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was employed with maximum retention period of 15s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Isotopes were excluded. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Scientific) and Tune version 2.1 were employed. For the Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) data the same gradient conditions were applied to the LC as for the DDA and the MS conditions were varied as follows: full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000. The filling time was set at maximum of 20ms with limitation of 5 x 10e5 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 34 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000 over the mass range 200-2000 m/z after accumulation of 2 x 10e5 ions or after filling time of 70 ms (whichever occurred first). Ions were injected for all available parallelizable time. Data were acquired in profile mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
For library creation, the DDA data was searched using the Pulsar search engine (version 1.0.15764.0, Biognosys AG). The data were searched against a human database (Swiss-Prot entries of the Uniprot KB database release 2016_01, 20198 entries). The data were searched with the Biognosys default settings with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. The library contained 70796 precursors, corresponding to 5401 protein groups using Spectronaut protein inference. DIA data were then searched against this library. Precursor matching, protein inference and quantification was performed in Spectronaut (version 11) using default settings(44). Peptide and protein level FDR for DIA data were controlled to 1% (45). Differential protein expression was evaluated using a pairwise t-test performed at the precursor level followed by multiple testing correction according to (46). The data (candidate table, Supplementary Tables 1 and 2) was exported from Spectronaut and used for further data analyses. The sne files can be opened and viewed with Spectronaut Viewer (free upon registration).

INTRODUCTION:
The capacity of lysosomes to degrade macromolecules is necessary for cells to clear damaged components and to recycle nutrients for maintaining homeostasis upon starvation. In the context of disease, lysosomes are best known for their dysfunction in the rare lysosomal storage diseases, but also play roles in neurodegeneration and cancer as well as the aging process (reviewed in). Over the last decade it has become apparent that mTOR Complex 1 (mTORC1), the major nutrient-sensitive regulator of growth (mass accumulation), has an intimate relationship with lysosomes (reviewed in). Most components of the nutrient sensing machinery upstream of mTORC1 localize to the lysosomal surface, and nutrients generated by lysosomes regulate mTORC1 by promoting its translocation there, a key step in its activation. In turn, mTORC1 regulates the flux of macromolecules destined for lysosomal degradation by controlling autophagosome formation as well as lysosomal biogenesis through the TFEB transcription factor.
Using our recently developed LysoIP method to rapidly isolate highly pure lysosomes we profiled the dynamics of the lysosomal proteome under conditions that inhibit mTORC1 signaling. We identify NUFIP1, a protein not previously associated with lysosomes, as necessary for the starvation-induced degradation of ribosomes and show that it fulfills multiple criteria for being an autophagy receptor for ribosomes.
mTORC1 and nutrients regulate the lysosomal proteome
To define the mTORC1-regulated lysosomal proteome, we used high-resolution quantitative proteomics to analyze lysosomes isolated from HEK-293T cells cultured in nutrient-replete media (full media), starved of nutrients (amino acids and glucose), or treated with the mTOR inhibitor Torin1 for one hour (Fig. 1A and S1A). Nutrient starvation and Torin1 both inhibit mTORC1 signaling (Fig. S1A) but will have distinct effects because Torin1 inhibits mTORC1 more strongly than nutrient deprivation and there are mTORC1-independent mechanisms for sensing nutrients. Nutrient starvation and Torin1 did not impact the abundance of most proteins associated with the purified lysosomes, but even a cursory view of the datasets revealed many proteins affected by one or both treatments (Fig. 1B). Gratifyingly, these included proteins with established nutrient- and Torin1-sensitive associations with lysosomes, including components of mTORC1 (mTOR, Raptor, and mLST8) and the Folliculin complex (FLCN, FNIP1, and FNIP2) (Fig. 1B and C) as well as the TFEB, MITF, and TFE3 transcription factors (Fig. 1B). Proteins previously connected to lysosomes but not known to have regulated associations with them were also identified. For example, Torin1 decreased and amino acid starvation increased the lysosomal abundance of SPG11 and ZFYVE26 (Fig. 1B and 1C and Table S1), which are associated with Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia and interact with each other as well as the Adaptor-5 complex, whose components (AP5B1, AP5M1, AP5S1 and AP5Z1) behaved similarly in the datasets (Table S1).
Although these examples hinted at the utility of the proteomics data for discovery, we needed a way to a priori designate a protein as associated with lysosomes upon mTOR inhibition and/or nutrient deprivation as the set of such proteins has not been previously defined. To do so we generated a control dataset of proteins that bind non-specifically to magnetic beads coated with antibody to hemagglutinin (HA), used in the immune-isolation of the lysosomes. We defined as “lysosomal” any protein that was more abundant in purified lysosomes than on the control beads by a factor of at least 1.5 (at a significance value of q<0.1; Fig. 1A and 1D). We arrived at this value using a sliding-window method to identify a relative change that captured a protein set significantly enriched for those annotated as lysosomal in the UniProt database (Fig. S1B). This approach yielded a total of 828 unique proteins as associated with lysosomes in any of the three experimental conditions (Fig. 1D), with 343 proteins designated as lysosomal under all conditions (Fig. 1D and Table S2).
NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 accumulates on autophagosomes and lysosomes upon mTORC1 inhibition
Of the many proteins whose lysosomal abundance increased upon Torin1 treatment (Tables S1), Nuclear fragile X mental retardation-interacting protein 1 (NUFIP1) piqued our interest because previous work indicates that while NUFIP1 is largely a nuclear protein it has also been observed in the cytoplasm of some cell types. NUFIP1 forms a heterodimer with a smaller protein, Zinc finger HIT domain-containing protein 3 (ZNHIT3), whose lysosomal abundance also increased upon Torin1 treatment (Tables S1 and S2), albeit to a lesser extent. Similar to the behavior of many constitutively interacting proteins, CRISPR-Cas9-mediated loss of NUFIP1 caused the concomitant loss of ZNHIT3 (Fig. S2A).
Previous work implicates NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 in the assembly of the box C/D snoRNP. Consistent with such a role, NUFIP1 not only co-immunoprecipitated ZNHIT3 but also snoRNP core components such as Fibrillarin (FBL), NOP58, SNU13/15.5K, and NOP17/PIH1D1 (Fig. S2B). In addition, its loss caused modest reductions in the interaction of FBL with NOP58, and SNU13/15.5K as well as the expression of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) of the box C/D (U3 and U14), but not H/ACA (U19) or U4, class (Fig. S2, C and D). Although these results confirm a role for NUFIP1 in the function of the box C/D snoRNP, it was intriguing that none of its core components were in our proteomics data, suggesting that NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 might have a previously unappreciated role involving lysosomes.
Acute inhibition of mTORC1 in HEK-293T cells, by either via Torin1 treatment or amino acid starvation, strongly increased the lysosomal abundance of NUFIP1 and ZNHIT3 (Fig. 2A). mTORC1 inhibition did not change the total cellular amount of NUFIP1 or ZNHIT3, so we reasoned that it must affect their subcellular localization. Indeed, upon Torin1 treatment and amino acid starvation NUFIP1-ZNHIT3, but not SNU13/15.5K, redistributed from the nuclear fraction to the post-nuclear supernatant (PNS) that contains lysosomes (Fig. 2B). Imaging studies using HEK-293T cells stably expressing FLAG-NUFIP1 confirmed that Torin1 caused NUFIP1 to translocate from the nucleus to LAMP2-positive lysosomes (Fig. 2C). Consistent with this shift in localization, Torin1 reduced the amount of NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 that co-immunuprecipitated with FBL, a C/D snoRNP component, without impacting the FBL-SNU13/15.5K interaction (Fig. S2E). Thus, mTOR inhibition promotes the lysosomal accumulation of NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 at the expense of its interaction with the nuclear C/D snoRNP.
Because mTORC1 inhibition strongly induces autophagy, we hypothesized that NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 may travel to lysosomes through an association with incipient autophagosomes. Indeed, NUFIP1 and ZNHIT3 were absent from lysosomes isolated from cells lacking the ATG7 protein (Fig. 2D), which is necessary for the formation of autophagosomes, and in Torin1 treated cells FLAG-NUFIP1 co-localized with LC3B-positive autophagosomes (Fig. 2E).
NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 interacts with LC3B
Sequence analyses predict that NUFIP1, but not ZNHIT3, has four potential LC3B-interacting regions (LIR) (Fig.2F). LIRs are found in autophagy receptors that physically link their cargo to the autophagosomal membrane through an LC3B/ATG8-binding domain that contains the Trp/Phe-X-X-Leu/Ile/Val sequence motif (reviewed in). Consistent with the presence of LIRs in NUFIP1, endogenous LC3B co-immunoprecipitated endogenous NUFIP1 and ZNHIT3 from detergent lysates of HEK-293T cells cultured in full media and, to a much greater extent, in cells treated with Torin1 or starved of amino acids (Fig. 2G). Even when overexpressed, ZNHIT3 did not co-immunoprecipitate with LC3B in cells lacking NUFIP1 (Fig. S3A). In vitro, purified NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 bound to purified LC3B but not to GABARAP, another autophagosome-associated protein, or to the Rap2A control protein (Fig. 2H).
We sought a NUFIP1 mutant that dissociates its function in the nuclear C/D snoRNP from its capacity to bind LC3B. We generated NUFIP1 mutants with point mutations in each of the four potential LIRs and identified one, W40A NUFIP1, which no longer interacts with LC3B (Fig. 2I). When expressed in NUFIP1-null cells, neither NUFIP1 W40A nor ZNHIT3 associated with lysosomes, whether or not mTORC1 was inhibited (Fig. S3B). The W40A NUFIP1 mutant was indistinguishable from the wild-type protein in its capacity to co-immunoprecipitate FBL and reverse the modest reductions in U3 and U14 snoRNA expression caused by NUFIP1 loss (Fig. S3,C–D). Thus, NUFIP1 interacts with LC3B and the W40A mutant distinguishes between the role of NUFIP1 in C/D snoRNP function and its capacity to bind LC3B and localize to lysosomes.
NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 associates with ribosomes in a nutrient-dependent manner
Because NUFIP1 binds to LC3B we hypothesized that it might serve as a selective autophagy receptor for an unknown cargo in the cytoplasm. Given its role in modifying ribosomal RNA and its reported co-localization with ribosomes in some cell types, we considered the possibility that NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 can associate with ribosomes. We began by fractionating cell lysates to determine the amount of NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 that co-migrates with ribosomes pelleted through a 50% sucrose cushion. In lysates from control cells, NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 did not enter the sucrose cushion, but in those from cells treated with Torin1 or deprived of amino acids both proteins shifted markedly to the ribosome-containing pellet (Fig. 3A and Fig. S4A). Consistent with this finding, amino acid starvation increased the amount of ribosomes, as monitored via small (40S) and large (60S) ribosomal subunit proteins, that co-immunoprecipitated with NUFIP1 (Fig. 3B). To probe which ribosomal subunit NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 might associate with, we took advantage of the capacity of EDTA to dissociate ribosomes into their 40S and 60S subunits. When lysates of amino acid starved cells were fractionated through a 10 to 45% sucrose gradient, endogenous NUFIP1 and ZNHIT3 co-migrated with monosomes (80S) and polysomes. The addition of EDTA to the same lysates increased the amount of NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 that migrated with the large ribosomal subunits (Fig. S4B). Collectively, these results suggest that upon mTORC1 inhibition NUFIP1 binds to LC3B and associates with the ribosome, likely through its large subunit.
Given that mTORC1 inhibition increases the interaction of NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 with ribosomes, we considered the possibility that an mTORC1-dependent modification of either NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 or ribosomes regulates the interaction. To test this, we purified ribosomes or NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 from cells cultured in full media or treated with Torin1 and examined their capacity to interact with each other in vitro. Interestingly, only ribosomes from Torin1-treated cells bound strongly to NUFIP1-ZNHIT3, while the source of NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 did not impact the strength of the interaction (Fig. 3,C and D). These results suggest that mTOR inhibition leads to a stable alteration of ribosomes that promotes their interaction with NUFIP1-ZNHIT3. In contrast, the in vitro interaction of NUFIP1-ZNHIT3 with LC3B was unaffected by the source of either (i.e., control or Torin1-treated cells) (Fig. S4C). Taken together, these data suggest that the loss of nuclear NUFIP1 and the increase in the LC3B-NUFIP1 interaction caused by mTORC1 inhibition results from the binding and trapping of NUFIP1 by modified ribosomes in the cytoplasm. We cannot exclude the possibility that an mTORC1-dependent modification of NUFIP1 also regulates its nuclear entry or exit, but we have failed to identify mTORC1-regulated phosphorylation sites on NUFIP1.
NUFIP1 is required for ribosomal degradation induced by nutrient starvation
While it is known that the proteasome degrades ribosomal proteins that do not incorporate into ribosomal subunits, which we verified (Fig. S5, A to C), how intact ribosomes are degraded is less understood, particularly in mammalian cells. Upon amino acid deprivation or Torin1 treatment, ribosomal proteins decreased in a time-dependent manner in a fashion that depended on ATG7 and a low lysosomal pH (Fig. 4A and S6, A and B), in accord with previous work in yeast showing that intact ribosomes are degraded via autophagy. In GATOR1 mutant (DEPDC5 KO) cells that have nutrient-insensitive mTORC1 signaling, amino acid starvation did not reduce the abundance of ribosomal proteins while Torin1 still did (Fig. S6C). Thus, mTORC1 likely mediates the loss of ribosomal proteins caused by mTOR inhibition.
Given that NUFIP1 binds LC3B and also makes an mTORC1-regulated association with ribosomes, we hypothesized that NUFIP1 is required for the degradation of ribosomes via autophagy, a process that has been termed ribophagy in yeast. Indeed, in multiple cell types, loss of NUFIP1 prevented the depletion of ribosomal proteins caused by nutrient deprivation or Torin1 treatment (Fig. 4B and S6, D to G).
Loss of NUFIP1 had no impact the induction of autophagy, as assessed by LC3B lipidation, nor on the degradation of ferritin, another selective autophagy substrate, whether it was induced by nutrient starvation or iron chelation (Fig. 4B and S6H). NUFIP1 loss also blocked the Torin1-induced depletion of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) (Fig. 4C). Re-expression at levels near that of the endogenous protein of wild-type NUFIP1, but not of the W40A mutant deficient in LC3B binding, restored the capacity of NUFIP1-null HEK-293T and 8988T cells to degrade ribosomes upon nutrient depletion (Fig. 4, D and E and S6I). As assessed by electron microscopy, autophagosomes in HEK-293T cells lacking NUFIP1 or just its LC3B-binding capacity contained many fewer ribosomes than those from control cells (Fig. 4F and S6, J and K). Loss of NUFIP1 did not affect the morphology of the ER, mitochondria, or Golgi (Fig. S6L).
To test the role of the subcellular localization of NUFIP1 in the induction of ribosome degradation, we generated NUFIP1 mutants lacking either a nuclear localization (NLS) or export (NES) signal and expressed them in NUFIP1-null cells. The NLS mutant localized to the cytoplasm even in cells in full media, but this did not cause ribosome loss. The NLS mutant colocalized to a greater extent with LAMP2 upon Torin1 treatment and restored the capacity of the null cells to degrade ribosomes upon amino acid starvation (Fig. S7, A and B). The NES mutant was constitutively nuclear and did not support ribosome degradation even upon nutrient starvation (Fig. S7, B and C). Loss of ATG7 or LC3B did not affect the nuclear exit of wild-type NUFIP1 (Fig. S7, D and E). Thus, in cells in full media, the presence of NUFIP1 in the cytoplasm is not sufficient to induce ribosome degradation, presumably because mTORC1 inhibition is still needed to promote the interaction of NUFIP1 with ribosomes.
NUFIP1 is important for cells to survive starvation
Because NUFIP1 is required for starvation-induced ribophagy and ribosomes constitute a major fraction of the total cell mass, we asked whether NUFIP1 is important for the cellular response to nutrient deprivation. Indeed, loss of NUFIP1 or just its LC3B-binding ability reduced the capacity of multiple cell types to survive nutrient starvation, as measured in clonogenic survival assays or via direct cell counting (Fig. 5, A and B and Fig. S8, A to C). These results suggest that the NUFIP1-mediated degradation of ribosomes supplies metabolites needed for survival during starvation. Consistent with this possibility, loss of either ATG7 or NUFIP1 suppressed the large increase in nucleoside levels (including inosine, which is generated by the deamination of adenosine in lysosomes), caused by mTOR inhibition that we recently described, which suggests that most of this increase results from the lysosomal degradation of rRNA (Fig. 5C). The addition of nucleosides to the starvation media rescued the survival defect of the NUFIP1-null cells, and, as previously shown, of cells lacking the canonical autophagy pathway (Fig. 5D and E and S8D).
Starvation of single amino acids acutely inhibits mTORC1 signaling, but over time it reactivates because of the release of endogenous amino acids by the autophagic degradation of proteins. Analysis of the human proteome annotated in the UniProt database (which includes isoforms) revealed that ribosomal proteins are amongst the most highly enriched for arginine and lysine (Fig. 5F). Because mTORC1 senses lysosomal arginine (and likely lysine) through SLC38A9, ribophagy might be important for generating the amino acids necessary for mTORC1 re-activation. Indeed, loss of NUFIP1 severely diminished the reactivation of mTORC1 normally observed after long-term arginine deprivation (Fig. 5G). Thus, NUFIP1-mediated ribophagy contributes significantly to the cellular response to nutrient starvation.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Author Contributions: G.A.W., M.A-R., and D.M.S. initiated the project and designed the research plan. G.A.W and M.A-R. performed the experiments and analyzed the data with help from E.M.F, N.L., and V.D.. A.O. designed the proteomic runs and analyzed the lysosomal proteomic data. C.A.L. and S.Z.H preformed LC/MS runs and quantified metabolites. G.A.W and M.A-R. wrote the manuscript and D.M.S. edited it. All the authors approved and edited the manuscript.
Competing Interests: D.M.S. is a founding member of the scientific advisory board, a paid consultant, and a shareholder of Navitor Pharmaceuticals, which is targeting for therapeutic benefit the amino acid sensing pathway upstream of mTORC1.
Data and Materials availability: The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD009084.