PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
diseases: Alzheimer's disease
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Human; Lc-msms; Brain microvessels; Blood-brain barrier; Transporters; Maxquant; Orbitrap; Aging; Ontogeny

ABSTRACT:
The Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB) is a crucial, selective barrier that regulates the entry of molecules including nutrients, environmental toxins, and therapeutic medications into the brain. This function relies heavily on brain endothelial cell proteins, particularly transporters and tight junction proteins. The BBB continues to develop postnatally, adapting its selective barrier function across different developmental phases, and alters with aging and disease. Here we present a global proteomics analysis focused on the ontogeny and aging of proteins in human brain microvessels (BMVs), predominantly composed of brain endothelial cells. Our proteomic profiling quantified 6,223 proteins and revealed possible age-related alteration in BBB permeability due to basement membrane component changes through the early developmental stage and age-dependent changes in transporter expression. Notable changes in expression levels were observed with development and age in nutrient transporters and transporters that play critical roles in drug disposition. This research 1) provides important information on the mechanisms that drive changes in the metabolic content of the brain with age and 2) enables the creation of physiologically based pharmacokinetic models for CNS drug distribution across different life stages.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Profiling Reveals Age-Related Changes in Transporter Proteins in the Human Blood-Brain Barrier

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The process of isolating brain microvessels (BMVs) from human brain cortical tissue was conducted. The procedure started with using less than 1 gram of tissue which was thawed and homogenized in protease inhibitors (cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) contained HBSS solution with 20 up- and-down strokes in a Potter-Elvehjem glass homogenizer. The resulting homogenate was centrifuged at 1200 g for 10 min at 4C, and the BMV enriched pellet was resuspended in a 17.5% dextran-70/HBSS solution and centrifuged and centrifuged at 4300 g for 15 min at 4C in a swinging bucket rotor. The myelin-rich layer on the top and the supernatant were aspirated and the pellet was resuspended in HBSS with 1% Bovine Serum Albumin. This solution was filtered with a 40 μm nylon mesh strainer and the BMVs captured on the strainer were washed with 35 ml of 1% BSA/ HBSS buffer. The BMVs were then collected off the filter with 1% BSA/HBSS buffer and centrifuged at 3000 g for 5 min at 4C. The supernatant was removed and the resulting BMV pellet was immediately frozen at -80°C for further analysis. All the steps above were carried out at 4°C or on ice. BMV samples were lysed in a 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.8) containing 50 mM dithiothreitol and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate, followed by a 5-minute incubation at 95°C. Subsequently, the samples underwent sonication using a Branson-rod-typesonicator and were then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 minutes. To determine protein concentration, a tryptophan fluorescence assay was employed. For multi-enzyme digestion, 100 μg of protein was utilized in the multi-enzyme digestion filter-aided sample preparation (MED-FASP) protocol, where sequential digestion with LysC and trypsin occurred. Following digestion, the resulting peptides were concentrated via a GeneVac EX-2plus system. Subsequently, peptide separation was achieved using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system, employing an easy spray C18 reversed-phase column (50 cm, ID 75 μm) with a gradient of water/acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid over a 145-minute period. The eluted peptides were analyzed with a Top15 method, involving full MS followed by ddMS2 scans, using an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA).

DATA PROCESSING:
Data analysis was conducted using MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43, with the complete human proteome extracted from UniProt (September 2020). A false discovery rate of 0.01 was set, and match-between-runs was enabled. See mqpar file for complete set of parameters used for MqxQuant. Protein abundance quantification was performed using the total protein approach (TPA) for proteins with three or more razor+unique peptides. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium through the PRIDE partner repository.