PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Stem cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Normoxia; Proteome remodeling; Hypoxia; Stem cells

ABSTRACT:
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have become an invaluable tool to study molecular disease mechanisms on a human genetic background as they can be differentiated in different cell types including cardiac myocytes. One major downside that has decelerated the research performed in hiPSCs is that during propagation of these cells, changes in the karyotype of these cells have been observed. Interestingly, when hiPSCs are being cultured under hypoxic conditions and not as commonly done under normoxic conditions, hiPSCs grow faster to confluency and also changes in the karyotype of these cells are less frequently observed.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Comparing the proteome of human induced pluripotent stem cells cultured during normoxic versus hypoxic conditions

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) were cultured under normoxic or hypoxic conditions and then split into 2 T75 culture flasks, each. After 7 days, cells were washed with PBS and then frozen. Cells were lysed in 1ml 100 mM Tris pH 7.4 and 1% Triton X-100, transferred into a tube and incubated on ice for 15 min and divided into technical replicates. Homogenates were centrifuged for 10 min at 16´000 g at 4°C. Proteins of the supernatant were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (final concentration 20%). Precipitated proteins were washed twice with ice-cold acetone. All pellets were resolved in 6 M Guanidinhydrochlorid (GdmCl), 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and samples were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. 100 µg of protein was digested with 1 µg trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were fractionated on multi-stop-and-go tips (StageTips) containing C18-tips and strong cation exchange (SCX) tips. Peptides were eluted in 6 steps. Peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid.  Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long from New Objectives) using a gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 50 % mobile phase B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min with a flow rate of 400 nl/min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with a resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1*E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1-Data were acquired in profile mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
X calibur Raw files were analysed by proteomics software Max Quant (1.6.1.0) using default settings. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. Acetylation of N-terminus (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected for variable modification, carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines was set as fixed modification. Human proteom set from Uniprot (Download February 2018, 71785 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Labile free quantification values were obtained from at least one identified peptide.  Match between run option was enabled in a time window of 2 min.  Cox, J. & Mann, M. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 (2008).

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs)
The generation and utilisation of hiPSC lines was approved by the Ethical Committee of the University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf (Az. PV4798, October 28, 2014) with written informed consent. An in house hiPSC control line (UKEi001-A), which was registered at the European Human Stem Cell Registry (hPSCreg) was used for the experimental comparison between hyperoxic versus physioxic cultured hiPSCs.
Reprogramming of human fibroblasts into hiPSCs
Punch skin biopsies (4 mm diameter) from human donors were taken under local anesthesia. Skin biopsies were collected in MACS tissue storage solution (Miltenyi, Germany, 130-100-008) and dissociated by digestion with collagenase type 2 (Worthington, Austria, LS004176). Dissociated tissue was collected into a T25 TC flask (Sarstedt, Germany, 83.3910) containing fibroblast medium (DMEM supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) superior (Biochrom, Germany), l-glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin (Life Technologies, USA)). Outgrowing dermal fibroblasts were expanded in a T75 TC flask (Sarstedt, Germany 83.3911), passaged with trypsin (Life Technologies, USA) or cryopreserved (passage number 1–5) in FBS with 10 % DMSO (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), and used for subsequent reprogramming until passage number 5.
For reprogramming, human dermal fibroblasts were thawed and cultured in fibroblast medium, transduced by Sendai virus (SeV) vectors containing four separate Yamanaka reprogramming factors (hOct-3/4, hSox2, hKlf4, hc-Myc) according to the manufacturer's instructions at MOI 6 (CytoTune-iPS Sendai Reprogramming Kit, #A1377801, Life Technologies, USA). At day 7 post-transduction, SeV-transduced fibroblasts were trypsinised and re-seeded in three different densities (1.6 × 104, 3.2 × 104, 6.4 × 104 per 6 well) on feeder cells (primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) from CF-1 mice, mitotically inactivated with 10 μg/ml mitomycin C (SERVA), MMC-MEF density 2.5 × 105 per 10 cm2, and cultured with hES medium (DMEM/F12 with Knockout serum replacement, l-glutamine, non-essential amino acids, penicillin and streptomycin (Life Technologies, USA) and 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) supplemented with FGF (FGF/basic; Peprotech, Germany), with daily medium change.
30–40 days after transduction, the reprogrammed hiPSC colonies were picked with an inverted EVOS microscope and transferred under sterile conditions. Each single individual clone was further expanded and cryopreserved. For the initial passages after picking, the lines were cultured with CF-1 MEF-conditioned hES medium supplemented with 10 ng/ml FGF (Peprotech, Germany) on plates (Nunclon Delta Surface, ThermoFisher, Germany 150687, 142475, 150628, 140675) coated with growth factor reduced Matrigel (Corning, USA, 354230) and for passaging dissociated with 0.75 mM EDTA. At later passages (passage number 5–10), culture conditions were adapted gradually to the ones described in the following section.
Thawing, passaging and culture of hiPSCs
Prior to hiPSC culture, six-well plates were coated with Geltrex (1:100, Gibco, Germany, A 14133-02) in cold RPMI (Gibco, Germany) for 1 h in the incubator at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 and 5 % O2. The cryotubes were thawed in a waterbath at 37 °C for 2–3 min and then drawn up into a pipette containing 5 ml FTDA (DMEM, 2 mM L-glutamine, 5 mg/l transferrin/selenium, 0.1 % human serum albumin, 1x lipid mix, 5 mg/l insulin, 50 nM dorsomorphin, 30 ng/ml FGF, 2.5 ng/ml activin A, 0.5 ng/ml TGFβ and 10 μM of the ROCK-Inhibitor Y-27632 (Biorbyt, United Kingdom, orb154626). The cells were then slowly transferred into a falcon tube and centrifuged for 3 min at 200 g. The pellet was resuspended in FTDA containing 30 ng/ml FGF, 10 μM Y-27632 and counted. 1 × 106 cells were plated per 9.6 cm2 (equal to 1 well of a six-well plate; Nunclon™ Delta Surface; Thermo Scientific; #140675). According to the oxygen content, hiPSCs were either cultured under physioxic conditions at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 and 5 % O2 or under hyperoxic conditions at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 and 20 % O2. Cells were fed daily with pre-warmed FTDA, supplemented with FGF. After 3–4 days, when cells had recovered from the freezing procedure and the cell layer was >90 % confluent, cells were split to additional wells of Geltrex-coated six-well plates (0.5 × 106/well). In brief, medium was aspirated off the well, hiPSCs were washed once with 1 ml PBS per well, and then treated with 1 ml accutase (StemCell technologies, Germany, 07922), supplemented with Y-27632 and incubated for 5–10 min in the respective hyperoxic or physioxic incubator until all cells started to detach. The cells were then fully detached by pipetting up and down using a 1000 μl pipette and transferred into a 15 ml tube. To ensure capture of all cells, each well was washed twice with pre-warmed FTDA supplemented with Y-27632 and FGF and added to the tube. After centrifugation at 800 rpm for 3 min, the supernatant was aspirated off and hiPSCs were resuspended in FTDA (+Y-27632+FGF). Cells were diluted 1:2 or 1:4 with trypan blue and medium and subsequently counted with a Neubauer chamber. After calculation, 0.5 × 106 cells per well were plated and left for 3–4 days in culture at the respective oxygen level until >90 % confluency. Prior to enrolling cells into experiments, hiPSCs were passaged three times and then incubated one more day to completely attach into a cell monolayer at their respective oxygen level. Handling of hiPSCs outside the incubators occurred in a laminar flow cabinet exposed to atmospheric oxygen.
To compare the proliferation rate of hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic or physioxic conditions, hiPSCs were seeded at the same density per well (0.5 × 106 cells/well in a 6-well plate) and the hiPSC number was determined for every well every three days using a Neubauer chamber.
RNA isolation
For ribonucleic acid (RNA) isolation, 5.5 × 105 hiPSCs were plated per well of 6-well plates as previously described and cultured for 4 days until the cell layer was confluent. The cells were then washed once with PBS and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. For RNA isolation, plates were thawed on ice and 1 ml Trizol™ was added to each well. The RNA isolation was performed according to the instructions of the manufacturer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Germany). Samples were transferred to 2 ml Eppendorf tubes and homogenised with a tissue lyser (Qiagen). After 5 min incubation, 0.2 ml chloroform was added, and samples incubated for 2–3 min and centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min. After centrifugation, the aqueous phase was mixed with 0.5 ml isopropanol and incubated for 10 min. After another 10 min centrifugation step at 12,000 g, the pellet was resuspended in 1 ml 75 % ethanol, mixed and again centrifuged at 7,500 g for 5 min. The pellet was allowed to air dry for 5–10 min and then resuspended in 30 μl RNase-free water. The samples were incubated for 10–15 min in a heat block at 55–60 °C and the RNA concentration was measured with a NanoDrop™ 1000 spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
cDNA synthesis
RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA according to the manufacturer's instructions (Applied Biosystems, USA). For a single reaction, 500 ng of RNA, 2 μl of the 10x reverse transcriptase buffer, 0.8 μl 100 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) and 2 μl random primers were mixed with 4.2 μl nuclease-free water and 1 μl reverse transcriptase. The reaction was incubated in a PCR cycler for 10 min at 25 °C, for 120 min at 37 °C and for 5 min at 85 °C.
Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)
Samples analyzed by RT-qPCR were run on 384-well plates in triplicates and in 10 μl reactions. Therefore, 100 nM forward and reverse primer, 5 μl SYBR Green/ROX mix (K0222, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 50 ng cDNA were combined. For negative controls, water was used. The following human primers were designed using NCBI Primer Blast: NDUFA4 forward (5’ -> 3’: AAGCCACATCCGCACAATTT), NDUFA4 reverse (5’ -> 3’: AGTTCAGAGCATACTTTCAGCAT), NDUFA4L2 forward (5’ -> 3’: CGCTTTACTTGCTGCGACTC), NDUFA4L2 reverse (5’ -> 3’: GGTCGGTACAGTCGAAGGTG), HIF1A forward (5’ -> 3’: GAGCACCTTGTGCAGTTTGG), HIF1A reverse (5’ -> 3’: CTAAACCCTGAGCCGTGACA). GUSB forward (5’ -> 3’: ACGATTGCAGGGTTTCACCA), GUSB reverse (5’ -> 3’: CACTCTCGTCGGTGACTGTT). GUSB was used as a housekeeping gene. The RT-qPCR was performed with the 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR system for 2 min at 50 °C, 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min. The final cycle was set to 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for 15 s and 95 °C for 15 s. The cycle threshold values (CT) of the respective gene were subtracted from the CT values of GUSB to calculate the delta CT value. These were normalised to the mean of the respective control group to calculate the delta delta CT value and the fold change.
RT-qPCR and mitochondria
Genomic and mitochondrial DNA (mt-DNA) were isolated using the Dneasy Blood & Tissue Kit (69506, Qiagen) following the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative PCR was performed in a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the SYBR Green/ROX qPCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 15 ng of DNA per reaction. The mt-DNA content was quantified by normalizing gene expression values of the mitochondrial encoded NADH dehydrogenase- 1 (mt-ND1) and −2 (mt-ND2) to the nuclear-encoded globular beta actin (g-β-actin). Primer sequences were used as previously described and listed in the table below.
Measurement of the Stage Specific Embryonic Antigen 3 (SSEA3) by flow cytometry
For assessment of the Stage Specific Embryonic Antigen 3 (SSEA3), hiPSCs were detached with accutase, centrifuged as previously described, resuspended in 1 ml FBS and counted using a Neubauer chamber. Subsequently, 1 × 106 hiPSCs in FBS were split into one tube for isotype control and one for SSEA3 staining. The cells were then centrifuged for 3 min at 200 g at 4 °C and resuspended in the antibody diluents (1:5 PE-Anti-SSEA3, BD Biosciences, Germany, 560237 or 1:80 PE-Rat IgM, κ Isotype control, BD Biosciences, 553943). After staining for 30 min at 4 °C, antibody diluents were removed, and cells washed twice with PBS containing 5 % FBS and afterwards resuspended in PBS. The fluorescence was measured using the BD FACS Canto II with the settings FSC 187 V, SSC 308 V, PE 522 V and FITC 396 V for hiPSCs.
Karyotyping: GTG-banding (trypsin-Giemsa)
Karyotype analysis was essentially performed according to standard cytogenetic protocols optimized for hiPSCs as described previously. In brief, to capture an appropriate proportion of hiPSCs during metaphases, at least 4 × 105 hiPSCs were used for karyotyping. Before harvesting, cells were arrested with 0.2 μg/ml colcemid (Gibco) for 3 h at 37 °C and 5 % CO2, detached from the plate with 0.05 % Trypsin-EDTA (Gibco) at 37 °C and centrifuged for 10 min at 250 g at RT. After removal of the supernatant, 7 ml of 75 mM KCl solution were dropwise added under swirling and incubated for 15 min at 37 °C. Subsequently, 13 drops of ice-cold fixative solution (methanol/glacial acetic acid 3:1) were added to the suspension, the tubes were inverted carefully, because the cells are very fragile at this point, and then centrifuged at 250 g for 10 min at RT. All except 1 ml of the supernatant was removed, vortexed and 6 ml of ice-cold fixative were dropwise added. After centrifugation, the fixative washing step was repeated twice to receive finally about 500 μl cell suspension for slide making.
For the generation of metaphase chromosome spreads, the optimal environmental conditions to ensure good slide quality are 45–50 % humidity and a temperature of 20–22 °C. The slides and cell suspension were kept at 6 °C until further use.
For metaphase spreads, about 100 μl hiPSC cell suspension was added dropwise onto a wet slide that was immediately transferred into a pre-warmed (90 °C) oven until the fixative had been fully evaporated. Cell density and metaphase spreading was checked by phase-contrast microscopy. Afterwards, slides were aged for 15 min at 95 °C.
For trypsin G-banding, slides were placed for 5 s to 0.25 % (v/v) trypsin in Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS), followed by a short equlibration in PBS and subsequent incubation for 5 min in 10 % (v/v) Giemsa stain in Titrisol (pH 7.2). Slides were rinsed with cold water and then air-dried.
For karyotyping, slides were covered with a coverslip and Cytoseal 60. Chromosomes of fifteen cells were counted under a light microscope using a 1000x magnification and karyograms from five captured images (CytoVysion, Leica Biosystems) were prepared. Karyotypes were described according to the International System for Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature 2016 or 2020.
Proteomic and complexomic analysis
The mass spectrometry raw data, identification/quantification of proteins, complexomes and a detailed description of the procedure and data analysis have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRoteomics IDEntification Database (PRIDE) repository with the dataset identifier PXD050410 ((for review Username: reviewer_pxd050410@ebi.ac.uk, Password: bMPCc8cr) and PXD048535 (for review Username: reviewer_pxd048535@ebi.ac.uk; Password: 5FhZvOjn). In addition, data from proteomic analysis were loaded to Perseus proteomics software for further statistical analysis (Table S1).
Senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) activity assay
To investigate cellular senescence as well as the induction of senescence by paracrine actions of pro-senescent factors in cells cultured under hyperoxic or physioxic conditions, hiPSCs of the master cell bank were thawed and cultured for three passages at 5 % O2 (5 % CO2: 37 °C) or 20 % O2 (5 % CO2, 37 °C).
At the starting point of the experiment, media (FTDA supplemented with FGF) of cells from both culture conditions was exchanged. After 12 h incubation at the respective oxygen concentration, the hyperoxic or physioxic medium were exchanged to the respective other hiPSC cell culture dish, meaning that physioxic-cultured cells received media from cells that were cultured at hyperoxia in the first 12 h of the experiment and vice versa. After additional 24 h incubation, the media from all wells was removed and replaced with new medium before the crossover exchange procedure was repeated.
To investigate directly if media exchange from hyperoxic or physioxic medium led to senescence of the cells, a senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) activity assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions (β-galactosidase staining kit; Cell Signaling Technology, USA, 9860). All used solutions were included in this kit. In brief, media was removed and hiPSCs were washed once with 2 ml PBS, followed by incubation in 1x fixative solution for 10–15 min at RT. The plate was then washed twice with 2 ml PBS and incubated with 1 ml of the β-galactosidase staining solution. Plates were sealed with parafilm, covered for light-protection and then incubated overnight dried in an incubator at 37 °C without additional CO2. On the next day, the staining solution was replaced by 70 % glycerol and analyzed by light microscopy on a Nikon Eclipse TS2 microscope using a 200x magnification. As a positive control, hiPSCs were treated twice for 2 h with 75 μM H2O2 prior to media collection.
Image analysis and quantification of senescence
For analysis and quantification of the blue signals representing the SA-β-gal activity, three to five different areas per well were randomly chosen and imaged. In order to remove the background in a similar fashion in all images, images were opened in Image J and the color threshold was changed for all images according to the following settings: Hue 68–198, saturation 53–255, brightness 110–255 and color space HSB. After application of those values, the appropriate areas were selected and measured. Subsequently, the selection was inverted, and the non-stained areas were measured. By addition of those values, the total area could be calculated. The stained area was then calculated as a percentage of the total area.
ELISA-detection for insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3)
Insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) protein levels in the media from the above-described crossover experiments were quantified using the human IGFBP-3 ELISA Kit (Invitrogen, Germany, EHIGFBP3) according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, collected media samples of the appropriate above-mentioned culture conditions were diluted 1:1 in 1x assay diluent B. For a standard curve, standards with IGFBP-3 concentrations of 0 pg/mL, 74.07 pg/mL, 222.2 pg/mL, 666.7 pg/mL, 2000 pg/mL, 6000 pg/mL and 18000 pg/mL were prepared in assay diluent A. For binding of the antigen, standards were prepared and pre-diluted media samples were added to the 96-well plate and incubated at RT for 2.5 h with gentle agitation. After intermittent washing steps with the provided 1x wash buffer, 100 μl biotin-conjugate per well was added and incubated for 1 h with gentle agitation, followed by intermittent washing and incubation with 100 μl streptavidin-HRP solution for 45 min. After additional washing steps, the wells were incubated with the TMB substrate for 30 min resulting in a blue-dyed solution that turned into yellow by addition of 50 μl stop solution. The plate was read within 30 min after adding the stop solution at 450 nm in a Tecan Safire2 (LifeSciences). Afterwards, the background was subtracted, and unknown concentrations of the samples were calculated using the standard curve.
Analysis of glucose and lactate levels in the medium by blood gas analysis
To investigate glucose consumption and lactate production, at each medium change of the above-described procedure (0 h, 12 h, 36 h, 48 h, 72 h), media samples were collected and stored at 4 °C until the end of the experiment. The media samples were then used to measure pH, O2, CO2, lactate and glucose using a blood gas analyzer (Radiometer, ABL90 FLEX BGA).
ATAC-sequencing
The assay for transposase-accessible chromatin with sequencing (ATAC-sequencing; ATAC-seq) was performed according to Buenrostro et al. with minor modifications from the Kaestner lab. For the transposition reaction, 2.5 μl Tagment DNA enzyme 1 (Illumina) were used per 5 × 104 freshly collected cells (n = 3 per condition). The reaction was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C on a thermal shaker and DNA isolated for library preparation. After addition of EvaGreen (Biotium), tagmented fragments were amplified using Illumina compatible primers with fluorescence monitoring until the fluorescent signal reached the inflection point. The libraries were then subjected to double-sided purification using Ampure XP beads (Beckmann) and sequenced in paired-end mode on Nextseq2000 (PE50, Illumina) and AVITI (PE75, Element Biosciences) to at least 50 × 106 reads per sample.
The analysis of sequencing data was performed with bioinformatics tools that were integrated in the Galaxy platform. Quality control and adapter trimming of reads were performed with Trim Galore to exclude low quality reads and adapter contamination. Reads were then mapped to the human genome (hg19) using Bowtie2 v2.5.0 (-X 700 --very-sensitive) and PCR duplicates were removed using SAMtools. Triplicates were merged for visualization.
Transcription factor footprints were generated using Transcription factor Occupancy prediction by investigation of ATAC-seq Signal (TOBIAS, version 0.14.0). Briefly, accessible regions were identified by peak calling for each sample BAM file separately using MACS2 (--nomodel –shift 75 –extsize 150 –broad). Peaks from each sample were merged to a set of union peaks across all conditions using bedtools. The ATAC-seq signal in each accessible region was corrected for Tn5 transposase insertion bias (ATACorrect) and converted to a footprint binding score. Scored footprints were matched to the JASPAR 2022 Core vertebrate non-redundant motifs database and differential scores for each motif were determined to compare the hyperoxic or physioxic conditions (BINdetect).
RNA-sequencing
Total RNA was isolated with the RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen) including on-column DNase digestion. Library preparation was then performed on 10 ng RNA input with the SMARTer Stranded Total RNA-Seq Kit v3 (Takara) following the manufacturer's instructions. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina Nextseq2000 in 50 bp paired-end mode (25 × 106 reads per sample).
The analysis of sequencing data was performed with bioinformatics tools integrated in the Galaxy platform. Quality and adapter trimming of sequencing reads were performed prior to mapping to remove low quality reads and adapter contaminations. RNA-Seq data was mapped to the human genome (hg19) using RNA STAR 2.6.0b-2. PCR duplicates were removed using SAMtools. HTSeq-count and DESeq2 were used for read-count and differential gene expression analysis.
Western immunoblot analysis
Physioxic or hyperoxic hiPSCs (500.000 hiPSCs/sample) were washed with PBS and harvested in sample buffer. 10 μg total protein/lane was resolved on prepacked Mini Protean TGX gels (BioRad; #4568123) and blotted using a Trans Turbo Transfer Pack (BioRad; #1704156) using a Trans-Blot Turbo™ Transfer System (BioRad). Primary antibodies used were anti-HIF1α (1:1000; polyclonal rabbit IgG; #PA116601; Invitrogen) and anti-beta actin (1:1000; monoclonal mouse IgG1; Invitrogen) as a loading control.
Immunofluorescence
For immunofluorescence analysis, physioxic or hyperoxic hiPSCs (500.000 hiPSCs per μ-dish; #83256; Ibidi) were washed with PBS, fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde (Agar; #AGR1026) in PBS for 10 min at RT, permeabilised with 0.2 % Triton X-100 (Roth, Germany, 3051.3) for 5 min at RT. Non-specific binding sites were blocked with 5 % normal goat serum. HiPSCs were stained with anti-Nanog (10 μg/ml; polyclonal goat IgG; #AF1997; Biotechne), anti-Oct-3/4 (10 μg/ml; polyclonal goat IgG; #AF1759; Biotechne), anti-HIF1α (1:100; polyclonal rabbit IgG; #PA116601; Invitrogen), anti-hydroxy (Pro564) HIF1α (1:100; rabbit IgG; #D43B5; Cell Signaling Technology) as well as phalloidin (1:1000; #A22283; Invitrogen) for the actin-cytoskeleton and 4′,6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole (DAPI, 1:100, Sigma, Germany, D9542) for the nuclei. For staining mitochondria, hiPSCs were incubated for 30 min with 250 nM of the mitochondrial localization probe MitoSpy™ Orange (Biolegend) following the manufacturer's instructions in their respective culture medium at 37 °C in the hyperoxic (20 % O2) or physioxic (5 % O2) incubator. Subsequently, cells were washed with PBS and fixed with RotiHistofix for 20 min at RT. Subsequently, hiPSCs were permeabilised with 0.2 % Triton X-100 (Roth, Germany, 3051.3) for 5 min at RT, were washed three times with PBS for 5 min each and then incubated with DAPI (1:100, Sigma, Germany, D9542) at RT for 3 h. After incubation, hiPSCs were washed three times with PBS and mounted with coverslips. For confocal microscopy, the Zeiss LSM 800 airyscan confocal microscope and for image analysis the Zeiss Zen software was used. To visualize the mitochondria network, thresholding of the MitoSpy images was performed using the default 2D threshold values of the Mitochondria Analyzer plugin in ImageJ.
Analysis of mitochondrial membrane potential
The mitochondrial membrane potential was analyzed using the mitochondrial membrane potential-sensitive dye tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (Thermo Fisher; TMRM; 2.5 nM). To normalize to mitochondrial content, hiPSCs were stained with MitoTrackerGreen (Thermo Fisher; 200 nM, 1 h). For that purpose, 5 × 105 hyperoxic or physioxic cultured hiPSCs were plated on gelatine-coated 24 mm glass coverslips (A. Hartenstein, 1001/24) and cultured overnight under hyperoxic (20 % O2) or physioxic (5 % O2) conditions. The cells were then cultured in FTDA (supplemented with FGF, TMRM and MitoTrackerGreen) for 1 h at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 and their respective oxygen concentration. Afterwards, the medium was changed to FTDA that was only supplemented with FGF and TMRM. Measurements were performed on a Zeiss LSM 800 airyscan confocal microscope at basal conditions. TMRM was excited at 561 nm and emission assessed between 580 and 700 nm. MitoTrackerGreen was excited at 488 nm and emission assessed between 500 and 530 nm. The images were processed using ImageJ (version 1.54g). Mean intensity values of TMRM fluorescence (corrected for background) were normalised to mean intensity value of MitoTrackerGreen fluorescence (corrected for background) per image to correct for mitochondrial content. The data derive from n = 5 biological replicates that were normalised to mean values of the basal condition of hyperoxic hiPSCs.
Mitochondrial respiration and oxygen consumption
Cell oxygen consumption rates were measured using the high resolution oxygraph O2k (Oroboros Instruments GmbH, Innsbruck, Austria) under atmospheric oxygen conditions. For respiration measurements in intact cells, we used the predefined protocol SUIT3-003_O2_ce_D012 included in the DatLab software accompanying the instrument (v7.4.0.4; Oroboros Instruments GmbH, Innsbruck, Austria). Measurements were performed at 37 °C. Cells (7.5 × 105 cells/ml) were resuspended in MiR05 buffer (purchased from Oroboros Instruments GmbH containing 20 mM HEPES pH 7.1, 0.5 mM EGTA, 3 mM MgCl2, 60 mM K+-lactobionate, 20 mM taurine, 10 mM KH2PO4, 110 mM d-sucrose and supplemented with 0.1 % (m/v) fatty acid-free BSA) and added to the oxygraph chambers. The experiments took place by successively adding the following compounds: 5 mM pyruvate, 5 nM oligomycin, carbonyl cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP) in sequential steps of 0.5 μM until a maximal stable respiration signal was reached, and finally 0.5 μM rotenone. Data were exported and analyzed using the analysis template DL7.4 provided by the manufacturer. Further analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism v6. The presented data were corrected for residual (background) oxygen consumption after treatment with rotenone.
Blue-native electrophoresis (BNE)
HiPSCs from both culture conditions were pelleted and dry-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Pellets were homogenised in a pre-chilled motor-driven glass/Teflon Potter-Elvehjem homogeniser at 2000 rpm and 40 strokes. Homogenates were then centrifuged for 15 min at 600 g to remove nuclei, cell debris, and intact cells. Mitochondrial membranes were sedimented by centrifugation for 15 min at 22000 g. Mitochondrial-enriched pellets from 20 mg cells (wet weight) were resuspended in 35 μl solubilisation buffer (50 mM imidazole pH 7, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM aminocaproic acid) and solubilised with 10 μl 20 % (m/v) digitonin (Serva, Heidelberg). Samples were supplemented with 2.5 μl 5 % Coomassie G250 in 500 mM aminocaproic acid and 5 μl 0.1 % Ponceau S in 50 % glycerol. Equal protein amounts of samples were loaded on top of a 3–18 % acrylamide gradient gel (dimension 14 × 14 cm). After electrophoresis in a cold chamber, blue-native gels were fixed in 50 % (v/v) methanol, 10 % (v/v) acetic acid, 10 mM ammonium acetate for 30 min and stained with Coomassie stain (0.025 % Serva Blue G, 10 % (v/v) acetic acid). Densitometry was performed using the GelQuantNET software provided by biochemlabsolutions.com.
Statistics
All experiments were repeated at least three times with three technical replicates each, if not stated differently in the figure legends. The data was processed using ImageJ, Excel 2010, Sigma Plot 8.0, GraphPad InStat version 3.05 and GraphPad Prism 6.0. In order to analyse significant differences, a paired t-test was used if two groups were compared with each other or one-way ANOVA was performed if more than two groups were compared with each other or to the respective control. This was followed by Tukey's post-hoc test. The data are represented as mean ± standard error mean (SEM). Significant differences are indicated as ∗/# = p < 0.05, ∗∗/## = p < 0.01 und ∗∗∗/### = p < 0.001, #### = p<0.0001.

RESULTS:
Results
To generate hiPSC-lines of unrelated human donors (n = 52), dermal skin fibroblasts were reprogrammed into hiPSCs using Sendai virus-encoded reprogramming factors hOct-3/4, hSox2, hKlf4 and c-Myc (CytoTune-iPS Sendai Reprogramming Kit, #A1377801, Life Technologies, USA). After completion of the reprogramming procedure, at passage 5–10, the obtained hiPSC-lines were concomitantly cultured either permanently under hyperoxic (20 % O2; n = 28) or physioxic (5 % O2; n = 52) cell culture conditions (Fig. 1A). Between passage 18–30, master cell banks (MCB) for all hiPSC-lines from both conditions were generated and karyotype integrity was confirmed by Giemsa-banding (Fig. 1B).
Surprisingly, analysis of the karyotypes revealed that only approximately 50 % of hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic conditions had a normal karyotype with 46 chromosomes, while 32 % exhibited a mosaic-like karyotype and 18 % showed chromosomal aberrations (Fig. 1C). In case of chromosomal aberrations, all abnormal hyperoxic hiPSCs showed a partial trisomy of chromosome 1 and a translocation of this part to chromosome 15, leading to an extended chromosome 15. A mosaic-like karyotype indicates a mixture of cells with normal and abnormal metaphases. In comparison, 69 % of the hiPSCs that were cultured under physioxic conditions exhibited a normal karyotype and the remainder showed either an aberrant mosaic-like karyotype or non-mosaic chromosomal aberrations, suggesting that hiPSCs cultured under physioxic conditions displayed more often a normal karyotype than hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic conditions. There was a significantly higher propensity in the abundance of abnormal karyotypes in hyperoxic versus physioxic cultured hiPSCs (50 % vs. 31 %; 32 % vs. 6 % mosaic-like karyotypes). The extent of chromosomal abnormalities did not depend on the passage number, which did not differ between the two culture conditions (Fig. 1E). In addition, no overt morphological differences were observed (Fig. 1D).
To investigate whether hiPSC culture under hyperoxic conditions affects pluripotency, the percentage of hiPSCs that are positive for the pluripotency-associated surface glycosphingolipid Stage Specific Embryonic Antigen 3 (SSEA3) was quantified by flow cytometry. Percent of SSEA3-positive hiPSCs were significantly higher in physioxic than hyperoxic hiPSCs, indicating superior preservation of pluripotency in physioxic cultured hiPSCs (Fig. 1F). Expression of the transcription factors/stemness markers Nanog and Oct-3/4 were detectable in the nucleus of hiPSCs, with no overt difference between culture conditions as evidenced by immunofluorescence (Supplementary Figs. 1A and B). The difference in SSEA3 by FACS was paralleled by higher proliferation rate of physioxic hiPSCs (Fig. 1G) and significantly higher glucose consumption and lactate production (Fig. 1H) in physioxia. A hallmark of cellular hypoxia is the induction of the hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1α) pathway by stabilization of HIF1α protein. To validate that the physioxic culture condition promotes the HIF1α pathway, western immunoblot analysis was performed on physioxic- and hyperoxic-cultured hiPSC homogenates. This revealed a significantly higher HIF1α protein abundance in physioxic compared to hyperoxic hiPSCs (Fig. 1I and J).
The global proteome was analyzed to investigate whether potential alterations could aid to explain the differences in pluripotency in hiPSCs cultured under diverging oxidant tensions. The principal component analysis (Supplementary Fig. 2A) revealed that physioxic and hyperoxic hiPSC samples (n = 4 per group; red dots: physioxia; blue dots: hyperoxia) clustered separately along the projected plane, indicating that hiPSCs cultured under different oxygen tensions differed substantially regarding their protein composition. In total, 81 proteins were significantly higher and 660 were lower abundant in physioxic versus hyperoxic hiPSCs (Fig. 2A, volcano plot). The top 10 differentially most or least abundant proteins between hiPSCs cultured in physioxic versus hyperoxic conditions are summarized in a heat map (Fig. 2B). Pathway analysis revealed enrichment of the HIF1α signaling pathway, reduction in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system, mitochondrial complex I assembly and cellular senescence in physioxic versus hyperoxic hiPSCs (Fig. 2A, B, C; Supplementary Fig. 2B). Gene ontology enrichment analysis of the terms for molecular functions suggested downregulation of mitochondrial function, in particular of NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) complex I activity under physioxic conditions (Supplementary Fig. 2C). In the context of OXPHOS, many subunits of the respiratory chain complexes (complex I, III, IV) showed reduced abundance under physioxic conditions (Fig. 2A, colored dots: complex I (yellow), complex II (orange), complex III (pink) and complex IV (green)). The components of ATP synthase (complex V) appeared unchanged (Fig. 2A, turquoise spots). However, the identified subunits of complex II showed significantly higher levels of succinate dehydrogenase complex flavoprotein A (SDHA), indicating that the subunit for the first assembly step of complex II is not limiting under physioxic conditions. Interestingly, some assembly and homeostasis factors (Cox20, NDUFAF3 and HIGD1A) showed significantly increased levels in physioxic cultures. HIGD1A is a member of the hypoglycaemia/hypoxia-inducible gene domain (HIGD) family and plays a role in cytochrome c oxidase assembly. It can also be found as a stoichiometric interactor to positively modulate cytochrome c oxidase activity.
Among the lower abundant proteins in physioxic conditions was also insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), a protein that has been previously associated with cellular senescence.To validate the proteomic data and to investigate whether senescence factors acting in a paracrine fashion are released, we initially analyzed senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-Gal) activity in hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic versus physioxic conditions. Here, hiPSCs were cultured at 5 % O2 (physioxia) or 20 % O2 (hyperoxia) two weeks prior to performing the experiment (Fig. 2D and E). The culture medium was exchanged for fresh medium, and cells were then incubated at their appropriate oxygen concentration for 12 h. The preconditioned medium was collected and added for 24 h to the respective other cell culture condition to investigate a potential impact of pro-senescent factors on hiPSC-senescence. Media were then collected, and the entire procedure was repeated again. Subsequently, SA-β-Gal activity was assessed using 5-Bromo-4-chloro-3-indoxyl-β-d-galactopyranoside (X-gal), which is hydrolyzed by SA-β-Gal and thereby producing a detectable and quantifiable blue color in senescent cells (Fig. 2E).
In comparison to hiPSCs cultured under physioxic conditions (physioxia/physioxic medium; green dots, green patterned bars), significantly enhanced X-gal staining was detectable in hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic conditions (hyperoxia/hyperoxic medium; black dots, open bars; Fig. 2F) reflecting significantly enhanced cellular senescence. Moreover, SA-β-Gal staining was significantly increased in physioxic hiPSC cultures that were treated with medium from hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic conditions (physioxia/hyperoxic medium; green dots, open bars), confirming paracrine transmission of senescence (Fig. 2F). In comparison, SA-β-Gal activity in hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic conditions with incubation in physioxic medium (hyperoxia/physioxic medium; black dots, green patterned bar) did not differ to senescence detected in hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic conditions (hyperoxia/hyperoxic medium; green dots, open bars), suggesting that senescence cannot be reversed.
To investigate the content of IGFBP3 in hiPSC media, an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for IGFBP3 was performed using the endpoint media from the previous experiment. This revealed significantly higher IGFBP3 concentrations in hyperoxic medium (black dots, open bars) compared to physioxic medium (green dots, patterned bar; Fig. 2G), a result confirming the proteomic data. Hyperoxic-conditioned medium moderately increased IGFBP3 levels in physioxic cells (green dots, open bars) and physioxic-conditioned medium moderately lowered IGFBP3 levels in hyperoxic cells (black dots, patterned bars) that corroborates the observations from Fig. 2F.
Since the unbiased enrichment analysis revealed not only association of hyperoxia with cellular senescence, but also with OXPHOS, glucose and lactate levels were assessed in the collected media. Consumed glucose and produced lactate levels were significantly higher in the culture supernatant of hiPSCs cultured under physioxic conditions than hyperoxic conditions even when hyperoxic-conditioned medium derived from hyperoxic hiPSC culture was added to physioxic hiPSCs at time-point 36 h, 48 h and 72 h (Fig. 1H; Supplementary Figs. 3A and B). This suggests that physioxic metabolism relies more on glucose and this might also impact the senescence phenotype observed in hiPSCs maintained under hyperoxic conditions.
To investigate transcriptome-wide differences between hiPSCs cultured under these conditions, we performed total RNA sequencing from hiPSCs (Fig. 3A; Supplementary Fig. 4A; n = 3 per condition). Overrepresented pathways in physioxic hiPSCs indicated by the BIOCARTA pathways dataset and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) revealed among others HIF1A signaling in the cardiovascular system, glycolysis and gluconeogenesis and metabolism (Supplementary Fig. 4B), which is in accordance with the data obtained from the above-mentioned proteomic and immunoblot analysis. To investigate the implication of transcriptional remodeling in this response, we profiled genome-wide chromatin accessibility using ATAC-seq. The analysis of transcription factor footprints showed strong binding enrichment predicting increased chromatin-occupancy of several transcription factor families under physioxic conditions, including HIF1A, FOS/JUN, POU2/3, MAFG, MFE2L1, RFX2, FOXH1 previously associated with the physioxic response (Supplementary Fig. 5A and B). In contrast, a number of transcription factors active in hiPSCs under hyperoxic conditions such as TFAP2, THAP1, HIC2 and NFKB displayed a high sensitivity and appeared to loose chromatin-binding with physioxia, consistent with previous findings and confirming the implication of diverging transcriptional mechanisms in the cellular response to physioxia. Among the most significantly differentially expressed genes in physioxic-cultured hiPSCs, we observed a significant upregulation of transcript levels encoding the hypoxia-inducible nuclear-encoded mitochondrial protein NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex, 4-like 2 (NDUFA4L2). NDUFA4L2 is a mitochondrial protein that was suggested to inhibit complex I activity and to control the rate of OXPHOS, functioning as an off-switch. Thereby, it limits the production of reactive oxygen species and confers chromatin stability. The significant increase in NDUFA4L2 transcript levels in physioxic versus hyperoxic hiPSCs was validated by subsequent RT-qPCR analysis. NDUFA4, a paralog of NDUFA4L2 is a subunit of complex IV, important for complex IV maintenance. Its mRNA levels remained unchanged in the differentially cultured hiPSCs (Fig. 3B). ATAC-sequencing of hiPSCs cultured under physioxia (n = 3) or hyperoxia (n = 3) revealed extensive remodeling, generating accessible chromatin at the NDUFA4L2 promoter and gene body under physioxic conditions (Fig. 3C), suggesting a robust local transcriptional activation in response to physioxia. In contrast, we did not observe differences in chromatin accessibility for HIF1A or NDUFA4 (Fig. 3D and E).
To further investigate potential differences in the composition and abundance of OXPHOS complexes identified in the transcriptomics and proteomics study, mitochondria were isolated from hiPSCs from both conditions and subjected to blue-native electrophoresis (BNE; Fig. 4A, Supplementary Fig. 6). In mitochondria from three independent hiPSC preparations, bands representing the different OXPHOS complexes were identified according to their expected molecular masses by comparison to the well-known OXPHOS complexes isolated from bovine heart mitochondria (BHM; Supplementary Fig. 6). Each condition was analyzed by mass spectrometry-based complexome profiling covering a mass range between 10 kDa and 10 MDa (Fig. 4C). The resulting complexome profiles (Fig. 4) evidenced co-migration of the majority of subunits of mitochondrial complexes I (yellow), II (orange), III (red), IV (green) and V (blue) in hiPSCs under hyperoxic (left panel) and physioxic (right panel) conditions.
The complex I panel showed that the identified subunits were most abundant in the 1.5–2 MDa range. Complex III and IV subunits were also identified in the same high molecular mass region within the native gel. It is well known that individual human complex I of about 1 MDa is barely present in free form since it is mostly incorporated into supercomplexes together with complexes III and IV. In physioxic hiPSCs, the supercomplex S1 (I + III∗+IV) was identified at significantly lower abundance. This is particularly evident in the 2D plots compared to hyperoxic conditions (Fig. 5A). On the other hand, complex III appeared to be more abundant as an individual complex in physioxia, suggesting that complex I is the limiting entity for the formation of supercomplexes. In addition, individual complex IV was less abundant, although a small supercomplex (Ss) containing complex III and complex IV appeared to be assembled in comparable amounts.
Since NDUFA4L2 was strongly upregulated in physioxia, we examined this protein in the complexome profiles. The paralog NDUFA4 was identified in the high molecular mass region co-migrating with subunits of complex IV and the supramolecular assemblies Ss and S1, as well as a single protein migrating near the electrophoretic front in both conditions (Fig. 5B). NDUFA4L2 was found to likely interact with the small supercomplex Ss and in other fractions in the range of 30–100 kDa under hyperoxic conditions, but not in the single complex IV (Fig. 5B, left panel). However, the ratio of NDUFA4L2 to NDUFA4 was very low in hyperoxia (Fig. 5B, pie chart). The ratio increased to 4.5 % in physioxia, where NDUFA4L2 was not identified in high molecular mass complexes, but rather appeared as a single protein or in low mass fractions at ∼50 kDa. The behavior of NDUFA4L2 as a putative alternative subunit of complex IV changed drastically in hyperoxia to that of a protein interacting with other unknown binding partners.
Inspecting the migration pattern of OXPHOS subunits and other related interactors, the ATPase inhibitor factor 1 of complex V, ATP51F1 caught our attention. An apparent differential interaction of ATP5IF1 (IF1) with the complex V monomer was observed (Fig. 5C). Binding of IF1 to complex V inhibits its ATP hydrolysis activity. However, this interaction does not affect the ATP synthase activity; thereby ATP can still be synthesized in its presence. Under situations where a sufficient membrane potential cannot be generated by the respiratory chain, ATP molecules can be hydrolyzed by complex V to translocate protons from the matrix to the transmembrane space thus reestablishing the proton gradient. This scenario is only possible if IF1 does not interact with complex V. In hyperoxic hiPSCs, IF1 was identified bound to complex V and present between 10 and 30 kDa (Fig. 5C; blue arrow left). Interestingly, in physioxia, IF1 was only identified at 20–30 kDa in our complexome dataset, which possibly represents monomeric and dimeric arrangements (Fig. 5C; black arrow right). The total amount of IF1 also increased notably (3.9 fold) under physioxic conditions. Accordingly, modulation of the activity of complex V by IF1 seems to be different in hiPSCs under hyperoxic versus physioxic conditions.
Mitochondrial DNA content did not differ between culture conditions (Fig. 6A). Analysis of the mitochondrial membrane potential (mtMP; Fig. 6B) in physioxic versus hyperoxic hiPSCs was performed by calculating the ratio between tetramethylrhodamine methyl ester (TMRM) to MitoTracker fluorescence, which was employed as a loading control. Baseline measurements showed a significant lower mtMP in physioxic compared to hyperoxic hiPSCs, which supports our data that physioxia suppresses complex I and  abundance, resulting in a lower, less polarized, mtMP. Immunofluorescence staining of hiPSC mitochondria by MitoSpy revealed a dense structure of interdigitating mitochondria as visible on the threshold image. This pattern of intertwined organelles was less detectable in physioxic hiPSCs (Fig. 6C, Threshold Images (TI)). Mitochondrial respiration was assessed by high resolution respirometry in intact hiPSCs cultured previously under physioxic (green) or hyperoxic (black) conditions by measuring the oxygen flux with an O2k oxygraph. Results were normalised to hiPSC number per chamber and expressed per million cells and corrected for residual oxygen consumption (ROX) after treatment of hiPSCs with rotenone. Oxygen flux at the routine respiration state (R′), which also reflects the phosphorylating respiratory rate, was assessed after supplementation with the respiratory fuel substrate pyruvate. This showed that routine respiration was higher in hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic versus physioxic conditions (Fig. 6D and E). A similar observation was made for the non-phosphorylating leak respiration (L′), which was measured following inhibition of the mitochondrial ATP synthase with oligomycin. Furthermore, treatment with the uncoupler carbonyl cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP) showed that hiPSCs cultured under hyperoxic conditions displayed significantly higher electron transfer capacity (E') than under physioxia (Fig. 6D and E). The majority of HIF1α in physioxic hiPSCs was detected in the nucleus, with in contrast weaker staining distributed uniformly throughout the hyperoxic hiPSCs (Fig. 6F, white arrows). This supports our HIF1α protein expression data in Fig. 1I and J. Albeit no difference in the hydroxylation state of HIF1α at proline 564 was detectable between hyperoxic and physioxic hiPSCs (Fig. 6G). Taken together, these results show that hyperoxia promotes mitochondrial respiration and energy production at the expense of cellular senescence. Physioxic hiPSCs rewire their mitochondrial protein composition with enhanced HIF1α-regulated NDUFA4L2 protein abundance associated with downregulation of complex I, thus protecting pluripotency, chromosomal integrity and vitality.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
In the past decade, human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) technology has become an important tool for studying patho-/physiological molecular mechanisms on a human genetic background. HiPSCs allow the differentiation into various cell types and their functional assessment in 2-dimensional (2D) or 3-dimensional (3D) culture formats. Their embryonic-like pluripotent state enables the development of multiple types of human cells that can also be used for therapeutic purposes.
Substantial attention has been attributed to optimize differentiation protocols and to decipher appropriate cell culture conditions regarding medium composition, supplementation with nutrients, growth factors and pH-buffering compounds to achieve efficient propagation and viability of hiPSCs in vitro. Less attention was attributed to oxygen concentrations present in culture media, as ambient air was presumed acceptable for the viability of cells. However, recapitulating stem cell niche oxygen levels in cell culture experiments might better represent the in vivo situation and allow translation of in vitro observations.
Intrauterine investigations of developing rat embryos revealed much lower oxygen tensions in tissues comprising resident stem cells. In tissues that constitute the physiological normoxic niche, oxygen concentrations amounted to 2–9% (14.4–64.8 mm Hg). In hypoxic niches harboring stem cells, such as for example the bone marrow, the thymus or kidney medulla, an oxygen concentration of ≤1 % (7.2 mm Hg) or less was detected. Analysis of the partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) in the bone marrow of five healthy human donors revealed a mean pO2 value of 54.9 mmHg, suggesting the existence of tissue-specific stem cell niches with physiological oxygen levels ranging between 1 % and 6 %.
Since early embryogenesis occurs in an oxygen-deprived environment, the question emerged whether such an environment would be better suited as stem cell niche in cell culture. Indeed, it was shown that pre-adipocytes cultured under physioxic conditions remained in an undifferentiated state without impacting their differentiation potential, suggesting that low oxygen concentrations are crucial to maintaining the undifferentiated pluripotent stem cell phenotype. Additionally, culture of human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) under physioxia (5 % O2) for 5 days led to enhanced mRNA levels of the pluripotency markers Oct-4 and c-Myc, increased proliferation rate and revealed a high percentage of S-phase cells compared to hyperoxic culture. In accordance, low expression of immune-related markers, increased levels of the oxygen-sensing marker hypoxia-inducible factor 1-α (HIF1α), and reduced senescence was observed in physioxic-cultured MSCs compared to their hyperoxic-cultured counterparts.
Cellular senescence accelerates organism aging and involves a permanent state of cell cycle arrest. Under controlled conditions, cellular senescence induces tissue remodeling during development or after injury. Excessive accumulation of senescent cells in form of replicative senescence negatively affects the cells regenerative potential, ultimately leading to the development of age-related diseases such as cancer. Replicative senescence can occur after DNA damage, by activation of oncogenes, during conditions of enhanced oxidative stress, in the presence of mitochondrial dysfunction, or induced by paracrine factors termed as the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP).
Besides cellular senescence induction under hyperoxia (20 % O2), increased mutation frequency, including primarily genome rearrangements, was reported in hyperoxic-cultured mouse embryonic fibroblasts isolated from lacZ mice, when compared to primary cultures. In contrast, physioxic culture (3 % O2) neither induced cellular senescence nor altered mutation frequency.
As oxygen tension during standard cell culture conditions differs from the optimal niche microenvironment and has been shown to impact stem cell proliferation ability, stemness potential, cell cycle and mutation frequency in different stem cell types, we aimed on performing a systematic analysis to investigate the impact of oxygen on genomic and proteomic aberrations in hiPSCs. Even though hypoxia in the stem cell niche of living organisms is defined as ≤1 % O2 or less and normoxia as 2–9% O2, we focused on commonly as suitable perceived stem cell culture conditions. In this manuscript, the term physioxia refers to hiPSC culture at 5 % O2 and hyperoxia refers to atmospheric oxygen levels (approximately 20 % O2).

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2024.103352.