PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver; Lung; Kidney; Heart
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetic acid derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Proteomics; Multi-omics; Tissue specificity; Egf; Mapk; Phosphoproteomics; Egfr

ABSTRACT:
Epidermal growth factor receptor (Egfr)-driven signaling regulates fundamental homeostatic processes. Dysregulated signaling via Egfr is implicated in numerous disease pathologies and distinct Egfr-associated disease etiologies are known to be tissue-specific. The molecular basis of this tissue specificity remains poorly understood. Most studies of Egfr signaling to date have been performed in vitro or in tissue-specific mouse models of disease, which has limited insight into Egfr signaling patterns in healthy tissues. Here, we carried out integrated phosphoproteomic, proteomic, and transcriptomic analyses of signaling changes across various mouse tissues in response to short-term stimulation with the Egfr ligand Egf. We show how both baseline and Egf-stimulated signaling behaviors differ between tissues. Moreover, we propose how baseline phosphorylation and total protein levels may be associated with clinically relevant tissue-specific Egfr-associated phenotypes. Altogether, our analyses illustrate tissue-specific effects of Egf stimulation and highlight potential links between underlying tissue biology and Egfr signaling output.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The network response to Egf is tissue-specific

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Briefly, tissues were pulverized in liquid nitrogen and lysed with a needle/syringe in 8M urea 200mM EPPS (MilliporeSigma #E9502) buffer (pH 8.5) with protease and phosphatase inhibitors (1X – 2X cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (MilliporeSigma #11873580001), 1X – 2X Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (MilliporeSigma #P5726), and 1X – 2X Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (MilliporeSigma #P0044)). Lysed tissues were pelleted at 4C at 14,000 rpm and the supernatant was isolated for subsequent steps. A Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific #A55864) was used to determine protein concentration according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were adjusted to 1 mg/mL and 200 µg of protein were reduced with 5mM TCEP (Thermo Fisher Scientific #77720) for 15 minutes and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific # A39271) for 30 minutes. Quenching was performed with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Thermo Fisher Scientific #R0861) for 15 minutes. The reduced and alkylated protein was precipitated with methanol/chloroform (4 methanol (MilliporeSigma #MX0486) : 1 chloroform (MilliporeSigma #C2432) : 3 water (Thermo Fisher Scientific # W61)) and reconstituted in 200 µL of 200mM EPPS (MilliporeSigma #E9502) buffer (pH 8.5). Proteins were digested overnight with LysC protease (Thermo Fisher Scientific #NC9242798) at room temperature (1:50 LysC-to-peptide ratio) and with trypsin protease (Thermo Fisher Scientific #90059) for 6h the next day at 37C (1:100 trypsin-to-peptide ratio). Following trypsin digest, 30 µL of anhydrous acetonitrile (Honeywell Burdick & Jackson AS017-0100) were added for every 100 µL digest and 200 µg peptide were labeled with 400 µg TMT using TMTpro16plex Isobaric Labels (Thermo Fisher Scientific #A44520). Quenching of the labeling reaction was achieved by addition of 50% hydroxylamine (Thermo Fisher Scientific #90115) to a final concentration of 0.5%. To confirm complete labeling and evaluate mixing ratios, 2 µL of each sample was pooled, desalted, and analyzed by mass spectrometry prior to quenching. This “ratio check” was used to calculate normalization factors and samples were mixed at 1:1 ratios across all TMT channels. The combined samples were desalted with a 200mg Sep-Pak solid phase extraction column (Waters #WAT054945) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Phosphopeptides were enriched from the labeled sample using the High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific #A32992). The only deviations from the manufacturer’s protocol were that we added formic acid to all samples prior to phosphopeptide enrichment to decrease the pH to ~2 (with the exception of multi-tissue plex “Round 2”, to which no acid was added) and that for all sample we prepared an “elution collection tube” with 20 µL of 100% formic acid (Thermo Fisher #85178), into which the eluates were eluted. The combined eluate was vacuum centrifuged to near dryness and desalted via StageTip. StageTip Empore-C18 material was purchased from 3M, St. Paul, MN (#14-386-2). Fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and combined into 12 fractions that were desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS analysis to serve as the total proteome corresponding to each phosphoproteome.

DATA PROCESSING:
Database searching included all entries from the mouse UniProt reference Database (downloaded: August 2021). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. For TMT experiments, TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini +304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. In addition, deamidation (+0.984 Da) at glutamine and asparagine residues and phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were also set as variable modifications for phosphopeptide enrichment. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. Phosphosites with an AScore of >13 (95% confidence) were considered localized. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to account for equal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equals 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement. For phosphopeptides, the RA measurement was calculated at the peptide level.