PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Hela cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: TMT
keywords: Er stress; Translation; Proteomics; Oxidative stress

ABSTRACT:
Stress due to protein misfolding in the endoplasmic reticulum affects transcription and translation, RNA and protein degradation. By integrating several large-scale datasets, we quantified transcription, translation, RNA-protein binding events, and protein levels for several thousands of genes in HeLa cells. Here, we deposit the TMT-based, quantitative proteomics data consisting of two replicates with four measured time points collected for two stress treatments, i.e. tunicamycin and hydrogen peroxide.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mammalian proteome changes during oxidative stress and stress of the endoplasmic reticulum

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The cell pellets were collected for each sample and resuspended in 50 µl ice-cold PBS containing 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail. The cells were then sonicated with probe sonicator 2 x 30 seconds with amplitude 5. The samples were returned to ice for 30 seconds between sonication intervals. Then the samples were mixed with 50 µl trifluoroethanol (TFE) and the mixtures were kept at 60 °C for 1 h. Then the samples were reduced in 15 mM DTT at 55 °C for 45 min, and alkylated in 55mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Finally, 50 mM Tris (pH=8) was used to adjust the sample value to 1 ml, and 1 µg MS level trypsin was added to digest the proteins into peptides at 37 °C overnight. Peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher) and 30 µg peptide per time point was subjected to TMT labeling. TMT 10-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (0.8 mg/40 µl) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. 30µg/100µl peptide per sample labeled with 41 µl of the TMT 10-plex label reagent at final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 h, the reactions were quenched with 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. All the samples were combined in a new microcentrifuge tube at equal amounts and dried down to remove acetonitrile prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.  TMT-labeled tryptic peptides were subjected to high-pH reversed-phase HPLC fractionation using an Agilent 1200 Infinity Series with a phenomenex Kinetex 5u EVO C18 100A column (100 mm x 2.1 mm, 5mm particle size). Mobile phase A was 20mM ammonium formate, and B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% 20mM ammonium formate. Both were adjusted to pH 10. Peptides were resolved using a linear 120 min 0-40% acetonitrile gradient at a 100µl/min flow rate. Eluting peptides were collected in 2 min fractions. About 70 fractions covering the peptide-rich region were re-combined to give 40 samples for analysis. To preserve orthogonality, fractions were combined across the gradient, i.e. each of the concatenated samples comprising fractions which were 40 fractions apart. Re-combined fractions were dried down using an Eppendorf Concentrator vacufuge plus, desalted with C18 stage-tip, and suspended in 95% MS degree water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid for low pH LC-MS analysis.     While we collected three replicates in total, proteomics data was collected for replicates 1 and 3 only, with some samples for replicate 2. Replicate 1:  A Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 coupled on-line to a Q Exactive spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) were used as mobile phases for gradient separation. An EASY Spray 50cm x 75µm ID PepMap C18 analytical HPLC column with 2μm bead size was used for peptide separations using the auto sampler of an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC (ThermoFisher). Peptides were separated a 110 minute linear gradient from 5%  to 23% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid),  followed by 20 minutes  from  23% to 56% solvent B, and 10 minutes from 56% to 100% solvent B. Solvent B was held at 100% for another 10 minutes. High resolution full MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, an AGC target of 1e6, with a maximum ion time of 120 ms, and scan range of 400 to 1500 m/z.  Following each full MS scan ten data-dependent high resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired (with a mass window of 100-2,000 m/z).  All MS/MS spectra were collected using the following instrument parameters: resolution of 35,000, AGC target of 1e5, maximum ion time of 250 ms, one microscan, 1.5 m/z isolation window, fixed first mass of 115 m/z, and NCE of 30.     Replicate 3:  A Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 coupled on-line to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used. Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80 % ACN) were used as mobile phases for gradient separation. A 75 µm x 15 cm chromatography column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, German) was packed in-house for peptides separation. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5–40% buffer B over 110 min, 40%-100% B over 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a range of 300-1500 m/z with resolution 120,000 at m/z 200. The top 15 most abundant precursors were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 Thomsons and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy of 40. MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with resolution 30,000 (with a mass window of 100-2,000 m/z). The automatic gain control target value was 1e6 for full scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans respectively, and the maximum ion injection time is 60 ms for both.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw spectra were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.5.1 with its integrated search engine Andromeda. Data was searched against Human (Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.75.pep.all.fa) sequence file downloaded from the ENSEMBL database. All sample fractions of two individual sets were grouped by setting up experimental design parameters in Maxquant. The mass tolerance of MS/MS spectra were set to 20 ppm with a posterior global FDR of 1% based on the reverse sequence of the human FASTA file. In addition, MS/MS data were searched by Andromeda for potential common mass spectrometry contaminants. Trypsin/P specificity was used to perform database searches, allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and 10-plex TMT modifications on Lys and N-terminal amines were considered as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and N- terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. TMT quantification was performed at MS2 level with default mass tolerance and other parameters.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell culture and treatment
All samples for the total RNA, ribosome footprinting, protein occupancy profiling, and proteomics were derived from cells grown in parallel, arising from the same passage number. Cells were split just before the experiment and grown in parallel under identical conditions. Due to required protocols, we then prepared the samples for the total RNA-seq and ribosome profiling together, while the samples for the protein occupancy profiling and proteomics were processed separately. Biological replicates were collected independently on different days.
We grew Hela cells under standard condition,that is in DMEM (Sigma) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Atlanta biologicals) and 1X penicillin streptomycin solution (Corning cellgro) at 37°C and 5% CO2. At ~60% confluency, we treated the cells with 60 μM H2O2 or 0.5 μg/ml tunicamycin to induce oxidative and ER stress, respectively. We treated samples 8, 4, 1, and 0 hr prior to collection and therefore collected all samples at the same time with similar confluency. For protein occupancy profiling, we added 200 μM of 4-thiouridine at ten hours before the treatment to incorporate photoreactive ribonucleoside analog required for protein occupancy profiling. For ribosome footprinting, we added 0.1 mg/ml cycloheximide for 5 min at 37°C before the harvesting the cells.
We authenticated the cell line identity by STR profiling from Genetica DNA Laboratories. No mycoplasma contamination has been detected, as confirmed by mycoplasma contamination test using PlasmoTest kit (Invivogen) and ATCC universal mycoplasma detection kit (ATCC) separately.
Sample collection for total RNA and ribosome footprinting
All steps were performed according the the TruSeq Ribo Profile (Mammalian) kit protocol. Confluent plates of HeLa cells were first aspirated of their growth media and washed with fresh media supplemented with 0.1 mg/ml cycloheximide. The media was then removed and the cells were washed with 10 ml chilled phosphate buffer saline (PBS) containing 0.1 mg/ml cycloheximide. Following removal of the PBS, 800 μl of Lysis Buffer was added and the cells were extensively scraped off plate and transferred to a pre-chilled eppendorf tube, recovering ~1 ml of lysate per sample. To insure complete lysis, we passed the lysate through a 25 gauge needle and further incubated on ice for ~10 min. The lysate was then clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000, 4°C and ∼1 ml supernatant was recovered. For each treatment (tunicamycin and hydrogen peroxide), we aliquoted 100 μl of the cell lysate for total RNA extraction and 200 ul for ribosome footprinting.
Sample preparation
Total RNA profiling and ribosome footprinting
We used the TruSeq Ribo Profile (Mammalian) kit for both total RNA profiling and mapping of ribosome protected fragments (RPF). Briefly, for the total RNA samples, 100 μl aliquots of lysate were supplemented with 10 μl of 10% SDS and purified using a Zymo RNA Clean and Concentrator-25 Kits. For the RPF samples, we treated the cell lysate with 5 units of Truseq Ribo Profile Nuclease for each A260 of lysate and incubated for 45 mins at room temperature while agitating gently. We stopped reactions by adding SUPERase-In RNase inhibitor and placed the samples on ice. The nuclease-treated lysate (100 μl) was purified using Illustra Microspin S-400 columns as per instructions followed by addition of 10 μl of 10% SDS to the flow-through. The remaining 100 μl of the nuclease digested RNA was stored in −80C for future use. Samples were purified using Zymo RNA Clean and Concentrator-25 kits and separated by denaturing 15% Urea-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). We excised the desired size - corresponding to the ~28 – 30 nt range - using a dark field trans illuminator and purified according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
For library preparation, all samples were RiboZero treated and the total RNA samples were heat-fragmented at 94°C for 25 min according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Both the fragmented total RNA and RPF samples were then end-repaired and 3’ adapter ligated. Following adapter removal, the samples were reverse transcribed and the resulting cDNA was PAGE purified and circularized. We used one quarter of the circularized cDNA as a template for PCR amplification using Phusion (NEB) in a 50 μl volume using specific oligos (Truseq Riboprofile Forward PCR primer and Index PCR primer) and purified the samples with Agencount AMPure beads (Beckman Coulter). We purified the amplified libraries by using 8% Native PAGE and verified the final library size using the High Sensitivity DNA assay on the Agilent Bioanalyzer. We quantified samples using Qubit Fluorometric quantitation and sequenced them on a HiSeq 2500.
Protein occupancy profiling
After sample collection, cells were crosslinked with 365 nm UV light (0.2 J/cm2) on ice using a Stratalinker 2400 (Stratagene). We scraped crosslinked cells off the plates with a rubber policeman, collected by centrifugation, washed with ice-cold PBS once and flash-froze the samples in liquid nitrogen for long-term storage.
Protein occupancy profiling was carried out as described previously. Briefly, we resuspended cell pellets in lysis/binding buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 at 25°C, 500 mM LiCl, 10 mM EDTA pH 8.0 at 25°C, 1% LiDS, 5 mM DTT, Complete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche), incubated them at room temperature for 15 min for lysis and passed cells through a 21 gauge needle 10 times for shearing of genomic DNA. Lysates were incubated with oligo(dT) Dynabeads (Ambion) for 1 hr at room temperature on a rotating wheel. Following incubation, the beads were concentrated on a magnetic rack and the supernatant was stored on ice for further rounds poly(A)+-RNA depletion. We washed beads 3 times in lysis/binding buffer and 3 times in NP40 washing buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 at 25°C, 140 mM LiCl, 2 mM EDTA pH 8.0 at 25°C, 0.5% NP40, 0.5 mM DTT) and crosslinked poly(A)+-RNA-protein complexes were eluted in low-salt elution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl at at 25°C) by incubation at 80°C for 2 min.
The stored supernatants were re-incubated with beads for two additional rounds of poly(A)+-RNA depletion following the described procedure. Eluates from different rounds of poly(A)+-RNA depletion are combined, incubated with RNase I for 10 min at 37°C and precipitated with 4 volumes of ammonium sulfate. The resuspended precipitate was separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. RNA-protein complexes were on-membrane incubated with Proteinase K for 30 min at 55°C to release protein-protected RNA fragments. RNA was recovered with phenol-chloroform extraction and subjected to small RNA library cloning procedure. In short, RNA fragments generated by RNase I digestion were dephosphorylated with Calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (CIP), radiolabeled at the 5’ end with [γ-32P]-ATP in a T4 Polynucleotide kinase (PNK) reaction followed by ligation of a pre-adenylated 3’ adapter and a 5’ adapter and reverse transcription to generate the cDNA library. In order to identify the RNA population with the desired fragment size, radiolabeled RNA size markers (24 and 50 nt) were used as ligation controls. The cDNA libraries were processed and subjected to sequencing on HiSeq 2500 following standard protocol.
Proteomics analysis by mass spectrometry
For proteomics analysis, we resuspended cell pellets for each sample in 50 μl ice-cold PBS containing 1:100 protease inhibitor cocktail. The cells were then sonicated with probe sonicator 2 × 30 s with amplitude 5. The samples were returned to ice for 30 s between sonication intervals. After sonication, we mixed the samples with 50 μl trifluororethanol, and the mixtures were kept at 60°C for 1 hr. Then the samples were reduced in 15 mM DTT at 55°C for 45 min, and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 min. Finally, we used 50 mM Tris (pH = 8) to adjust the sample volume to 1 ml, and 1 ug mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) was added to digest the proteins into peptides at 37°C overnight.
We measured peptide concentrations with the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (ThermoFisher) kit a. Tandem mass tag (TMT) 10-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) were dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile (0.8 mg/40 μl) according to manufacturer’s instruction. We labeled 30 ug/100 μl peptide per sample labelled with 41 μl of the TMT 10-plex label reagent at final acetonitrile concentration of 30% (v/v). Following incubation at room temperature for 1 hr, we quenched the reactions with 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. All samples were combined in a new microcentrifuge tubes at equal amounts and reduced to remove acetonitrile using an Eppendorf Concentrator Vacufuge Plus.
TMT-labelled tryptic peptides were subjected to high-pH reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography fractionation using an Agilent 1200 Infinity Series with a phenomenex Kinetex 5 u EVO C18 100A column (100 mm x 2.1 mm, 5 mm particle size). Mobile phase A was 20 mM ammonium formate, and B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% 20 mM ammonium formate. Both buffers were adjusted to pH 10. Peptides were resolved using a linear 120 min 0 – 40% acetonitrile gradient at a 100 ul/min flow rate. Eluting peptides were collected in 2 min fractions. We combined about 70 fractions covering the peptide-rich region to obtain 40 samples for analysis. To preserve orthogonality, we combined fractions across the gradient, that is each of the concatenated samples comprising fractions which were 40 fractions apart. Re-combined fractions were reduced using an Eppendorf Concentrator Vacufuge Plus, desalted with C18 stage-tip, and suspended in 95% mass spectrometry grade water, 5% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid for subsequent low pH chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry analysis.
For the first replicate, we used an EASY-nLC 1200 coupled on-line to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) were used as mobile phases for gradient separation. A 75 µm x 15 cm chromatography column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, German) was packed in-house for peptides separation. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 5 – 40% buffer B over 110 min, 40 – 100% B over 10 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over a range of 300 – 1500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. The top 15 most abundant precursors were selected in data-dependent mode with an isolation window of 0.7 Thomsons and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy of 40. MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 30,000. The automatic gain control target value was 1e6 for full scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans respectively, and the maximum ion injection time is 60 ms for both.
For the second replicate, we used an EASY-nLC 1000 coupled on-line to a Q Exactive spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) were used as mobile phases for gradient separation. An EASY Spray 50 cm x 75 µm ID PepMap C18 analytical HPLC column with 2 μm bead size was used for peptide separation. We used a 110 min linear gradient from 5% to 23% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid), followed by 20 min from 23% to 56% solvent B, and 10 min from 56% to 100% solvent B. Solvent B was held at 100% for another 10 min. Full MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 70,000, an AGC target of 1e6, with a maximum ion time of 120 ms, and scan range of 400 to 1500 m/z. Following each full MS scan, data-dependent high resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 35,000, AGC target of 1e5, maximum ion time of 250 ms, one microscan, 1.5 m/z isolation window, fixed first mass of 115 m/z, and NCE of 30.
Measurement of reactive oxygen species
We used CM-H2DCFDA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following protocols in. Briefly, after tunicamycin or hydrogen peroxide treatment, we washed the cells with PBS and loaded with CM-H2DCFDA (10 μM) in Dulbecco’s PBS for 90 mins, trypsinized with 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA, resuspended in PBS with 10% fetal bovine serum, and analyzed using an BD Acuri (Becton Dickinson). Dyes were excited using a blue 488 nm laser, and emission was recorded on FL1 (514/20) for a minimum of 5,000 cells per sample. Small cellular debris was excluded by gating on a forward scatter plot.
Validation experiments
qRT-PCR
For qPCR, we followed manufacturer’s instructions unless noted otherwise. We isolated total RNA from Hela cells treated with tunicamycin using Trizol extraction (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and purified RNA with the RNAesay mini Kit (Qiagen). We then synthesized cDNA using the Super ScriptIII First Strand cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen, Life technologies). We estimated sXbp1 quantities by SYBR Green quantitative real-time PCR using Kapa Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Kapa biosystem) in a Roche Light Cycler 480 (Roche). All reactions were performed in triplicate. The expression of the spliced XBP1 was assessed by real time PCR (RT-PCR) in a Roche Light Cycler 480 (Roche) with KAPA universal SYBR green master mix. Relative gene expression was quantified using the ΔCT method with respective primers (sXBP1 forward 5′-TGCTGAGTCCGCAGCAGGTG-3′; reverse 5’-GCTGGCAGGCTCTGGGGAAG-3’) and normalized to RPL19 (forward 5'-ATGTATCACAGCCTGTACCTG-3'; reverse 5'-TTCTTGGTCTCTTCCTCCTTG-3'). We used ∆∆CT method to determine the fold changes in the expression of sXbp1. Briefly, the threshold cycle (Ct) was determined and relative gene expression was calculated as follows: fold change = 2-Δ(ΔCt), where ΔCt (cycle difference)=Ct(target gene)-Ct(control gene) and Δ(ΔCt)=Ct(treated condition)-Ct(control condition).
Western blotting
We boiled all samples collected at different time points after indicated treatment in sample buffer (Bio-Rad) supplemented with B-mercaptoethanol as per manufacturer’s instruction. We used equal amount of protein (25 μg) from three independent grown cultures and treatments for blotting. The membrane was blocked using 5% BSA and incubated with respective antibodies (rabbit PERK (1:2000, CST C33E10), rabbit P-PERK (1:2000, CST 3179), rabbit P- eIF2alpha (1:2000, CST 9721S), rabbit anti Oxidative Stress Markers (Abcam ab179843). β- Actin (1:5000, CST 4967S) served as a loading control. We captured signal intensities of the bands in the Western blot with Kwikquant Imager (Kindle Biosciences, USA).
Quantification and statistical analyses
RNA, ribosomal and (non-ribosomal) protein footprints
We used an in-house R pipeline to process the sequencing data from total RNA, ribosome footprinting and protein occupancy profiling. The fastq files of individual samples were processed with FASTX-Toolkit v0.0.14 to remove adapters and trim reads based on a minimum quality score of 20, as well as discard reads with a trimmed length shorter than 20 nucleotides. Reads mapping to ribosomal DNA were removed using Bowtie2. Remaining processed reads were aligned to the human reference genome (hg19) with TopHat v2.1.1 using the gencode v19 GTF reference transcriptome. Aligned bam files were filtered based on unique mapping and read length: RNA and protein footprints > 25 nt, ribosome footprints 28–30 nt. Total counts per gene were calculated using HTseq. For expression measurements comprising the core dataset (Figure 2), RNA reads aligning to exons were counted as a measure of processed mRNA abundance, ribosomal footprint reads mapping to the coding regions of transcripts (CDS) were counted as a measure of translating ribosomes, and protein footprint reads mapping to the untranslated regions (UTR) were counted as a measure of protein bound UTR. Genes were filtered based on a minimum count of 10 across all samples and counts were normalized using the median ratio method implemented in DESeq2. Surrogate variables were estimated and removed via linear modeling (SVA) to remove batch effects. The data includes a total of ~14,000 genes and is described in Supplementary file 1–3.
Protein
We used MaxQuant Software version 1.5.5.1 with its integrated search engine Andromeda to analyse our raw files acquired from the mass spectrometer. Data was searched against the human sequence file (Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.75.pep.all.fa) sequence file downloaded from the ENSEMBL database. All sample fractions of two individual sets were grouped by setting up experimental design parameters in Maxquant. The mass tolerance of MS/MS spectra were set to 20 ppm with a posterior global FDR of 1% based on the reverse sequence of the human FASTA file. In addition, MS/MS data were searched by Andromeda for potential common mass spectrometry contaminants. Trypsin/P specificity was used to perform database searches, allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and 10-plex TMT modifications on Lys and N-terminal amines were considered as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications. TMT quantification was performed at MS2 level with default mass tolerance and other parameters. We then used the reporter ion intensities as estimates for protein abundance. A total of 10,399 protein groups were identified, including 0.01% reverse sequences and contaminants. Protein groups with no measurement among either replicate were then removed, as well as those identified by only one peptide in either replicate. After filtering, for each protein the geometric mean was calculated across all samples within one stress and the intensities were divided by this mean. The median of these ratios over all proteins was used as a size factor to account for differences in global sequence coverage between samples, similar to library size normalization for RNA sequencing and footprinting experiments. SVA was also applied to remove batch effects as described above. The data describes a total of N = 7255 protein groups and is presented in Supplementary file 4.
The core dataset
To derive the core dataset of 7,011 genes (Figure 3—figure supplement 5), we first mapped all data to common ENSG identifiers. If several genes or isoforms mapped to the same data, we used the major/most abundant isoform as the group’s identifier. The data was then filtered for completeness across all replicates and resulted in the 7,011 genes presented here as the core dataset. For each time series experiment, we calculated the log base 10 ratios of the measurement at time x compared to the measurement at time 0. We then normalized across the entire time course (but for each dataset separately) by subtracting the average value from each entry and dividing by the standard deviation.
We visualized and analyzed the data matrix in PERSEUS version 1.5.5.1, using hierarchical clustering, the ‘Correlation’ and ‘Complete’ options, marking values in blue-white-red scale (Figure 3—figure supplement 1). The data discussed in the main text focuses on two of the replicates and the first six eigenvectors of the subsequent PCA of the data. Using PERSEUS, we clustered the core dataset into 20 clusters with highest coherence in the similarity measure. The functional analyses were generated through the use of IPA (QIAGEN Inc., https://www.qiagenbio- informatics.com/products/ingenuity-pathway-analysis), with an adjusted p-value cutoff of 0.0001.
Extracting significant regulatory events via Protein Expression Control Analysis (PECA)
To extract significant regulatory events, we adapted the statistical tool PECA that we developed and expanded recently. For PECA, we used the abundance data after SVA-based removal of surrogate variables, but prior to other transformations and normalization described above. The data was transformed by taking the natural logarithm and centered by subtracting the row median. We then smoothed the data using the Gaussian Process tool in PECAplus with standard settings and replicate information. We then performed the PECA analysis using standard settings as described in reference for absolute, label-free data. In brief, PECA extracts significant regulatory events for each gene and each time point by examining the overall noise in the data and specifically the change in the synthesis and degradation of the respective molecule since and until the time points before and after the time point in question. For the footprinting data, synthesis and degradation are replaced by association and dissociation of the respective molecules.
The paired concentration data for the four different levels was derived as follows: i) for transcription and RNA degradation (TRXP; RNA-DEG) we paired the RNA abundance data with DNA abundance set to a constant; ii) for translation (TRL) we paired the ribosome footprinting with the RNA abundance data; iii) for translation and RNA degradation/localization/processing (TRL; RNA-DEG) we paired the protein footprinting with the RNA abundance data; and iv) for translation and protein degradation (TRL; PROT-DEG) we paired the protein and the RNA abundance data.
PECA reports for each gene a putative change point score. Given the overall score distribution it also calculates a false discovery rate (FDR) for each data point. We reported a significant regulatory event for a gene if we observed a change point with a score corresponding to an FDR < 0.2 in both replicates, in the same direction (up or down), but regardless of the time point at which the event occurred. Stricter cutoffs resulted in very similar results (Figure 3—figure supplement 2). PECA results are provided in Supplementary file 1–5.
Alternative splicing analysis
We generated Sashimi plots for the 20 cytosolic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases on the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) from RNA-seq data for all four time points and searched manually for alternative splicing events. These events were marked by reads that spanned exon-exon junctions and therefore unambiguously denoted inclusion or exclusion of specific exons. Single read events were excluded. To reduce the number of false positive splicing events, we only counted junction reads that started at or ended on at least one known exon boundary as determined by the RefSeq variants on IGV. Exons that were not annotated in these transcript variants were only included in the analysis if they comprised junction reads on both exon boundaries. We recorded the events as a major (V1) and minor (V2) splicing event (Supplementary file 6). We then examined the data for putative stress-dependent changes in production of these variants, requiring consistency across the three replicates.
Analysis of proteins binding to RNA secondary structures
We obtained a list of conserved RNA secondary structures from reference. Coverage of structures was calculated using htseq to count reads mapping within ±200 nucleotides of the midpoint. Structures were considered to be transcribed if they had an average coverage of 10 reads among untreated samples. Using R, we mapped these structures to the processed RNA, ribosome and protein footprinting data and evaluated the accumulation of reads around the structure (Supplementary file 7). We extracted motifs in the RNA sequence in and surrounding the secondary structure with the MEME package using standard settings.
Data availability
The data discussed in this publication have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE113171. The mass spectrometry data including the MaxQuant output files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008575.

RESULTS:
Results
Multi-layered data types identify new regulatory signatures during stress
We present a resource comprising four complementary data types collected for cervical cancer cells treated with tunicamycin and hydrogen peroxide: RNA and protein concentrations measured with RNA-seq and quantitative proteomics, respectively, and the binding profiles of ribosomes and non-ribosomal proteins along mRNAs measured with ribosome footprinting and protein occupancy profiling (Figure 1A). The data provides a comprehensive picture of the regulatory landscape in response to stress, with a specific focus on post-transcriptional regulation during the Unfolded Protein Response. Ribosome footprints mapping to coding regions serve as an estimate of translation efficiency. In comparison, we use protein occupancy profiling to monitor footprints of other, non-ribosomal proteins on the untranslated regions (UTRs). These proteins are candidate regulators that bind to the UTRs to alter translation, RNA stability, and localization. While protein occupancy profiling, similar to ribosome footprinting, provides high-resolution, single-nucleotide level data, it does not reveal the identity of the bound proteins.
To account for the dynamic nature of the stress response, we monitor four time points (0, 1, 4, 8 hr). As illustrated in Figure 1A, protein misfolding stress in cancer cells is tightly intertwined with the response to oxidative stress. Therefore, we also subjected the cells to oxidative stress enabling the identification of components of the shared stress response and those specific to the UPR. From the extended sequencing data comprising >14,000 genes with triplicate measurements and >10,000 quantified proteins (Supplementary file 1–4), we compile a core set of 7,011 genes with complete, replicate measurements (Figure 3—figure supplement 5). We identify general and specific regulatory signatures in this core set that provide many new insights into the adaptive response to stress.
As expression changes are interdependent, for example protein expression depends on RNA changes, we apply our tool for Protein Expression Control Analysis (PECA) to extract significant regulatory events at specific levels (Figure 1B). PECA is designed to ‘subtract’ the change in transcript abundance for each gene to isolate the contribution of translation and degradation to protein expression changes (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). PECA also takes into account the temporal information to report both significantly regulated genes and time points (change points). We expand the use of PECA to all four datasets and convert concentration and binding data into information on regulatory events. For the RNA data, assuming DNA copy number does not change, PECA informs on significant changes in transcription and RNA degradation (TRXP/RNA-DEG)(Figure 1B). For ribosome footprinting data, PECA extracts information on translation (TRL) by controlling for changes at the RNA level. For the protein occupancy data, PECA extracts information on the binding of post-transcriptional regulators that can affect translation, RNA localization, and degradation (TRL/RNA-DEG). For the protein data, it extracts significant translation and protein degradation events (TRL/PROT-DEG). As such, PECA is capable of determining multiple levels of significant regulation per gene at each time point. We define a significant regulatory event if a change occurred in both replicates at a defined false discovery rate (FDR < 0.2), independent of the timing, but in the same direction, that is up- or downregulation (Figure 1B). All results presented here are robust to the use of stricter cutoffs and can be expanded to time-resolved analysis.
Figure 1B illustrates this workflow from measurements of concentrations and protein-RNA interactions to extraction of significant regulatory events for four types of processes. The examples are two stress-related genes, HSPA5 (BiP/GRP78) and HSP90B1, the tryptophanyl-tRNA-synthetase Trp-tRS (WARS), and the DNA repair enzyme RAD51. HSPA5 is a key chaperone of the ER stress response and significantly upregulated in its transcription, translation, but also binding of non-ribosomal proteins to the untranslated regions (Figure 1B). As its protein concentration changed only little compared to the increase in transcription and translation, it is marked as downregulated by our analysis tool. Indeed, the HSPA5 protein is known for its short half-life which delivers one explanation for the apparent counterbalancing regulation.
Several lines of evidence illustrate the quality of the data, the appropriate induction of protein misfolding stress, and the role of the hydrogen peroxide experiment as a control to identify ER stress specific changes. As expected (Figure 1A), the cancer cells exhibit low basal levels of ROS even without treatment. The ROS levels increase slightly upon tunicamycin exposure, likely due to the increased re-folding in the ER (Figures 1A and 2A). Therefore, ER stress is indeed likely to elicit a weak oxidative stress response. However, even though we chose the lowest concentration known to induce oxidative stress in cancer cells, ROS levels increase much more when the cells are treated with hydrogen peroxide compared to tunicamycin, indicating the induction of a stronger response.
Tunicamycin treatment elicits the expected ER stress response in the cells as shown by an increase in phosphorylated PERK and phosphorylated eIF2α (Figure 2B). Note that, also as expected, the RNA and protein expression levels of these two stress markers do not change substantially (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). In comparison, the expression increase of markers of oxidative stress such as catalase, SOD1, and thioredoxin was modest in response to treatment with hydrogen peroxide (Figure 2B), consistent with the pre-existing ROS levels and the experimental setup. Further, when examining a set of 143 known UPR genes, many of the genes peak in their response at four hours after tunicamycin treatment (Figure 2—figure supplement 2). Finally, expression for many housekeeping genes remains largely unchanged, indicating cells are largely non-apoptotic (Figure 2—figure supplement 3).
The timeline of the ER stress response is further confirmed by the activation of UPR regulators, such as XBP1, ATF4, and GADD34 (PPP1R15A)(Figure 2C–E). The non-canonical splicing of the fourth exon in XBP1 results in a frame-shifted transcript (sXBP1) that produces the XBP1 transcription factor; this is one of the earliest steps in the ER stress response. While we observe some constitutive sXBP1 even in unstressed cells, the spliced isoform dominates by eight hours after tunicamycin treatment (Figure 2C,D). The spliced isoform is present in both the RT-qPCR and RNA-sequencing data, supporting our confidence in the resolution and quality of the large-scale dataset. Both ATF4 and GADD34 are known to escape global translation shutdown and are translationally upregulated via uORFs in the 5’ UTR. GADD34 is responsible for the dephosphorylation of eIF2α, making it essential for the reinitiation of translation necessary for cell survival and eventual apoptosis during chronic stress conditions. Accordingly, we observe significant translation upregulation of ATF4 and GADD34 through an increase in ribosome footprints in the main open reading frame (Figure 2—figure supplement 4).
Finally, we validate our ability to extract significant regulatory events through examination of genes with known uORF-medidated translation increase during ER stress (Figure 2E). The genes include ATF4, GADD34, and HSPA5 discussed above, as well as ATF3, ATF5, DDIT3 (CHOP), IBTK, and IFRD1. Across all three replicates, we identify significant translation upregulation based on the increase in ribosome footprints compared to RNA levels (FDR < 0.2, TRL, Figure 2E). With the exception of ATF5, all genes also show concordant increases in RNA concentrations that are marked as significant regulatory events (FDR < 0.2, TRXP/RNA-DEG). Figure 2—figure supplement 5 shows additional uORF- and IRES-regulated genes that serve as a negative control: these genes are not associated with ER stress and we did not not identify translation induction. The replicates are highly consistent.
Intricate regulatory patterns emerge
Figure 3 provides an overview of the complexity of the response to tunicamycin, the multiple routes of its regulation, and its relationship to the response to hydrogen peroxide treatment. As expected, translation repression is the most frequent response to ER stress, affecting approximately one sixth of the 7,011 core genes (Table 1, N(TRL down)=1,189). However, many genes also increase in translation during ER stress (Table 1, N(TRL up)=746), including those with known mechanisms of translation induction via uORFs, as mentioned above. ER stress also elicits a large response at the transcript level, and in contrast to translation, we find twice as many transcriptionally up- than down-regulated genes (Table 1, N(TRXP; RNA-DEG up)=1,012 and N(TRXP; RNA-DEG down)=590). PECA results for the extended data show similar regulatory distributions (Supplementary file 1–4, Figure 3—figure supplement 1) and are robust to different significance thresholds (Figure 3—figure supplement 2).
To extract major trends in the data, we clustered the genes based on normalized expression changes across all data types and both stresses. We determined the appropriate cluster number through the ‘elbow method’ (Figure 3—figure supplement 3). Confirming successful induction of the ER stress response (Figure 2), many genes with similar expression changes in response to tunicamycin are enriched in UPR pathways (Figure 3, cluster 11, p-value<0.0001) and a quarter of these genes are upregulated concordantly in both transcription and translation (71 of 302 genes). Examples are genes discussed for Figure 1 and Figure 2 for example HSPA5, GADD34, and HSP90B1. This cluster also encompasses aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (p<3×10^−9) and serine biosynthesis enzymes (p<3×10^−6) that are regulated in a manner similar to the UPR genes and are discussed later. Using an upstream regulator analysis (Ingenuity Pathway Analysis) we also confirm that cluster 11 is enriched for genes that are themselves targets of established UPR regulators (e.g. ATF4 and ATF6) (Figure 3—figure supplement 4).
We observe a significant increase in protein expression during ER stress for a set of genes significantly enriched in the integrin signalling pathway (Figure 3, cluster 3, p<0.0001, Figure 3—figure supplement 5). Integrins are transmembrane proteins that are synthesized and processed in the ER, and indeed, cluster three is generally enriched in transmembrane proteins (Figures 3 and 161 of 377 genes, p<0.0001). Many of these genes decrease in translation during ER stress, but show stable or increasing protein abundance (Figure 3—figure supplement 5), suggesting that as the ER becomes incapable of synthesizing new transmembrane proteins during stress, those already present within membranes may be stabilized to preserve cellular function until synthesis of new proteins is able to resume.
Many genes are regulated in multiple ways
Next, we examined the interplay between different regulatory pathways that can affect the same gene in its response to ER stress. This analysis is illustrated at the example of enzymes from four DNA repair pathways, which include RAD51 mentioned above (Figure 1B). Like RAD51, many of the DNA repair genes, for example NBN and MRE11A functioning in homologous recombination, are significantly induced in their transcript levels, but also significantly repressed in their translation in response to ER stress, counterbalancing the effect of transcription (Figure 4A,B; TRXP; RNA-DEG vs. TRL).
We examined these cases, in which genes are regulated in more than one way, more closely. In some cases, the events were discordant, such is the case for the DNA repair genes: the cell appears to regulate two processes in opposing directions, that is increasing transcription but decreasing translation (Figure 4B). Discordance can be implemented in different ways at the molecular level. For example, some genes, like MRE11A and NBN, show decreases in the abundance of translating ribosomes under ER stress and also a decrease in protein concentration, opposing the increase in transcript numbers (Figure 4A). Other genes, like RAD50, BRCA1, and BRCA2, show an increase in both RNA abundance and ribosome footprints; however, the increase in ribosome footprints is small, resulting in an overall decrease in the translation for these transcripts compared to their transcription increase. When examining all 7,011 genes, discordant regulation frequently involves post-transcriptional regulation opposing what was initiated by transcriptional changes (Figure 4C), suggesting that counterbalancing regulation might be more common than previously thought.
In comparison, concordance often occurs amongst different post-transcriptional pathways, that is between events extracted from ribosome footprinting, protein occupancy profiling, and protein expression data, but not transcription. This effect is perhaps due to translation being common across the post-transcriptional categories. However, we also find a modestly significant amount of concordant regulation between transcription and translation in response to ER stress, including among many UPR genes mentioned above (Figure 3, cluster 11; Figure 4C, p<0.1, hypergeometric test).
Next, we examine the timing of the different regulatory processes. The analysis is again illustrated for the example of DNA repair genes, specifically those with transcription up- and translation down-regulation (Figure 4D). To do so, we averaged for each gene the time points at which significant regulation was observed across replicates and plot the frequency distributions. The transcription of DNA repair genes is induced early after treatment, but translation is repressed throughout the mid-to-late phases of stress. This delay between the two events is perhaps due to a rapid increase in mRNA abundance upon the sensing of stress that subsequently outpaces the availability of ribosomes.
Figure 4E takes this temporal analysis to all 7,011 genes. The resulting distributions for up- and downregulation are surprisingly symmetrical. During ER stress, most of the transcripts change early at one hour of tunicamycin treatment. Some genes, such as those of the UPR, also change early in translation, others change later (Figure 4E). The late response is more pronounced for the protein expression data than for the ribosome footprinting data. This delay in post-transcriptional regulation appears to be different from the canonical translation shutdown and perhaps reflects alternative mechanisms that recover protein synthesis from stress.
The shared stress response involves few genes but highly similar patterns
Next, we attempted to disentangle the ER stress response from a general stress response and the response due to an increase in reactive oxygen species in the cell. Due to the interconnected pathways (Figure 1A) and the basal ROS levels in cancer cells (Figure 2A), we chose a hydrogen peroxide concentration at the lower range of what is known to elicit oxidative stress in HeLa cells.
We find that the response to hydrogen peroxide treatment is qualitatively very similar to the response to ER stress (Table 1), but is overall much less pronounced (Figure 3). Only about a tenth of significant regulatory events in each category is shared across the two treatments (Table 1). Despite these small fractions, the number of shared genes is significant for most processes (p-value<0.05, hypergeometric test). In contrast to events specific to ER stress, which are dominated by translation, the shared response is dominated by up- and downregulation of transcription and RNA degradation (Table 1, TRL vs. TRXP; RNA-DEG).
Hydrogen peroxide treatment elicited similar patterns with respect to concordant and discordant regulation as compared to ER stress (Figure 4C) and similar temporal distributions (Figure 4E). The genes of the shared stress response, that is genes whose transcription is induced in response to both ER and oxidative stress, are enriched in DNA repair pathways discussed above as examples of discordant regulation (Table 1, p<0.01). Similar to ER stress, many DNA repair enzymes increase in their transcription in response to hydrogen peroxide treatment, but decrease in translation. Many of these genes belong to cluster 14 in Figure 3, and regulatory patterns for a subset are shown in Figure 4A, with the extended set in Figure 4—figure supplement 1.
Proteins from different subcellular localizations show different modes of regulation
The core set of 7,011 genes examined here is representative of the cytosol, nucleus, and various organelles, as assigned from published data (Figure 5A). Consistent with the above results, we observe much upregulation of RNA levels (TRXP/RNA-DEG) upon tunicamycin treatment for genes whose proteins reside in the ER (p<0.009; Figure 5B). These genes include many known UPR targets that relieve the burden of accumulating misfolded proteins.
Proteins localized to plasma membranes are marked by significantly reduced binding of non-ribosomal proteins to the 3’ UTR of the corresponding mRNAs (TRL/RNA-DEG; p<0.002; Figure 5B). Upon closer examination, we find that many of these genes include transmembrane proteins that require processing in the ER and therefore particularly burden the organelle during stress. These proteins often undergo N-linked glycosylation (p<0.0001), the precise process blocked by tunicamycin that leads to misfolding. Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that the reduction in binding of non-ribosomal proteins to the mRNAs of these genes acts to repress the translation of these problematic mRNAs or trigger their degradation. When examining regulation of these transmembrane proteins more closely, we noticed that the former explanation is more likely than the latter: transcript levels of the proteins do not change or increase indicating stabilization of the mRNA, while ribosome binding decreases indicating reduced translation (Figure 3—figure supplement 5).
Proteins localized to mitochondria encompass the only category of genes significantly upregulated in translation in response to ER stress (TRL, p<0.0003; Figure 5D). A similar, although non-significant trend is also observed at the protein level (TRL/PROT-DEG). Figure 5 and the section below discuss these genes in more detail.
Translation regulation modulates energy metabolism during ER stress
Closer examination of genes whose proteins localize to mitochondria indicates a shift in energy metabolism in response to ER stress from the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle to one-carbon metabolism to feed oxidative phosphorylation. Translationally upregulated genes are enriched in subunits of Complexes I-IV from the oxidative phosphorylation pathway (Figure 5C,D, Figure 5—figure supplement 1). While the genes’ mRNA levels often decrease during ER stress, ribosome binding and therefore translation increases significantly (p<0.0001, Figure 5C,D). In contrast, translation is largely unchanged among subunits of the ATP synthase and decreases among enzymes involved in the TCA cycle with the exception of ACO2 (Figure 5C,D, Figure 5—figure supplement 1.
Examination of the 5’ UTR of the genes for Complex I-IV reveals a sequence element that might explain their differential translation increase during ER stress. Translation of mitochondrial genes is often regulated by the TISU element, the Translation Initiator of Short 5’ UTR. The TISU element is also part of mTOR-sensitive mRNAs, which in turn confers resistance to translation inhibition under energy deprivation. Therefore, we hypothesize that TISU elements may play a role in the translation regulation of mitochondrial genes during ER stress, as this condition challenges the cell’s energy balance. Indeed, we find the TISU element (SAASAUGGCGGC) highly enriched among the translation initiation sites of Complex I-IV genes (E-value = 1.7×10^−8), but not amongst genes for ATP synthase subunits or TCA cycle enzymes (E-value = 0.03 and E-value = 0.1, respectively).
We also observe increased translation for other mitochondrial components that are related to either oxidative phosphorylation or the ER stress response, including one-carbon metabolism, TIM/TOM complexes, respiratory-chain assembly factors, and calcium uptake (Figure 5C,D). Of particular interest is the subset of one-carbon metabolism genes whose proteins localize to mitochondria (SHMT2, MTHFD2, and ALDH1L2). While the TCA cycle generally supplies NADH that feeds into the oxidative phosphorylation pathway to generate ATP, production of mitochondrial NADH can also be achieved through one-carbon metabolism, particularly under conditions of stress. Translation increase of one-carbon metabolism genes with simultaneous translation repression of TCA cycle genes, as we observe in our data (Figure 5C,D, Figure 5—figure supplement 1), suggests a rerouting of NADH production.
Our data indicates an important role of serine metabolism in this process. NADH production via one-carbon metabolism is driven by serine, which can be generated through the upstream serine biosynthesis pathway in the cytosol (PHGDH, PSAT1, PSPH)(Figure 5C,D). While enzymes of serine biosynthesis are known to be transcriptionally induced in various stresses, we find additional upregulation of translation for these genes (Figure 5C,D). We also find such concordant increase in transcription and translation for the mitochondrial one-carbon metabolism enzymes, but not for their cytosolic homologs, supporting our interpretation.
Finally, components of the TIM/TOM complexes and respiratory-chain assembly factors, also exhibit discordant regulation during ER stress, similar to Complex I-IV: they decrease in mRNA abundance but increase in translation (Figure 5C,D). TIMM17A represents an exception as it significantly decreases at the protein level, consistent with previous findings. Co-translational import and proper assembly of oxidative phosphorylation complexes is orchestrated by TIM/TOM and complex specific assembly factors, and dysregulation of this process leads to complex defects implicated in many human diseases. Therefore, this shared regulatory pattern may reflect a coordinated response between the oxidative phosphorylation complexes and their assembly machinery, which work together to adjust mitochondrial metabolism when the cell is burdened by misfolded proteins in the ER.
Alternative splicing of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases exemplifies the variety of stress-induced regulation
As another case study, we examined a functional family of genes in the same cluster as the UPR and serine biosynthesis genes, which also shows substantial transcription and translation upregulation: aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (Figure 3, cluster 11; Figure 3—figure supplement 6). Post-transcriptional regulation of these enzymes in response to stress has been observed before without an explanation or a specific link to ER stress. As these enzymes are known for their additional functions beyond aminoacylation of tRNAs and have been observed to undergo alternative splicing related to such ‘moonlighting’, we hypothesized that stress-dependent expression of alternative transcript variants might explain some of discrepancy between changes in ribosome binding and the corresponding protein levels observed in our data.
Indeed, we find evidence for ~80 alternative splicing events amongst the 20 cytosolic aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, where the RNA reads on exon-exon junctions indicate the expression of a second transcript variant (Figure 6A). The distribution of these events is similar to what has been observed across the entire human genome, with exon skipping being the most frequent splicing event. A small number of these alternative splicing events changes in response to ER or oxidative stress consistently across the three replicates; these examples indicate potential stress-dependent splicing. One such example is the tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase WARS (Figures 1 and 6B-E). Other examples are shown in Figure 6—figure supplement 1 and Supplementary file 6.
WARS has five previously identified transcript variants in total (Figure 6B,E). Two transcript variants exclude exon II, leading to the production of a shorter protein called mini-TrpRS which misses the N-terminal protein interaction domain; mini-TrpRS is non-catalytic. For both the RNA and the ribosome footprint data, reads signifying skipping of exon II and production of mini-TrpRS increased at one hour after tunicamycin induced ER stress (Figure 6C). This trend is confirmed by a decrease in the abundance of the full-length protein as seen in the proteomics data (Figure 6—figure supplement 2). As mini-TrpRS is known for its anti-proliferative function and its role in angiogenesis, the cell might produce the short variant in response to stress to reduce proliferation.
Excitingly, our data describes another splice event for WARS in response to ER stress, letting us hypothesize on a possible new regulatory mechanism affecting the production of mini-TrpRS. Exons -Ia and Ia in the 5’ UTR of WARS are mutually exclusive (Figure 6B), and we find a substantial increase in the inclusion of exon -Ia at one hour after stress treatment, correlating with the exclusion of exon II (Figure 6D). Indeed, when combining the data for the two splicing events, we observe a significant bias towards exclusion of exon II and production of mini-TrpRS if exon -Ia instead of Ia is used (p-value<0.001, Figure 6—figure supplement 2). We hypothesize that this splice event in the UTR influences skipping of exon II.
Ribosomes and post-transcriptional regulators bind to or around conserved RNA secondary structures
Finally, we provide new hypotheses for mechanisms and regulators underlying post-transcriptional regulation through stress-dependent binding of proteins to conserved secondary structures in the mRNAs’ untranslated regions (UTR)(Figure 7). The importance of RNA secondary structures in the UTR has been increasingly recognized, especially in response to stimuli. Structures in the 5’ UTR can form Internal Ribosomal Entry Sites (IRES), which bind to ribosomes and allow translation in a cap-independent manner, and inhibitory elements that prevent the bypass of ribosomes leading to reduced translation. In the 3’ UTR, secondary structures can mitigate binding of regulators that impact stability of mRNAs, translation efficiency, and mRNA localization. As our dataset includes RNA footprinting data for both ribosomes and non-ribosomal proteins, we sought to identify local binding events in the UTR that may reflect stress-dependent interactions by focusing on a set of regions with predicted RNA secondary structures.
These elements were identified based on similarity of sequence and predicted secondary structure across vertebrate genomes, however the majority of these have not been experimentally validated or linked to biological functions. Therefore, to validate these predictions, we computed an aggregate structure score for the 5,504 predicted conserved structures that mapped to the 3’ UTR in our dataset and compared this value to 5,504 random 3’ UTR sequences. The aggregate structure score was derived from the Structure Surfer database and included experimental data from Parallel Analysis of RNA Structure (PARS)(Figure 7—figure supplement 1). The predicted structures used for the analyses below show a higher average score for the 200 base pair region surrounding the structure midpoint compared to the random sequences, suggesting these conserved secondary structures are enriched for truly structured regions. This enrichment is even stronger for the subset of sequences which contained protein footprints observed in our data (Figure 7—figure supplement 1), confirming both the validity of our experimental methods and the prediction of RNA secondary structures.
Another confirmation of the validity of the predicted structures lies in identification of bona fide regulatory elements, for example the iron response element. Two predicted RNA structures with the highest abundance of ribosome footprints are located within the 5’ UTR of the ferritin heavy and light chain transcripts, FTH1 and FTL (Figure 7—figure supplement 2). These structures correspond to iron response elements that interact with ribosomes to regulate translation according to cellular iron levels. In total, we find transcript information for 302 secondary structures predicted in 5’ UTRs (Table 2, Supplementary file 7). Of these, two-thirds (190) have ribosome footprints mapping to a window 100 nucleotides upstream or downstream of the structure midpoint. It is tempting to speculate that ribosomes might be stalled at these predicted structures.
In addition, we observe a large number of genes with predicted secondary structures in the 3’ UTR, and for more than two-thirds of them non-ribosomal protein footprints map to a 200 nucleotide window surrounding the structure (1,166 of 1,633 transcribed genes with structures, Table 2). When averaging across all transcribed 3’ UTR structures in untreated data (0 hr time point), we find that protein footprints are distributed symmetrically around the structure midpoint, suggesting proteins can directly bind these secondary structures (Figure 7A, Supplementary file 7). While the identity of putative post-transcriptional regulators at these sites remains to be determined, we observe a clear enrichment of footprints of non-ribosomal proteins around the structures. RNA structures are predominantly located near the 3’ ends of transcripts, which results in declining read coverage downstream of the structures (Figure 7A, right panel, RNA).
The presence of sequence motifs in close proximity to protein-bound RNA secondary structures further supports the possible binding of regulatory factors, that is RNA-binding proteins (Figure 7B). The most significant motif corresponds to the poly(A) signal site (AAUAAA, E-value = 1.40×10^−42). In our data this motif is most frequently 10 to 20 nucleotides downstream of protein-bound RNA structures, in line with recent work showing in vivo folded 3’-end structures are often located near poly-A signals (Figure 7B).
Other observed motifs include predicted binding sites for Pumilio and Sex-Lethal (PUM and SXL), as well as a hairpin without any predicted motif or known RNA-binding partner (Figure 7B). As SXL is an RNA-binding protein in Drosophila involved in sex determination without a known homolog in human, the motif observed in our data is therefore likely occupied by a protein with similar binding preferences, such as ELAVL1 which is known to bind to AU-rich elements in the 3’ UTR. Footprints for each of these motifs have a different spatial arrangement around the midpoint of structures. Pumilio RNA-binding sites display a broad distribution roughly centered around the structure (Figure 7B), while SXL motifs have a distinct spacing pattern, with the highest frequency 8 to 10 nucleotides upstream of structure midpoints and additional sites roughly 10 to 15 nucleotides apart. Finally, the hairpin is often the center of the RNA structure itself, but also appears 30 to 40 nucleotides away from the structure (Figure 7B).
While not all binding events surrounding predicted secondary structures are expected to be stress responsive, our data does contain examples in which ER stress alters the occupancy of 5’ and 3’ UTR structured regions, either by ribosomes or non-ribosomal proteins, respectively. We identified these examples by comparing the local coverage of structures at 0 and 8 hr time points and extracted significant changes (Supplementary file 7). We observe an increase in local ribosome footprints for a single 5’ UTR structure located within in the TSC22D3 transcript (adjusted p-value=0.031). This transcript encodes the glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper protein (GILZ), which has been shown to act as a pro-survival factor during ER stress.
Further, we detect significant increases in local protein binding for five conserved structures predicted in 3’ UTRs (adjusted p<0.01). Remarkably, these structures are all within genes that have an established role in the UPR, including three molecular chaperones that act as critical sensors of misfolded proteins: HSP90B1, HSPA5, and CALR. We observe a clear increase in protein binding over these conserved secondary structures after eight hours of tunicamycin treatment, independent of changes in RNA reads mapping to the transcripts, suggesting an important role in their regulation during stress (Figure 7C, Figure 7—figure supplement 3).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Proteostasis, the integrated assembly of pathways that regulate transcription and translation, the proteins’ correct folding, localization, and - eventually - degradation, is a major challenge for the cell. Much of the cellular energy expenditure is dedicated to maintaining a healthy proteome, as millions of molecules are produced every single minute. Challenges to proteostasis, that is the accumulation of unfolded or misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), are key to human diseases, including cancer, diabetes, and neurodegeneration.
Therefore, the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR), triggered by challenged proteostasis, affects all levels of gene expression regulation creating an intricate and highly dynamic network of responses (Figure 1A). Initially the ER stress sensor PERK is autophosphorylated leading to the subsequent phosphorylation of the initiation factor eIF2α limiting its use for translation initiation, thereby decreasing the ER’s protein folding load.
Global translation suppression is accompanied by the targeted activation of translation for important UPR regulators and the transcription of downstream stress-response genes. The best characterized example of such translation induction in mammalian systems is the transcription factor ATF4, where increased eIF2α phosphorylation allows ribosomes to bypass inhibitory upstream open reading frames (uORFs) in the 5’ untranslated region (UTR) during stress.
Another branch of the mammalian UPR includes the major transcription factor, XBP1, which is activated through non-canonical splicing by the IRE1 endonuclease. IRE1 also targets mRNAs for degradation, further relieving the ER from the burden of protein synthesis. A third UPR transcription factor, ATF6, is released from the ER membrane upon accumulation of misfolded proteins and activated through proteolytic cleavage in the Golgi. Finally, the proteasome degrades irreparably damaged and ubiquitinated proteins - demonstrating how indeed, over the course of several hours, the cell systematically responds to ER stress at all levels of gene expression regulation to adapt to the new conditions.
This elaborate regulatory network encompasses many questions that still remain unanswered, illustrating the need for integrative assessment of the coordination amongst these different processes. One such question involves the relationship between these response pathways, both across genes as well as over time. A specific gene may be regulated by multiple pathways over the entire course of the stress response; additionally, these pathways might act concordantly, discordantly, simultaneously or sequentially, thus adding to the complexity of possible gene expression regulation. The dynamics of the stimulus determines the transition between transient and chronic stress, as well as the reactivation of translation and the cell’s decision between survival and apoptosis. Establishing the factors responsible for this decision is essential to understanding how aberrant proteostasis leads to disease. Further, while a short list of uORF regulated genes is known to escape translation inhibition similar to ATF4, recent studies suggest more genes are likely to be positively regulated at the level of translation during ER stress. However, the extent and importance of this translation upregulation is largely unknown.
Translation regulation is not only linked to the ER and proteostatic stress, for example through eIF2α phosphorylation, but it is also intimately linked to energy metabolism. Conversely, depletion in metabolic energy can trigger the formation of misfolded proteins. The resulting challenge is particularly prominent in cancer cells, as they are subject to both elevated energy needs and increased protein synthesis - yet, we are only beginning to understand how the cell balances these demands.
Finally, ER stress and the UPR are interconnected with the oxidative stress response, largely due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced during protein folding in the ER (Figure 1A). In addition, many cancer cells have inherently higher basal ROS levels due to the challenges mentioned above, which can lead to the activation of the UPR to promote tumor growth. Both ER and oxidative stress have common elements in their elicited cellular response, however the extent of this shared stress response and is unclear.
To provide new insights into these open questions we conducted one of the most comprehensive assessments of the regulatory landscape in response to ER stress available to date - revealing previously unknown and underappreciated aspects of the adaptive UPR. We collected replicate samples at four time points (0, 1, 4, and 8 hr) from human cervical cancer cells treated with tunicamycin. Tunicamycin is a naturally occurring antibiotic that inhibits protein N-linked glycosylation and therefore prevents proper folding particularly in the ER, thus inducing the accumulation of misfolded proteins. Using RNA-seq and mass spectrometry, we determine the complete RNA and protein concentrations for >7,000 genes in the core dataset and for >14,000 genes in the extended data. Further, using ribosome footprinting and protein-occupancy profiling, we map the interactome of ribosomes and non-ribosomal proteins to mRNA, which informs on translation as well as several aspects of RNA processing, respectively. Finally, we apply the same technologies to cells treated with hydrogen peroxide to elicit oxidative stress and compare the responses. The presented data explores both shared and stress-specific regulation, it describes both the early and later stress response, and it disentangles transcriptional from post-transcriptional regulation. We discuss general patterns seen across the core set of genes and explore specific examples that illustrate new pathways important in the cell’s adaptation to stress.