PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human); Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Fibroblast; Blood cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: acetylated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Cbp; Acetyltransferase; Acetylation; P300

ABSTRACT:
The acetyltransferases CBP and p300 are multifunctional transcriptional co-activators; however, their acetylation targets, site-specific acetylation kinetics, and function in proteome regulation are incompletely understood. We combined quantitative proteomics with novel CBP/p300-specific catalytic inhibitors, bromodomain inhibitor, and gene knockout to show that CBP/p300 acetylates thousands of sites, including signature histone sites, as well as a multitude of sites on signaling effectors and enhancer-associated transcriptional regulators. Kinetic analysis identified a subset of CBP/p300-regulated sites with very rapid (<30min) acetylation turnover, revealing a dynamic balance between acetylation and deacetylation. Quantification of acetylation, mRNA, and protein abundance after CBP/p300 inhibition reveals a kinetically competent network of gene expression that strictly depends on CBP/p300-catalyzed rapid acetylation. Collectively, our in-depth acetylome analyses reveal systems attributes of CBP/p300 targets, and the resource dataset provides a framework for investigating CBP/p300 functions, as well as for understanding the impact of small molecule inhibitors targeting its catalytic and bromodomain activities.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Time-resolved analysis reveals rapid dynamics and broad scope of the CBP/p300 acetylome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins were digested to peptides using stadard protocols. Peptides were fractionated by high PH reverse-phase chromatography for proteome determination and for some acetylated peptide enrichment. Acetylated peptides were enriched with PTM scan acetyllysine enrichment kit from Cell Signaling Technologies. Some acetylated peptides were fractionated by micro-scale SCX following enrichment.Details are provided in the supplementary tables.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon easy nLC system connected to an Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as described (Kelstrup et al, 2014). Raw data was computationally processed using MaxQuant (developer version 1.5.5.4) and searched against the UniProt database (downloaded July 6, 2015) using the integrated Andromeda search engine (http://www.maxquant.org/) (Cox et al, 2011). The acetyl (K) sites table was filtered to remove reverse entries, contaminant entries, and entries with localization probability less than 90% (0.9). Identified sites required a minimum Andromeda search score of 40. Protein quantification required a minimum of 2 peptides, 1 unique peptide, and 2 ratios counts; reverse, contaminant, and proteins only identified by a modification site were removed.

METHODS:
Star Methods
Contact for Reagent and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Chunaram Choudhary (chuna.choudhary@cpr.ku.dk).
Experimental Model and Subject Details
Immortalized Crebbpfl/fl; Ep300fl/fl mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) stably expressing Cre-ERT2 were kindly provided by the laboratory of Paul Brindle. The sex of these cells is not reported, and was not determined in our laboratory. Following transfection with Cre-ERT2, cell clones derived from single colonies were recovered and tested for efficient gene KO. Kasumi-1 cells are derived from a human male with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with an 8;21 chromosome translocation. 293FT cells are a clonal isolate derived from human embryonal kidney cells transformed with the SV40 large T antigen. MEFs and Kasumi-1 were cultured (37°C, 5% CO2) in DMEM and RPMI1640 media (Biowest), respectively. For SILAC labeling, the media was supplemented with regular arginine and lysine, or with heavy isotope-labeled arginine (13C6,15N4-arginine, Sigma) and lysine (13C6,15N2-lysine, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and dialyzed serum (Sigma). All cell lines were routinely tested for mycoplasma.
Method Details
Cell culture and sample preparation
The floxed Cbp and p300 alleles were deleted by treating cells with 2μM 4-hyroxy-tamoxifen (4-OHT, Sigma), media was changed and fresh 4-OHT added every 12 hours for a total of four treatments over 48 hours. Cells were cultured for an additional 24–36 hours to allow for complete depletion of CBP/p300 protein. For CBP/p300 acetyltransferase inhibitors (3μM compound R (Cmpd-R) and A-485) and bromodomain inhibitor (5μM CBP112) cells were treated for 16 hours. Cells were harvested by washing 1× in PBS before on-plate lysis at 4°C using ice-cold lysis buffer (50mM Hepes, pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1× complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)). After cell lysis, 1/10 volume ice-cold 5M NaCl was added to the lysates to release chromatin-bound proteins, the lysate was sonicated to shear genomic DNA, and was clarified by centrifugation at 8,000 × g for 15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was precipitated by addition of 4 volumes (80% final) −20°C acetone. Acetone precipitated protein was dissolved in 8M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl), 50mM Hepes, pH8.0 and protein content measured by BCA assay (Pierce). Protein was reduced and alkylated by 5mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and 5mM chloroacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature. Before addition of proteases the protein was diluted to 2M GuHCl by addition of 50mM Hepes, pH8.0. Lys-C was added (1/200 w:w) and the protein digested for 2–4 hours at 37°C, the protein was further diluted to 1M GuHCl, before digesting with trypsin protease (1/200 w:w) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were purified using a Sep-pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and were eluted in 50% acetonitrile. Acetylated peptide enrichment was performed using 10–20mg of purified peptides and high pH reversed-phase pre-fractionation, or by direct enrichment from unfractionated peptides followed by in-tip SCX fractionation or in-tip HpH fractionation (for fractionation method references, and details for individual experiments, see Tables S2 and S3). In all experiments acetylated peptides were enriched using the PTMscan acetyllysine antibody kit (Cell Signaling Technologies). For proteome measurements the peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase into 24 fractions or 8–10 fractions followed by in-tip SCX fractionation. Fractionation strategies are indicated in Table S2. Approximately 1ug peptides were analyzed on the mass spectrometer for each proteome fraction.
CBP/p300 inhibitor synthesis and CBP/p300 biochemical activity assay of inhibitors
The synthesis of Compound-R (Cmpd-R) and A-485 and inhibition of CBP and p300 acetyltransferase activity were assessed as described. Cmpd-R was identified based on its in vitro and cellular potency, and is related to compound 22 that we reported previously. Acetyltransferase activity assays were performed using truncated p300 and CBP BHC domain proteins that contain the region from the bromodomain to the C/H3 domain. Assays were performed by detecting lysine acetylation of a biotinylated histone H4 (1–23) synthetic peptide (SGRGKGGKGLGKGGAKRHRKVLRGG-K(Biotin)-NH2; (Anaspec, #AS-65097)) using a time-resolved fluorescence energy transfer (TR-FRET). Reactions were performed in a 10 μL volume using an assay buffer containing 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 80 μM EDTA, 40ug/mL BSA, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 0.01% triton X-100. The CBP/p300 inhibitor was dissolved in DMSO and dispensed at 50 nL by a Labcyte Echo (Labcyte, Sunnyvale, CA) into white 384 well low-volume plates (Perkin Elmer, #6008289) in 3-fold dilutions from 50 μM to 0.00075 μM. CBP or p300-BHC protein at 0.6 nM was pre-incubated with Cmpd-R for 30 minutes. The reaction was initiated by adding 5 μL of a biotinylated synthetic histone-H4 peptide at 2 μM and acetyl coenzyme A (Sigma-Aldrich, #A2056) at 0.5 μM for p300 or CBP-BHC. Following incubation for 1 hour at room temperature in a humidified chamber the reaction was terminated with 10 μL of 3 nM LANCE Ultra Europium-anti-acetyl-histone H4 lysine antibody (Perkin Elmer, #TRF0412-D), 900 nM LANCE Ultra ULight-Streptavidin (Perkin Elmer, #TRF0102-D) in LANCE Detection Buffer (PerkinElmer, #CR97-100). TR-FRET measurements were obtained using a Perkin Elmer Envision with laser excitation at 335 nm and emission at 665 nm and 620 nm.
Recombinant protein acetylation in vitro
Full-length Codon-optimized His-p300-Strep2-Flag inserted into a pVL1393 baculovirus expression plasmid was expressed in Sf9 cells. Expressed p300 protein was purified from Sf9 cells over a HiTrap column and quantified/purity confirmed by Coomassie staining. Six proteins that were identified as p300 substrates in our acetylome analyses were used for p300 acetyltransferase assay. Five of these proteins were purchased from OriGene as recombinant purified proteins (TTC33;TP302360, FAM192A;TP304378, TRIM33;TP710251, NPM1;TP303841, JUNB;TP303595) and PPM1G was purified from yeast cells, as follows. The Invitrogen ORF for full-length, GST-tagged PPM1G was transformed into yeast cells. After galactose induction, cells were lysed; and PPM1G protein purified by GST-affinity chromatography and glutathione elution. Protein concentration and purity were assessed by colloidal Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE. Acetylation reactions were performed using ~1.5ug of protein substrate incubated with or without 40 nM p300 in buffer containing 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, and 10 mM sodium butyrate. Reactions were initiated with 10 μM acetyl-CoA to a final volume of 15 μl. After incubation at 30°C for 30 min, reactions were quenched with 1% HCl aqueous solution. The entire experiment (from in-vitro acetylation to mass spectrometry) was performed in duplicate. Protein was re-suspended in 100ul 2% sodium deoxycholate, 50mM Hepes pH8.0, reduced with 1mM DTT at 37°C for 30min and subsequently alkylated by 5mM chloroacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature, prior to digestion with ~1/100 trypsin protease at 37°C for 16 hours. Approximately 200fmol protein was analyzed by mass spectrometry in technical triplicate measurements.
Cell lysate protein acetylation
SILAC labeled Crebbpfl/fl; Ep300fl/fl MEF cells (described above) were harvested by typsin, washed twice in PBS, and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell pellets were resuspended in hypotonic cell lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 10 mM sodium butyrate) and flash frozen. Pellets were thawed, and lysed by passage through a QiaShredder column (Qiagen). The cell lysate was concentrated with an Amicon 3K MWCO column to ~10mg/ml (BCA assay). The lysates were then preincubated in reaction buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 50 mM NaCl, and 1 mM TCEP) with 40 nM p300 +/− 20 μM A-485 for 15 min at 4°C. The reaction was initiated with the addition of 20 μM acetyl-CoA and allowed to proceed for 30 min at 30°C. Reactions were quenched with 1% aqueous HCl and flash frozen for mass spectrometry. Digestion to peptides, enrichment of acetylated peptides, and SILAC-based quantification, was performed as described below.
Overexpression of p300 in 293FT cells
293FT cells were cultured in SILAC DMEM media as described above for MEF cells. A single 15cm plate at ~80% confluency was transfected with pCI-p300 vector expressing full-length wild-type p300 using Turbofect transfection reagent (Thermo Scientific, #R0531) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were harvested after 72hrs. Cell lysis, protein lysate preparation, digestion to peptides, enrichment of acetylated peptides, and SILAC-based quantification, was performed as described below.
High-content microscopy
PC-3 cells were plated in Collagen I coated 96-well view plates (Perkin Elmer, #6005810) overnight. Cells were then treated with an 8-point dose half-log dose response Compound-R starting at 10 μM for the indicated times. Cells were fixed in 10% formaldehyde (Polysciences, Inc., #04018) at room temperature for 10 min, washed in PBS, and then permeablized in 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min. Cells were then blocked in 1% BSA for 1 h and incubated with the incubated with H3K27Ac and H3K9Ac antibodies (Cell Signaling Technology; H3K9ac # 9649, H2K27ac #8173) in antibody dilution buffer (0.3% BSA in PBS) overnight at 4 °C. Cells were washed three times in PBS and then incubated with a mixture of Alexa Fluor488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG antibodies (Life Technologies, #A-11029), Alexa Fluor555-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Life Technologies, #A-21424) antibodies, and Hoechst 33342 (Life Technologies, #H3570) for 1 h at room temperature. After washing four times in PBS, plates were scanned within 24 h of processing on a ThermoFisher CellInsight using the target activation algorithm acquiring 15 fields per well. Fluorescence intensities were quantified using the average mean intensity function. IC50 values for H3K27Ac and H3K9Ac inhibition were calculated using a sigmoidal fit of the concentration/inhibition response curves.
Mass spectrometry
Peptide fractions were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) using a Proxeon easy nLC system connected to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).
Analysis of transcript abundance
Global transcript abundance was analyzed using biological triplicate measurements. RNA was purified using the RNeasy Mini Kit from Qiagen and RNA integrity was determined using the 2100 Bioanalyzer system (Agilent Technologies). Transcript abundance was measured using one-color 8 × 60K Mouse Gene Expression Microarrays (Agilent Technologies, G4852B) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 100 ng of total RNA was labeled using the Low Input Quick Amp Labeling Kit (Agilent Technologies, 5190-2305). Labeled samples were hybridized overnight and then washed and scanned using the high-sensitivity protocol (AgilentG3_HiSen_GX_1color) on a SureScan microarray scanner (Agilent Technologies), and probe intensities were obtained by taking the gProcessedSignal from the output of Agilent feature extraction software using default settings.
Quantitative PCR analysis of Cyp1a1 gene expression
All experiments were performed using the MEF and Kasumi-1 cells and culture conditions described above. To induce Cyp1a1 gene expression, cells were treated with 10μM 6-Formylindolo(3,2-b)carbazole (FICZ, Sigma) prepared in DMSO. RNA was isolated using the Qiagen RNeasy kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Total RNA was quantified using a nano-drop spectrometer (Thermo) and complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized using the QuantiTect Rev. Transcription kit (Qiagen). Reverse transcription reactions were diluted with H2O and stored at −20°C. Quantitative PCR was performed using Brilliant II SYBR® Green QPCR Master Mix (Agilent) and a Stratagene Mx3005P instrument. The expression levels of TATA-box binding protein (TBP) and Cyp1a1 were determined using standard curve generated from the sample expressing the highest levels of Cyp1a1. TBP expression varied by less than 2-fold between individual samples and was used to correct Cyp1a1 expression for differences in cDNA content. The following primers were used for QPCR: mouse TBP, 5′-GTGCCAGATACATTCCGCCT-3′ and 5′-AGCTGCGTTTTTGTGCAGAG-3′;Cyp1a1, 5′-GAGGCTAAACAGCCTTCCCA-3′ and 5′-ACAGGAGCACCCTGTTTGTT-3′, and human TBP, 5′-TGGCACCAGGTGATGCCCTT-3′ and 5′-TGCCCAGATAGCAGCACGGT-3′;Cyp1a1, 5′-ACCAGGACCCTGTCCAATCT-3′ and 5′-GAAGGCAGCCCTGTTTGTTC-3′.
H3K56ac stoichiometry measurement
Site-specifically acetylated (at H3K56) histone H3 was produced in E. coli using the orthogonal N(epsilon)-acetyllysyl-tRNA synthetase/tRNA(CUA) technology. To determine H3K56ac stoichiometry we first isolated histones from SILAC heavy-labeled control and Cmpd-R-treated MEFs (16h, 3μM Cmpd-R) using a standard acid extraction protocol. Briefly, cells were lysed in phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 0.5% NP-40, 1× complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Lysate was centrifuged at 1,000 × g, the supernatant discarded, and the pellet extracted with 0.2M hydrochloric acid overnight at 4°C. Extracted histones were recovered from the supernatant after centrifugation at 1,000 × g. Recombinant H3K56ac was mixed with histone preparations from SILAC heavy-labeled control and CmpR-treated cells in a 10-fold serial dilution to determine the ratio of recombinant to native H3. Recombinant H3K56ac was then mixed with histone preparations to a final stoichiometry of 0.1%, 0.01%, and 0.001% before trypsin digestion of histones to peptides, and acetylated peptide enrichment with anti-acetyllysine antibody. Acetylated peptides were analyzed by MS and the relative intensities of the light SILAC-labeled recombinant H3K56ac and heavy SILAC-labeled native H3K56ac peptides were compared. Stoichiometry was calculated based on these comparisons at all three dilutions (0.1%, 0.01%, and 0.001%). The experiment was performed in two independent biological replicates.
Quantification and Statistical Analyses
Peptide and protein identification
The raw MS data was computationally processed using MaxQuant (developer version 1.5.5.4) and searched against the UniProt database (downloaded July 6, 2015) using the integrated Andromeda search engine. The acetyl (K) sites table was filtered to remove reverse decoy database entries, contaminant entries, and entries with localization probability less than 90% (0.9). Identified sites required a minimum Andromeda search score of 40. Protein quantification required a minimum of 2 peptides, 1 unique peptide, and 2 SILAC ratio counts; common contaminants, proteins only identified by a modification site, and false hits identified from the reversed database were removed. Relative acetylation stoichiometry was estimated using acetylation site intensity corrected for differences in protein abundance, otherwise referred to as abundance-corrected intensity (ACI). ACI was calculated by dividing acetylation site intensity by iBAQ protein abundance.
Calculation of deacetylation half-life
The deacetylation rate after A-485-treatment was analyzed using the sites that were quantified at all seven time points. We applied fuzzy c-means method using Mfuzz to classify the quantified sites as “fast”, “slow” and “unregulated”. Half-lives were only calculated for regulated (“fast” or “slow”) sites. We assumed that deacetylation kinetics at early time points follow an exponential decay, formulated as (dN/dt = −λN), where N is the concentration of each acetyl site and λ is the exponential decay constant. This is transformed as (log2 (N/N0)) = −(t/t1/2), where N0 is the concentration at time 0, t1/2 is the half-life and t is the time after A-485 treatment. We determined the ranges between Q1 – 3.0*IQR and Q3 + 3.0*IQR as an ‘acceptable variability range’ and used this as a threshold to exclude the outliers. To estimate the half-life, we used a multi-step model. First, we constructed a model using only sites with replicate data from early time points and estimated the parameter λ from the replicate data. To limit these analyses to high-confidence data, the data were selected based on the following criteria: (1) To ensure accurate quantification, we only used log2 ratio values that were between 0 and −3.32 (not more than 10-fold reduced), and also within the acceptable variable range from the mean of replicates, (2) Only the data from early time points (for “slow” within 4 hours, and for “fast” within 1 hour) were used, and (3) If no data remained, the data within 1 hour were used. Then, the parameter was estimated by the robust linear regression model using the R package MASS. In the second step, the model was refined using all the data within the acceptable variability ranges. The parameter was updated by using all the data that passed the following criteria: (1) The log2 ratio values should be within the acceptable variable range from the estimated value of the model, (2) If no data had the log2 ratio value of less than −1, the data with the closest value of −1 were included, and (3) the step 2 was repeated until the parameters converged. We excluded data with more than 8 hours half-life because in our experimental setting and analysis method, it was difficult to correctly estimate half-life longer than 8 hours.
Statistical analysis of microarray data
The resultant microarray data was processed as follows; the intensity values were log2 transformed, for duplicated probes the mean was calculated, quantile normalization was used to correct for inter-array variability, for genes with multiple probes the median intensity values were used. The Statistical Analysis of Microarray (SAM) method was used to calculate significant (p value) differences, adjusted p values were calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Significantly regulated genes were classified based on an adjusted p value < 0.05 and a magnitude fold change >2. Low abundant, non-expressed transcripts were filtered from the data based on a probe intensity cutoff of Log2 <4 in all samples.
Statistical analyses
Acetylome measurements of CBP/p300 KO, Cmpd-R, A-485, and CBP112 (Figure 1) were performed in biological triplicates. Acetylome measurements of in vitro acetylation with recombinant p300 (Figure 2H), and in-vivo p300 overexpression in 293FT cells (Figure 2I) were performed in duplicate. Acetylome time course analysis after A-485-treatment (Figure 4) was performed in at least biological duplicate measurements for each time point, exact details are provided in Table S3. Microarray analysis of transcript abundance (Figure 6) was performed in a minimum of three biological replicates.
Statistical tests, such as Pearson’s correlation (r), Fisher test, and Wilcoxon test were performed in R. Boxplots were generated using R, the lower and the upper hinges of the boxes correspond to the 25% and the 75% percentile, the bar in the box shows the median. The upper whisker extends to the largest value but maximal 1.5 times the IQR from the upper hinge. Similarly, the lower whisker extends from the lower hinge at most 1.5 IQR. Outlier data points (outside the hinges) were not drawn. Gene Ontology analysis was performed using UniProt keywords and AGOTOOL. UniProt keywords were mapped to acetylation site-level data and the significance of enrichment was calculated by Fisher test. Acetylation site sequence logos were generated using the IceLogo stand-alone application version 1.2; comparing sequence windows of regulated (>2-fold decreased acetylation) to unregulated sites. Subcellular compartment analysis was performed by mapping proteins with the regulated sites to UniProt keywords, only the sites associated with proteins annotated to a single subcellular compartment were used in the analysis.
Data and Software Availability
The raw mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD005252. The microarray transcriptome data have been deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo) and are accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE92613.
Additional Resources
All of the data are accessible in the supplementary datasets (Tables S1–4) and can be further explored using our web-based resource (http://p300db.choudharylab.org).

RESULTS:
Results
A High-Confidence Map of the CBP/p300 Acetylome
To investigate the CBP/p300 acetylome we used three different, complementary, perturbations; gene knockout (KO), highly specific CBP/p300 KAT inhibitors, and a bromodomain inhibitor (Figure 1A). CBP/p300 was conditionally knocked-out in Crebbpfl/fl;ep300fl/fl mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) expressing a tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase. CBP/p300 KAT activity was inhibited with the recently developed potent and selective small molecule inhibitors-Compound R (Cmpd-R) and A-485 (Figure S1A). These two inhibitors are structurally related and show similar inhibitory activities for CBP/p300 in-vitro and in cell-based assays (Figures S1B and S1C). The CBP/p300 bromodomain was selectively inhibited using the small molecule CBP112.
We applied stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative MS to identify CBP/p300-regulated acetylation sites. We quantified ~21,000 acetylation sites on ~5,300 proteins, and more than 11,500 sites on 3,500 proteins in each condition (Figure 1B, Figure S1D, Table S1, and Table S2). We additionally quantified proteome levels to calibrate acetylation measurements for differences in protein abundance (Tables S1 and S2). Acetylation changes were strongly correlated across biological replicates (Figure S1E), indicating excellent reproducibility. CBP/p300 KO and catalytic inhibition resulted in extensively downregulated acetylation that was highly correlated (Figures 1D–1F). Nearly all sites (93%) that were downregulated (>2-fold) by the catalytic inhibitors were also downregulated in KO cells (Figures 1D and 1E). However, a greater proportion (~40%) of sites was exclusively downregulated in KO cells. This is likely due to the greater magnitude of reduced acetylation in KO cells (Figures 1D and 1E, compare boxplots for overlapping sites), that is attributable to the different time periods of treatment (72hrs for KO, 16hrs for catalytic inhibitors). There was a greater overlap between sites regulated by Cmpd-R and A-485 (Figure 4F) as compared to KO (Figures 1D and 1E), and in all comparisons the non-overlapping sites were close to the 2-fold cutoff for regulation (Figures 1D–1F, compare boxplots for non-overlapping sites). These data indicate that KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485 caused reduced acetylation at the same acetylation sites, and that the non-overlap of regulated sites is mostly attributable to weakly regulated sites that fall either side of the cutoff used to classify regulated sites. CBP112 caused modestly reduced acetylation compared to KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485 (Figure 1C and Table S1), and most (74%) of the CBP112-regulated sites were also regulated in KO cells (Figure S1F). Together, these results comprehensively verify the in-vivo specificity of Cmpd-R and A-485, and show that loss of catalytic activity alone has similar impact on acetylation as loss of the entire CBP/p300 protein, indicating that loss of CBP/p300 catalytic activity is the primary cause of reduced acetylation observed in the KO cells.
Properties of the CBP/p300 Acetylome
For the purposes of bioinformatic analyses, we defined sites with >2-fold reduced acetylation as CBP/p300-regulated. Based on the fraction of two-fold downregulated sites in an unperturbed control experiment (0.73%) (Figure S2A), we estimated the false discovery rate (FDR) for CBP/p300-regulated sites in the KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485 experiments to be 3.1%, 6.0%, and 3.9%, respectively, which is comparable to a P-value of 0.05. A small fraction of sites in KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485 were not quantified (Figure 1G), because acetylation was only detected in control cells (i.e. wild-type MEFs, or control-treated cells), suggesting that loss of CBP/p300 activity may have reduced acetylation to a level that was not detectable. Notably, not quantified sites occurred less frequently in CBP112-treated cells (Figure 1G), and not quantified sites in KO cells showed markedly reduced acetylation by Cmpd-R and A-485, but not by CBP112 (Figure 1H). These not quantified sites are putative targets of CBP/p300, and are included in the supplementary data (Table S2); however, due to the stringent criteria applied, they were excluded from further analyses presented here.
CBP/p300 was strongly biased to acetylate nuclear proteins, whereas cytoplasmic and mitochondrial proteins were underrepresented (Figure 2A). Remarkably, 36%, 22%, and 30% of sites on proteins associated with the UniProt keyword “Nucleus” were regulated by KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485, respectively; indicating that up to one-third of the nuclear acetylome is regulated by CBP/p300. Consistent with its role as a transcriptional coactivator, CBP/p300-regulated sites were significantly enriched for keywords describing transcription and chromatin regulation (Figures 2B and S2B).
Analysis of amino acids flanking CBP/p300-regulated sites did not reveal a prominent motif, with the exception of a modest enrichment of Ala, Pro, Gly, and Ser at the −2 position (Figure S2C). However, CBP/p300-regulated sites were significantly biased to occur at lysine residues that were in close proximity (Figures 2C, S2D, and S2E), and proteins with CBP/p300-regulated sites had a significantly higher tendency to interact with each other (Figure 2D). Furthermore, among regulated proteins, two-thirds of the detected sites were acetylated by CBP/p300, and among highly regulated proteins (>4 regulated sites), 82% of sites were acetylated by CBP/p300 (Figure 2E), indicating that CBP/p300 acetylates a majority of sites on targeted proteins. A closer inspection of CBP/p300 targets showed complex acetylation patterns; some proteins, such as Bcl9, Ncoa2, and Kmt2d, were regulated at nearly every site, other proteins, such as Parp1, Ncl, and Thrap3, showed a mixture of regulated and unregulated sites (Figure S3A), and some proteins were regulated at a conserved position in homologous proteins (Figure S3B).
We examined the relationship between regulation by CBP/p300 and acetylation abundance at individual sites by using abundance-corrected intensity (ACI) to estimate relative acetylation stoichiometry (Table S2). Consistent with enzyme-catalyzed acetylation, CBP/p300-regulated sites had significantly (P<2e−16) higher ACI than unregulated sites, and the most robustly regulated sites (>8-fold reduced acetylation) had the highest ACI (Figure 2F). We ranked all acetylation sites by ACI and classified the top 5% as having ‘high stoichiometry’ and the bottom 95% as having ‘low stoichiometry’. Strikingly, CBP/p300 acetylated a majority of ‘high stoichiometry’ acetylation sites in all experiments, but a much smaller fraction of ‘low stoichiometry’ acetylation (Figure 2G), indicating that CBP/p300 is one of the most prominent nuclear KAT activities in cells.
The Cellular Context Contributes to CBP/p300 Specificity
Our data indicate that CBP and p300 are relatively promiscuous KATs that target neighboring sites on proximal proteins. To validate these findings, and to further explore the specificity of CBP/p300-catalyzed acetylation, we used a combination of in-vitro acetylation assays and overexpression in cells. We first tested the ability of recombinant p300 to acetylate six purified human proteins that were identified as CBP/p300 targets. These six proteins contained 20 acetylation sites that were regulated in KO and inhibitor-treated cells. We found that recombinant p300 acetylated these same sites in vitro, as acetylation was more than two-fold increased or only detected in p300-treated samples (Figure S3C). In addition, acetylation was also increased at nearly all other detected sites; more than half of all sites were only detected after acetylation by p300 (Figure S3D), and of the remaining sites, acetylation was more than two-fold increased at >78% of sites (Figure S3E). We used SILAC quantification to measure in-vitro acetylation of whole cell lysates by purified p300 (Table S2). p300 caused extensive acetylation (48% of sites were more than two-fold increased over control- p300 + A-485); however, increased acetylation was weakly correlated (r= −0.20) with reduced acetylation in the KO cells (Figure 2H). Indeed, half of the sites that showed increased acetylation by p300 in-vitro were unaffected in KO cells, suggesting a low specificity of acetylation under these conditions. In contrast, in increased acetylation caused by ectopic expression of p300 in human 293FT cells was much better correlated (r= −0.57) with reduced acetylation in KO cells (Figure 2I and Table S2). 80% of sites that showed reduced acetylation in KO cells were increased after transfection with p300, while 65% of the sites with increased acetylation were also reduced in KO cells, showing that overexpressed p300 targets many of the sites that were regulated in KO and catalytic-inhibitor-treated cells. These results show that p300 is a promiscuous KAT in vitro, and overexpressed p300 in cells shows greater substrate specificity as compared to recombinant p300 in in vitro assays, indicating that the cellular environment contributes to CBP/p300 substrate specificity.
The CBP/p300 Acetylome is Conserved
To further confirm the impact of CBP/p300 catalytic inhibition on the acetylome in a different cell type, and to assess whether CBP/p300 targets the same proteins in human cells, we quantified acetylation in Cmpd-R-treated Kasumi-1 cells. Kasumi-1 is a human acute myeloid leukemia cell line whose growth depends on CBP/p300-dependent acetylation of the oncoprotein AML1-ETO. Similar to MEFs, Cmpd-R-treated Kasumi-1 showed widespread (20% of all sites, 34% of nuclear sites) reduced acetylation (Figure S4A, Table S2). Regulated acetylation sites were significantly biased to occur on nuclear proteins, and proteins with regulated sites were significantly enriched for UniProt keywords describing transcription and chromatin regulation (Figure S4B and S4C). Notably, the acetylomes of Cmpd-R-treated MEF and Kasumi-1 cells were well-correlated (r= 0.77) (Figure S4D), indicating that CBP/p300 acetylated conserved sites in mouse and human cells.
Acetylation of Diverse Signaling Effectors
Acetylation by CBP/p300 critically regulates the transcriptional activity of non-histone proteins, such as transcription factors. We found that CBP/p300 acetylates over two hundred transcription factors, chromatin remodelers, and transcriptional co-activators (Figure S5). In particular, CBP/p300 acetylated nearly all members of the bHLH-PAS family of transcriptional regulators quantified in our dataset, including Ncoa1, Ncoa2, Ncoa3, Arnt/Arnt2, Arntl, and Bmal1 (Table S2). Additional CBP/p300 targets include many signature transcriptional effectors in signaling pathways related to development and differentiation, including Wnt-beta catenin, hippo, hedgehog, notch, and TGF-beta signaling (Figure 3A). CBP/p300 also acetylated key proteins in pathways regulating nutrient and energy metabolism, such as AMPK, PKA, and calcineurin signaling, consistent with a role of CBP/P300 in regulating energy homeostasis. Taken together, these results show extensive CBP/p300-dependent acetylation of non-histone proteins and place CBP/p300 at the nexus of diverse signaling pathways.
Acetylation of Enhancer-Associated Regulators
CBP/p300 is implicated in enhancer-regulated gene transcription, and the CBP/p300-catalyzed H3K27ac mark is used to define active enhancers, but the extent of CBP/p300-catalyzed acetylation at enhancers is not fully known. Comparison of our acetylome data with an experimentally determined BCL9L-Wnt enhanceosome showed that nearly every detected component of the BCL9L-Wnt enhanceosome is acetylated by CBP/p300 (Figure 3B); a remarkable finding considering that the BCL9L-Wnt enhanceosome was purified from a different cell type and organism than used here. CBP/p300 acetylates more than three dozen enhancer-associated transcriptional regulators, such as the cohesion complex, Mll3/4 complex, mediator complex, super elongation complex (SEC), and components of the general transcription machinery (Figure 3C). These proteins harbored more than 150 CBP/p300-regulated acetylation sites in KO cells, and CBP/p300 acetylated a majority (65%) of the sites detected on these proteins. Together, these results show that CBP/p300 acetylates hundreds of sites on enhancer-associated proteins, revealing that the scope of CBP/p300-catalyzed acetylation at enhancers far exceeds what is currently known, and indicating that H3K27ac represents the ‘tip of the iceberg’ of CBP/p300 targets at enhancers.
Kinetic Analysis of the CBP/p300 Acetylome
The dynamic turnover rate of acetylation at individual sites remains an almost completely unexplored question. We exploited the rapid action of CBP/p300 catalytic inhibitors to obtain site-specific kinetics of acetylation on a proteome-wide scale. SILAC-based quantitative MS was used to quantify acetylation at various times following treatment with A-485 (Table S3). The number of CBP/p300-regulated sites increased in a temporal manner (Figures 4A and 4B), and with an increasing time period of treatment showed an increasing correlation to reduced acetylation after 16 hours exposure to A-485 (Figure 4C). We quantified a total of ~8,100 sites, of which 3,011 were quantified at all six time points. The sites quantified across all time points were clustered into three groups; ‘unregulated’, ‘slow’, and ‘fast’ regulated (Figure 4D), and deacetylation half-lives were calculated for the 619 sites that showed reduced acetylation within this timeframe. While we limited our calculation of acetylation half-life to sites quantified at all six time points, all additional measurements are accessible (Table S3), and the data can be visualized using the web resource (see details below).
Deacetylation half-lives of regulated sites were broadly distributed, with a median half-life of 94 minutes (Figure 4E). Reduced acetylation after catalytic inhibition can be attributed to the action of lysine deacetylases (KDACs) or protein turnover. Comparison of acetylation turnover rates to protein half-life in NIH3T3 cells, showed that KDAC activity is mainly responsible for the rapid turnover of CBP/p300-catalyzed acetylation (Figure 4F). Furthermore, individual proteins harbored sites with different deacetylation kinetics (Figure S6A), indicating that deacetylation is regulated at the site-level. Notably, rapidly deacetylated sites (t1/2 < 30 minutes) had significantly higher relative acetylation stoichiometry as determined by ACI (Figure 4G), indicating that the sites most acetylated by CBP/p300 are also the most strongly regulated by KDAC activity. Nearly one hundred sites were rapidly deacetylated, including CBP/p300 itself, and various transcription factors and co-activators such as Mef2a, Tp53, Bcl9l, Gtf2f1, and Mybl2 (Figure 4H). Together, these results provide the first systems survey of endogenous acetylation site half-lives and demonstrate very rapid turnover of many CBP/p300-regulated sites on both histone and non-histone proteins.
Histone Acetylation by CBP/p300
All four core histones are reported to be acetylated by CBP/p300, often redundantly with other KATs. However, a broad survey of CBP/p300-regulated histone acetylation marks has not been reported. We quantified acetylation at nearly all known histone sites (Table S2), enabling us to obtain a comprehensive map of endogenous CBP/p300-catalylzed histone acetylation marks. To minimize redundant data points we calculated the median acetylation ratio, summed intensity, and median deacetylation half-life by combining isoform-specific histone sites that occurred at the same position in different histone isoforms (Table S4).
CBP/p300 acetylated sites on all four core histones; however, to a differing degree and site specificity. The degree of regulation was most pronounced for sites on H2B and H3; acetylation of H3K18, H3K27, H3K36, and N-terminal H2B sites was 95–99% reduced by KO, Cmpd-R, or A-485, indicating that these sites are almost exclusively acetylated by CBP/p300 (Figure 5A). Acetylation sites on H2A and H4 were reduced to a lesser degree, suggesting that these sites could be targeted by additional KATs or are not deacetylated to the same degree. CBP/p300 showed remarkable selectivity for sites on H3, targeting K18 and K27 while neighboring sites at K14 and K23 were unaffected. In contrast, H2A and H2B were regulated on nearly all N-terminal sites, which constituted over half of all sites on these histones, revealing more extensive regulation of H2A and H2B N-termini by CBP/p300 than previously reported.
To gain further insights into CBP/p300-regulated histone sites, we examined their site-specific turnover rates and acetylated peptide intensity (estimated abundance) (Table S4). We calculated deacetylation half-lives for 14 of the 20 histone sites that were identified as regulated in KO cells. H2B N-terminal sites had the fastest turnover rates, and twelve histone sites displayed half-lives of less than one hour (Figure 5B). Comparison of H2B deacetylation kinetics showed that N-terminal sites were rapidly deacetylated, while K20 and K24 were deacetylated at a slightly slower rate, and C-terminal sites were completely unaffected (Figure 5C). Comparison of acetylated peptide intensity showed that N-terminal H2B sites were among the most high intensity histone sites (Figure 5D). Extensive regulation by CBP/p300, rapid turnover, and high intensity indicate that N-terminal H2B acetylation is a robust, multi-site mark that, like H3K18ac and H3K27ac, is a signature for CBP/p300 catalytic activity on chromatin. Collectively, these results provide a first MS-based quantitative map of CBP/p300-regulated histone sites in mammalian cells, demonstrating that CBP/p300 indeed targets all four core histones in-vivo, but the magnitude of regulation, site-specificity, and kinetics of deacetylation are distinct for individual sites and histones.
In addition to acetylating sites on histone N-termini, CBP/p300 is also reported to acetylate a distinct class of histone sites that are located in the globular or C-terminal domains, including H3K56, H3K122, and H2BK120. However, CBP/p300 did not acetylate any of these sites in our experiments (Figure 5A). We used recombinant acetylated H3K56 as a spike-in standard to verify the lack of regulation by CBP/p300 at this position (Figure S6B). Using site-specific antibodies we found a modest effect of Cmpd-R on H3K56ac and H3K122ac, while H2BK120ac was strongly reduced (Figure S6C). Thus, we observed some regulation of these sites using acetylation-site-specific antibodies, but not by MS. Similarly, the antibodies detected increased acetylation at all three of these sites after treatment with the KDAC inhibitor tricostatin A (TSA) (Figure S6C), even though a previous study using MS showed that these same sites were unaffected by a panel of KDAC inhibitors, including TSA (Figure S5D). Our MS-based data indicate that these sites are not regulated by CBP/p300, and our analysis suggests that previous findings may be a result of antibody cross-reactivity. Indeed, many PTM site-specific antibodies show cross-reactivity or non-specificity, highlighting the importance of quantitative MS in defining regulated histone acetylation sites.
CBP/p300 Impacts the Proteome by Regulating Gene Transcription
To delineate the roles of different CBP/p300 functionalities in gene transcription we measured transcript abundance in KO, Cmpd-R, A-485, and CBP112-treated cells at the same time points and conditions used for acetylome and proteome analysis (72hrs for KO, 16hrs for inhibitor-treated cells) (Tables S1 and S5). Transcriptional changes in KO cells were well correlated (r= 0.75–0.76) to catalytic inhibitor-treated cells (Figure 6A and 6B). The transcriptional changes by Cmpd-R and A-485 were highly correlated (r= 0.94) (Figure 6C), indicating that these compounds have a nearly identical impact on gene expression. The reduced correlation between catalytic inhibitors and KO cells is likely attributable to the different time periods of these interventions. Loss of CBP/p300 protein or catalytic activity caused reduced expression at a subset of genes (11.3% in KO cells, 11.6% in Cmpd-R, and 10.4% in A-485), and gene expression was more frequently downregulated than upregulated, particularly for strongly regulated (> 4-fold changed) genes (Table S1). Transcriptional changes caused by CBP112 were modest compared to KO and catalytic inhibition; CBP112 caused reduced expression at 2.4% of genes, and only 0.2% (25 transcripts) were more than 4-fold reduced, compared to >3% in KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485-treated cells (Table S1). These data show that catalytic inhibition has a similar impact on transcript levels as loss of the entire CBP/p300 protein in KO cells, indicating that CBP/p300 catalytic activity is the primary mechanism that drives CBP/p300-dependent transcription. While the scaffold function of CBP/p300 is undoubtedly important, it does not appear sufficient to regulate transcription independently of CBP/p300 catalytic activity, or does so at a very small number of genes.
In addition to its well-known function in transcriptional regulation, CBP/p300 can also regulate protein abundance post-transcriptionally, for example, by regulating acetylation-dependent protein stability, or by directly ubiquitylating proteins. CBP/p300 KO, Cmpd-R, A-485, and CBP112 affected a subset of the proteome, mostly causing downregulation of proteins (Figure 6D, Table 1). A larger number of proteins were regulated in KO cells compared to Cmpd-R and A-485-treated cells, likely due to the different time-scale of these interventions. Notably, proteome changes were significantly (r= 0.75) correlated with transcriptome changes in KO cells (Figure 6E), showing that most changes in protein abundance resulted from altered gene expression and that post-transcriptional mechanisms play a minor role in CBP/p300-dependent proteome dynamics. In addition, of the 78 proteins that were more than 2-fold downregulated in KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485, only 7 were not significantly (P<0.05) reduced at the transcript level, and none of these proteins were acetylated by CBP/p300. Thus, in our dataset we found little evidence supporting a widespread role of CBP/p300-catalyzed acetylation in regulating protein stability.
Rapid Acetylation Kinetics Regulate Transcription
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a major integrator of diverse environmental signals such as chemical toxins, cancer cell metabolites, and bacterial pigments. AHR-dependent transcriptional activation of the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase Cyp1a1 is required for detoxification of aromatic hydrocarbons. Multiple KATs, including Ncoa1, Ncoa3, and CBP/p300 are implicated in AHR-induced Cyp1a1 transcription; however, the specific requirement of CBP/p300-catalyzed acetylation in AHR signaling is not known.
We found that CBP/p300 impacts AHR signaling at multiple levels; AHR was downregulated at both the transcript and protein levels in KO, Cmpd-R, and A-485-treated cells, and CBP/p300 acetylated the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt), which binds to AHR to promote AHR-dependent transcriptional activation (Tables S2 and S5). Most notably, Cmpd-R-treatment completely blocked Cyp1a1 gene induction in response to the AHR ligand 6-Formylindolo(3,2-b)carbazole (FICZ) in both MEF and Kasumi-1 cells (Figure 6F). In contrast, CBP112 partially reduced Cyp1a1 expression (Figure 6F). These results show that CBP/p300 catalytic activity is indispensable for AHR-dependent Cyp1a1 transcription.
To determine how quickly loss of CBP/p300 catalytic activity disrupted Cyp1a1 gene expression, we added Cmpd-R one hour after FICZ treatment. Cyp1a1 transcript abundance continued to increase for three hours after FICZ treatment in control cells, whereas addition of Cmpd-R one hour after FICZ treatment completely blocked further increases in transcript abundance, demonstrating acute disruption of Cyp1a1 transcription (Figure 6G). These data show that CBP/p300 catalytic activity is required for Cyp1a1’s transcriptional maintenance, and that loss of this activity results in nearly immediate transcriptional arrest. Fast regulation of Cyp1a1 transcription suggests a causative role of acetylation in driving gene transcription, and strongly suggests that the subset of CBP/p300-regulated sites that display rapid turnover are critical for regulating gene transcription.
Database of the CBP/p300 Regulome
Our work greatly expands the known repertoire of the endogenous CBP/p300 targets. To make this resource easily accessible to the community we generated a user-friendly web-based database (http://p300db.choudharylab.org), which can be queried for a protein of interest to obtain information about CBP/p300-regulated acetylation sites, as well as changes in the protein and transcript abundance. In addition to providing an overview of all identified sites and their positions in the queried protein, it includes information about site quantification, site intensity, and peptide spectral counts (Figure 7), which are useful parameters in prioritizing putative regulatory sites for functional investigation. The database also provides a graphical overview of acetylation site regulation by different CBP/p300 perturbations used here, and allows visualization of acetylation dynamics at individual sites (Figure 7). The database shows interactions of the queried protein with other acetylated proteins in the dataset, and the interactive nature of the network allows further exploration of individual proteins in the network. Furthermore, the database can be batch-queried for proteins with specific functional domains, such as bromodomain, enabling a quick overview of CBP/p300-dependent acetylation on a protein family. These, and additional, features of the database offers a ‘one stop’ solution for convenient mining of all the datasets generated here.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Lysine N-ε-acetylation is a reversible protein posttranslational modification (PTM) that regulates diverse cellular processes, and its dysregulation has been linked to cancer and other diseases. Advancements in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics have led to identification of thousands of acetylation sites in mammalian cells. However, a systematic understanding of the acetylome is hampered by two fundamental deficiencies: (1) for a vast majority of acetylation sites, the responsible lysine acetyltransferases (KATs) are not known, and (2) almost nothing is known about site-specific kinetics of acetylation. The need for establishing enzyme-substrate relationship is further accentuated by recent studies indicating that acetylation occurs by both enzyme-catalyzed and non-enzymatic mechanisms. Therefore, distinguishing enzyme-regulated sites from a potentially large fraction of non-enzymatic acetylation, and obtaining a thorough understanding of site-specific acetylation kinetics, is urgently needed to obtain a functional understanding of the acetylome. A major bottleneck in this area has been the lack of specific KAT inhibitors that can be used to identify the in-vivo substrates of KATs, and to obtain time-resolved dynamics of the acetylome. Recently, we identified first-in-class catalytic inhibitors for the acetyltransferases CREBBP (CBP) and EP300 (p300), paving the way for a systematic analysis their functions.
CBP and p300 define a unique family of KATs that are often referred to as a single entity (CBP/p300) due to their extensive sequence homology and functional similarity. CBP/p300 is implicated in a multitude of processes, prominently including the regulation of enhancer-dependent, cell-type-specific gene transcription. Dysregulation of CBP/p300 is associated with diverse medical conditions, for example, recurring somatic mutations in CBP and p300 are associated with human leukemia and germline mutations in these genes cause Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome.
CBP/p300 is a multifunctional protein; it contains a catalytic domain that functions as an acetyllysine ‘writer’ and a bromodomain (BRD) that functions as an acetyllysine ‘reader’ that binds to acetylated proteins. CBP/p300 is also reported to function as an E3 and E4 ligase for protein ubiquitylation. In addition to these functions, CBP/p300 serves as a scaffold for recruiting a large repertoire of proteins, including transcription factors and co-activators, as well as several other reported KATs, such as NCOA1, NCOA3, ATF2, and CLOCK.
Traditionally, the identification of CBP/p300 targets has focused on individual proteins and relied on CBP/p300 overexpression, genetic knockdown and knockout, or in-vitro assays. However, given the intrinsic limitations of the aforementioned approaches, and the association of CBP/p300 with several other reported KATs, it is unclear whether all of the identified sites are directly acetylated by CBP/p300 in vivo. Because genetic depletion of CBP/p300 simultaneously eliminates both its catalytic and scaffolding functions, it was previously difficult to disentangle these functions in substrate acetylation and transcriptional regulation.
Here we combine quantitative proteomics with selective chemical inhibitors and genetic knockout cells to obtain a systems-wide understanding of the CBP/p300 acetylome, to investigate site-specific acetylation dynamics, and to unravel the functions of CBP/p300 in transcriptome and proteome regulation. Our data delineates the catalytic, bromodomain, and scaffolding functions of CBP/p300 in regulating protein acetylation, as well as in mRNA and protein expression.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
           Author contributions         
B.T.W., T.N., and C.C. designed the research. B.T.W., B.S., B.K.H., and S.S. performed most of the experiments and contributed to data interpretation. C.S. contributed to the initial experiments with CBP/p300 genetic knockout cells. B.K.H was supervised by B.T.W. B.T.W. and T.N. analyzed the data. T.N. developed the p300DB web resource. W.W. and W.L. generated site-specifically acetylated recombinant histone H3. W.H. and J.B. performed microarray analysis. B.E.Z. and P.A.C. performed in-vitro p300 substrate acetylation assays. E.K., A.L., and K.D.B. contributed CBP/p300 inhibitors. B.T.W., T.N., and C.C. wrote the manuscript. All authors read and commented on the manuscript. C.C. supervised the entire project.
           Competing interests         
A.L. and K.D.B. are employees of AbbVie and hold stocks in the company. E.A.K was an employee of Acylin Therapeutics, holds an equity stake in the company, and has a patent application (US20160235716A1) related to Cmpd-R and A-485. P.A.C. was a cofounder and is an equity holder of Acylin Therapeutics and is a scientific consultant for AbbVie.