PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Synovial tissue
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetic acid derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Arthroplasty; Mass spectrometry; Synovial fluid

ABSTRACT:
In 21 patients undergoing revision arthroplasty due to septic or aseptic implant loosening, synovial fluid was collected intraoperatively after opening the joint capsule. In a proteomic MS approach, we wanted now to investigate these synovial fluids for novel proteogenic markers of periprosthetic infections.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic differences in the synovial fluid of patients undergoing septic or aseptic revision arthroplasty

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation  Protein samples were first digested following the SP3 (single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation) protocol published by Hughes et al in 2019 (doi: 10.1038/s41596-018-0082-x). A volume corresponding to 15 µg of protein from each sample was taken up in 100 µL 1× SP3 Lysis Buffer (final concentrations: 5% (wt/vol) SDS; 10 mM TCEP; 200 μL 40 mM Chloracetamide; 200 mM HEPES pH 8) and heated for 5 min at 90°C. After cooling the samples to room temperature (on ice) a mix of pre equilibrated hydrophobic (#65152105050250) and hydrophilic (#45152105050250) SeraMag Speed Beads (75 µg of each; Cytiva) was added to the denatured and alkylated protein containing solution (bead to protein ratio 10 to 1) and gently mixed. Then 1 volume of 100% vol/vol Ethanol (EtOH) was added and the protein/bead/EtOH suspension was then incubated for 20 min at 24°C on a Thermomixer C (Eppendorf) while shaking at 1200 rpm. After this binding step, the beads were collected on a magnet and washed 4× with 80% EtOH (collection time on the magnet minimum of 4 min). After the final wash & collect step, the beads were taken up in 25 mM Ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) containing 1 µg Trypsin (Protein:Trypsin ratio 30:1). To help bead dissociation samples were incubated for 5 min in a sonification bath (preheated to 37°C). After this step samples were transferred to a Thermomixer C (preheated to 37°C) and incubated over night while shaking at 1300 rpm. Next morning the samples were acidified with formic acid (FA, final 1% vol/vol). The beads were collected on a magnet and the supernatant transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube. The samples were then put again on a magnet for at least 5 min to remove remaining beads. The cleared tryptic digests were then desalted using home-made C18 StageTips as described (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Briefly, peptides were immobilized and washed on a 2 disc C18 StageTip. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 0.1% formic acid solution (15 μL) and directly used for LC-MS/MS experiments (see below for details). LC-MS/MS.  Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) (Michalski et al. 2012) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 42 cm) with an integrated fritted emitter (15 µm; CoAnn Technologies) packed in-house with Kinetex C18-XB core shell 1.7 µm resin (Phenomenex). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 50 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.2% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.2% FA, 19.8% water and 80% acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Honeywell). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6 – 1.0 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 3% B; gradient 3% to 7% B for 5 min; gradient 7% to 20% B for 90 min; gradient 20% to 46% B for 30 min; gradient 46% to 100% B for 4 min and 100% B for 11 min) at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version v3.0.63 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (Olsen et al. 2005). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 60 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 30 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide and Protein Identification using MaxQuant.  RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (Cox et al. 2011) search in MaxQuant (2.0.3.0.) using the default settings (Cox & Mann 2008). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (Cox et al. 2014). The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot H. sapiens reference database (UP000005640_9606_OGPP.fasta, 20589 entries, downloaded 10/1/2022). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein. Further analysis and filtering of the results was done in Perseus v1.6.10.0. (Tyanova et al. 2016). Comparison of protein group quantities (relative quantification) between different MS runs is based solely on the LFQ’s as calculated by MaxQuant, MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al. 2014).

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Study Design and Sample Collection
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of the University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany (No.: 18-8042-BO) and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Between May 2020 and March 2021, 21 patients were recruited who underwent revision surgery due to persistent pain after hip, knee, or shoulder arthroplasty. The presence of a periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) was diagnosed based on the 2018 consensus definition of periprosthetic hip and knee joint infections. Before inclusion in the study, all patients had given their written informed consent. Inclusion criteria were complete clinical and laboratory data and a sufficient amount of synovial fluid (SF) for all determinations and to allow the diagnosis of periprosthetic joint infection (PJI). Exclusion criteria were signs of early postoperative PJI (8 weeks) due to reduced reliability of synovial and serologic markers shortly after surgery, inflammatory comorbidities (rheumatism, chronic bowel disorder), metallosis, and previous or concomitant antibiotic therapy. SF was harvested intraoperatively via joint puncture avoiding an admixture with blood using an 18-gauge needle. The SF was transferred into sterile tubes, stored on ice, and transported to the laboratory within 30 min, where the SF samples were centrifuged at 8000× g for 1 min. The supernatant was collected and aliquoted under sterile conditions using a laminar flow bench and stored at −80 °C until use. Soft tissue samples from the joint space were collected intraoperatively and were microbiologically investigated (microscopy, Gram staining, 14-day in vitro culture).
4.2. Protein and Biomarker Quantification in the SF
Protein quantification was performed by the BCA method using a modified micro-BCA assay (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) as previously described. In brief, 50 µL of the phosphate buffered saline (DPBS, Gibco, Thermo Fischer, Bend, OR, USA) diluted protein sample was mixed with 250 µL of the BCA reagent, incubated at 60 °C for 1 h, and measured at 570 nm in a plate reader (Multiskan Ascent, Thermo-Fischer, Rockford, IL, USA). The protein concentrations were measured in triplicates at three different dilutions (1:1000, 1:2000, 1:3000). The SF concentrations of leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 1 (LRG1), c-reactive protein (CRP), and calprotectin were determined by ELISA (human LRG1, CRP and calprotectin ELISA kits, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and measured at 450 nm using a Multiscan Ascent Reader (Thermo Scientific). The SF was diluted in a range of 1:400–1:20,000.
4.3. Proteome Measurement and Preparation
Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation: Protein samples were first digested following the SP3 (single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation) protocol published by Hughes et al. in 2019. The cleared tryptic digests were then desalted using home-made C18 StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al.. 
Proteome analysis: LC-MS/MS experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300–1800 and at a resolution of 60,000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane).
Peptide and protein identification using MaxQuant: RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda search in MaxQuant (2.0.3.0.) using the default settings. Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated. The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot H. sapiens reference database (UP000005640_9606_OGPP.fasta, 20,589 entries, downloaded 10 January 2022). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). Further analysis and filtering of the results was carried out in Perseus v1.6.10.0..
Bioinformatics analysis: Pathway enrichment analysis was conducted using the reactome online analysis tool. Significantly enriched pathways were defined based on the p-value cut-off (false discovery rate (FDR)) below 0.05.
The full description of the proteome measurement and preparation can be found in Supplementary Document S1.
4.4. Statistics and Data Visualization
The statistics were compiled using the software package SPSS (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA, v.29.0.1.0). The normal distribution of the data was tested using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Normally distributed continuous data were compared using student’s t-test and expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Non-normally distributed continuous data were compared using the Mann–Whitney U test and expressed as mean values. In most cases, the proteomic data were not normally distributed. Statistical results were considered significant if the p-value was < 0.05.
The following criteria were used to determine the differential abundance of proteins in the septic/aseptic group: (i) proteins that were identified in at least 60% of the samples in at least one group and (ii) for which a nominally significant difference in protein abundance was observed between conditions (unadjusted p < 0.05). The relationship between protein abundance in both groups was analyzed by linear regression.
The discriminatory power of the biomarker was determined using the receiver operating characteristics (ROC) analysis, in which the sensitivity, specificity, area under the curve (AUC), and its 95% confidence interval (CI) were determined for each cut-off value.
Pie and bar charts were created in Microsoft Excel (MS Office Professional Plus 2016). The heatmap was created using the online tool  (accessed on 5 December 2023). Volcano and boxplots were created in prism v.9.5.1. Scatter and ROC diagrams were created with SPSS (IBM, v.29.0.1.0).

RESULTS:
2. Results
2.1. Patient Groups and Characteristics
According to the definition of Parvizi et al., thirteen patients (62%) were assigned to the aseptic group and eight patients (38%) to the PJI group. The aseptic group consisted of two men and eleven women with a mean age of 67.8 ± 11.0 (52–85) years at the time of surgery, and revision procedures were performed on seven hips and six knees (Table 1).
Causes of implant failure and indication for revision surgery included aseptic loosening of the implant in nine cases (69%), instability in two cases (15%), and periprosthetic fracture and restriction of movement, each in one case (7.5%). The PJI group consisted of four men and four women, with a mean age of 68.5 ± 13.3 (51–90) years at the time of surgery, and revision procedures were performed on six hips and two shoulders (Table 1). Microbiological examination of the tissue samples taken intraoperatively revealed Staphylococci in four cases (50%), Streptococci in two cases (25%), Serratia marcescens (12.5%) and Cutibacterium acnes (12.5%) in one case. There were no significant differences in sex, age, and BMI between the cohorts (p > 0.05, Table 2). With the exception of CRP and creatinine, the preoperative blood parameters of the patients were comparable in both groups, were within the normal range, and showed no statistical significance (p > 0.05, Table 1). Creatinine levels were slightly higher in the septic group, without this being statistically significant (p = 0.514). Serum CRP levels were significantly higher in the septic group (p = 0.002) at 5.1 mg/dL (0.4–17.2) compared to 0.5 mg/dL (0–2.5) in the aseptic group.
2.2. Proteome Analysis of the Synovial Fluid
2.2.1. General Composition of the Proteome
To compare the proteomic profile of the synovial fluid of the patients in each group, LC-MS/MS-based proteomics was performed. Proteomic analysis of the SF resulted in the identification of 515 different proteins based on at least two peptides. To investigate proteomic differences between septic and aseptic implant failure, the proteomic profiles were separated into the two groups: septic (n = 8) and aseptic (n = 13). The average number of proteins identified in septic samples was 298 ± 69 (178–394) and 316 ± 50 (253–427) in aseptic samples, with no statistical differences (p = 0.492, Figure 1A).
To further increase the confidence level of the proteomic data and for the subsequent statistical analysis, only proteins that occurred in 60% of all samples within one group were considered, resulting in a protein count of 305. Of these proteins, 64% (194) were classified as secreted proteins, 32% (97) were of intracellular origin, 1% (4) were assigned to the membrane fraction, and 3% (10) could be assigned to more than one category, depending on the isoform (Figure 1C). Among the secreted proteins, 70% (135) were secreted into the blood, followed by 15% (30) that were secreted into the extracellular matrix (Figure 1D). Linear regression revealed a strong positive and significant relationship between the mean values of the relative abundance of the identified proteins in the septic and aseptic group (Figure 1B, F (1303) = 2260.012, p < 0.001), indicating a good consistency of the results.
Depending on the reference set used, 38–87% of the proteins could be assigned to the plasma proteome. A closer look at the ten proteins with the highest abundance showed that serum albumin (ALB) and immunoglobulin heavy constant gamma 1 (IGHG1) were found in the first two positions in SF of patients with both septic and aseptic implant failure (Figure 2).
2.2.2. Differentially Abundant Proteins
A statistical comparison of the proteins that were abundant in at least 60% of the samples within one group revealed the presence of 37 proteins of varying abundance (p < 0.05). Of these, 17 proteins (46%) showed a higher abundance in the septic group. Considering the threshold of at least a twofold change (log2 ≥ 1) for higher abundance and a decrease of 0.5 (log2 ≤ −1), nineteen proteins were considered, leaving nine proteins with at least a twofold change in abundance and ten proteins whose abundance decreased by at least half (Table 3). The proteins with the highest fold change in the septic group included the known marker proteins c-reactive protein (7.57-fold) and the calprotectin components protein S100-A8 (4.41-fold) and protein S100-A9 (3.1-fold). The protein with the highest fold change was leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 1 (LRG1) (9.07-fold) (Figure 3A, Table 2). Looking at the protein distribution in the different SF samples, the trend towards enrichment of these proteins in septic SF samples in contrast to aseptic SF samples is observable. However, patient-specific differences are also recognizable (Figure 3B).
In order to place the differentially abundant proteins into a biological context, pathway enrichment analysis was performed. Significantly enriched pathways were mainly related to hemostasis (platelet activation, signaling, and aggregation), the innate immune system (neutrophil degranulation and the complement system), extracellular matrix organization, and metabolism of proteins (Table 4). The majority of proteins that showed a fold change of more than 2 in septic SF could be assigned to the immune system, including LRG1, CRP, SERPINB1, S10A08, and S100A9.
2.3. Distribution of Biomarkers in SF
In the SF samples, we determined the protein concentration using a modified BCA method and the concentration of the biomarkers LRG1, CRP, and calprotectin using ELISA (Table 5). With the exception of protein concentration, all values showed a large scatter (SD ≥ 50%). However, as expected from the proteomic results, in all cases, the mean protein and biomarker concentrations were significantly higher in the SF of patients with septic implant failure than in the aseptic group (p ≤ 0.003), and the results show a very large effect size (Cohen’s d > 1.2) (Figure 4, Table 5).
To determine a meaningful cut-off value for the diagnosis of septic implant failure using the tested biomarkers in our cohort and to evaluate the efficacy of our test, we performed a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. In all cases, ROC curves and the test accuracy determined by the area under the curve (AUC) were similar (Figure 5). With the exception of LRG1, cut-off values with a sensitivity of 87.5% and a specificity of around 75% were determined for all biomarkers, with LRG1 having a higher specificity of 84.6%. The cut-off values are shown in Table 4.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
In the Western world, total joint replacement is a highly standardized procedure that improves mobility and quality of life, especially in the elderly population. In Germany, more than 300,000 patients underwent either total hip (177,826 patients) or total knee arthroplasty (137,030 patients) in 2022. Due to the aging population, high obesity rates, and the desire to remain physically active in old age, the number of annual joint replacement operations is expected to increase even further in the future. For this reason, the failure of endoprostheses will also increase, including the burden on patients and higher costs for the healthcare system. Today, aseptic implant loosening is a serious complication after total joint replacement and accounts for more than 22% of all revision procedures followed by periprosthetic joint infections (PJIs), which account for 16%. Aseptic implant failure includes periprosthetic fracture, mechanical instability, osteolysis due to wear debris, and stress shielding. Early PJIs, occurring less than three months after initial implantation, show typical signs of infection and are mainly caused by germs of high virulence, such as methicillin-resistant staphylococci, enterococci, or Gram-negative bacilli. Delayed (3–24 months after implantation) or low-grade PJIs are caused by low-virulence organisms such as methicillin-sensitive and coagulase-negative Staphylococci (CoNS), Streptococci and Propionibacterium acnes. These bacilli cause the formation of resistant biofilms on the implant and the surrounding tissue by producing immunomodulating products and extracellular polymeric substances, leading to resistance to antibiotics and the host’s immune response as well as to a reduced possibility of microbial detection. In surgical treatment, the differential diagnosis between septic and aseptic cases is crucial, as septic implant failures require treatment with antimicrobial agents and sometimes a two-stage revision, including implant removal, debridement, and the implantation of an antibiotic-releasing spacer prior to re-implantation. However, rapid and accurate clinical differentiation between septic and aseptic implant failure remains a challenge, especially in cases of low-grade PJI, where the usual clinical signs of infection may be absent. Diagnostic tests and clinical features may be inconsistent and to date, there is no diagnostic “gold standard”. In general, the diagnosis of PJI is based on a combination of clinical and intraoperative findings, microbiologic culture, histologic evaluation of periprosthetic tissue, and laboratory testing of blood and synovial fluid. In 2011, the Musculoskeletal Infection Society (MSIS) working group proposed a set of major and minor criteria for the definition of a PJI to address the lack of a single recognized set of diagnostic criteria for a PJI and the often inconsistent definitions. In the following years, at least five different definitions of PJI were proposed. According to the 2018 consensus definition for PJI, the major criteria for the diagnosis of PJI are the presence of a sinus tract with evidence of joint communication or visualization of the implant or at least two positive cultures of periprosthetic tissue. Minor criteria include synovial fluid biomarkers such as c-reactive protein (CRP), α-defensin, leucocyte esterase, and synovial blood cell composition such as white blood cell count (WBC) or polymorphonuclear leucocyte percentage (PMN%). However, the accuracy of these markers is limited, and it has been shown that choosing the right marker is not easy due to its advantages and disadvantages. Microbiological diagnosis occasionally produces a false negative or positive. It has been shown that the results of the WBC count and PMN values in the synovial fluid are distorted if antibiotics are administered before joint aspiration, if the synovial fluid is mixed with blood, or if there is open pus or inflammatory arthritis. Serum erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and serum CRP can be affected by various systemic inflammatory conditions such as autoimmune disorders, obesity, non-joint-related infections, and others. In contrast, alpha-defensin determination remains accurate even in the presence of antibiotics and blood admixtures in the synovial fluid, but is costly and has limited accessibility, and studies have shown that it is not statistically superior to the combination of the WBC count and the PMN% in the synovial fluid. Research into new reliable biomarkers for the diagnosis of PJI is ongoing, focusing on some new markers such as procalcitonin, calprotectin, IL-1β, and other immune system-related proteins. However, these markers need stronger evidence in order to be used as diagnostic markers. 
In this study, we used liquid chromatography-coupled mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to compare the protein composition of the synovial fluid from patients scheduled for revision arthroplasty due to septic or aseptic implant failure to find potential synovial biomarkers that could serve as possible diagnostic tools in the future.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: , Supplementary Table S1: List of proteins identified with at least 2 peptides, Supplementary Table S2: List of Proteins in at least 60% of a group, Supplementary Table S3: Significantly enriched pathways. Supplementary Document S1: Full description of the proteome method.
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data for the on-bead digestions have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository () with the dataset identifier PXD047507.