PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Blood cell
diseases: Open-angle glaucoma
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Glaucoma; Peripheral blood mononuclear cells; Shot gun proteomics; Immune system

ABSTRACT:
This study reports the first characterization of the intracellular proteome of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) isolated from subjects diagnosed with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG)by shot-gun proteomics.   Glaucoma is a chronic optic neuropathy and among the first causes of irreversible blindness on a global scale.  Several recent data have pointed out alterations of immune system processes in glaucoma subjects.  Very recently, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and NAD levels have been proposed as biomarkers of disease severity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Profiling of the proteome of peripheral blood mononuclear cells of subjects diagnosed with primary open angle glaucoma

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Venous blood was sampled in 10.0 ml Becton Dickinson (BD) Vacutainer blood collection tubes containing ethylenediamintetraacetic acid (EDTA). PBMCs, were freshly isolated within 1h from sampling by density-gradient centrifugation using Ficoll-Histopaque (FH). Briefly, whole blood was first diluted 1:1 in sterile 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and then gently layered on the top of FH (1:1 FH-blood ratio). Tubes were then centrifuged 1500 rpm, 30 min, at room temperature (r.t.), with brake set to off. After centrifugation, PBMC layer was gently isolated, washed three times with 1X PBS (1500 rpm, 10 min, r.t.), counted by Trypan blue staining using a Thoma cell counting chamber and stored at -80°C until use.  The profiling of the PBMC proteome was undertaken by shot-gun/bottom-up proteomic workflows under LFQ. PBMC pellets of n=12 subjects per experimental group were lysed in pre-chilled urea denaturing buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8) supplemented with a proteases inhibitors cocktail, PMSF and phosphatases inhibitors (sodium orthovanadate and β-glycerophosphate, both 1mM), sonicated (3 bursts, 10 seconds each, at 30 Hz) and cleared by centrifugation (13.000 rpm, 10 min, 4°C).    Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay and 200 µg enrolled for trypsin digestion. First, proteins were denatured with 5 mM di-thiothreitol (DTT) (45 min, room temperature [r.t.]), alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (30 min in the dark, r.t.). Then, samples were diluted to reduce urea concentration to 1 M and digested with mass-grade lysil C endopeptidase (1:200 enzyme:protein ratio, 2h, r.t.) and then mass-grade trypsin (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) (1:20 over-night, r.t.). The reaction was quenched with 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and peptides desalted and cleaned using C18 stage-tips (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by following manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were quantified by BCA peptide assay to inject equal quantities for each sample, dried in a Speed Vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA).   For each sample, 1 µg of peptides were analysed by Liquid Chromatography (LC)/MS-MS using an Orbitrap Exploris 240 online with a nano ultra-high pressure LC system (Dionex, Ultimate 3000).    Data were acquired under three different modalities:    Data Independent Acquisition (DIA)   Data Independent Acquisition over a different m/z windowing to meet the general criteria for generation of an experiment specific DIA library by Gas Phase Fractionation (GPF)   Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA)   A quality controls samples was injected every day of continuous analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
According to the different modalities of acquisition, raw proteomics files were analysed by different strategies, specifically:    DIA .raw files were analyzed by DIA-NN software under library-free search mode and using the UniProt database (UP000005640 – 9606, containing 82685 entries). By enabling the Match Between Run (MBR) and the library generation tool, an experiment specific DIA spectral library was generated, and samples re-processed using this library.   In the case of GPF, the GPF-refined library was generated using DIA-NN software. Thereafter, raw files were analyzed using this library in place of that indicated in the previous point.    DDA data were analyzed by Proteasome Discoverer (2.5) using the Sequest software implemented with the Inferys algorithm and Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) validated using a concatenated target-decoy strategy.  A contaminant list was included in the analysis.    Regardless of the acquisition modality the following parameters were used for all the searches: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as static modification, N-terminal acetylation of peptides and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modification.  False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set in all cases to 1%.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Subjects’ Selection and Enrollment
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBCMs) were isolated in subjects diagnosed with POAG, and control patients admitted to IRCCS-Fondazione Bietti over >12 months. All procedures were approved by the local ethical committee and performed in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki and the Good Clinical and Laboratory Practices. Enrolled subjects were asked to read and sign the written informed consent prior to study participation. A detailed medical history was asked to ascertain whether subjects were eligible for enrollment in the study according to the exclusion criteria summarized below.
Inclusion criteria for POAG subjects included the following: age > 18 years and confirmed diagnosis of POAG based on European Glaucoma Society criteria. Nonglaucomatous controls were aged >18 years and diagnosis of cataract was accepted, as done in other studies.
Exclusion criteria included comorbidities and neurodegenerative disorders, including pseudoexfoliation and pigmentary glaucoma as well as angle closure and congenital glaucomas, cancer, immune system and metabolic syndromes, infectious diseases, use of glucocorticoids, or immunosuppressive drugs.
A detailed medical history was collected at the time of the patient’s first visit and was reconfirmed or updated during follow-up visits. The medical history of each of the patients enrolled in this study was thoroughly reviewed to exclude systemic diseases that could potentially affect the analysis; some of the patients who underwent surgery (see Table S1) were further tested before the procedure, and no previously undiagnosed diseases were found.
Demographic, epidemiological, and clinical parameters of enrolled subjects, including the list of systemic and topical medications, are summarized in Table S1.
PBMCs Isolation Procedure
Venous blood was sampled in 10.0 mL of Becton Dickinson (BD) Vacutainer blood collection tubes containing ethylenediamintetraacetic acid (EDTA). PBMCs were freshly isolated within 1 h from sampling by density-gradient centrifugation using Ficoll–Histopaque (FH) (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Briefly, whole blood was first diluted 1:1 in sterile 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then gently layered on top of FH (1:1 FH-blood ratio). Tubes were then centrifuged at 1500 rpm, 30 min, at room temperature (rt), with the brake set to off. After centrifugation, the PBMCs layer was gently isolated, washed three times with 1× PBS (1500 rpm, 10 min, rt), counted by Trypan blue staining using a Thoma cell counting chamber, and stored at −80 °C until use.
Shotgun Proteomics Workflow
The profiling of the PBMCs proteome was undertaken by shotgun/bottom-up proteomic workflows under LFQ. PBMCs pellets of n = 12 subjects per experimental group (Table S1 and Supporting Information 1) were lysed in prechilled urea denaturing buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8) supplemented with a proteases inhibitors cocktail, PMSF and phosphatases inhibitors (sodium orthovanadate and β-glycerophosphate, both 1 mM), sonicated (3 bursts, 10 s each, at 30 Hz) and cleared by centrifugation (13,000 rpm, 10 min, 4 °C).
Protein concentration was determined by BCA protein assay, and 200 μg was enrolled for trypsin digestion. First, proteins were denatured with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (45 min, room temperature [r.t.]) and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (30 min in the dark, r.t.). Then, samples were diluted to reduce urea concentration to 1 M and digested with mass-grade lysil C endopeptidase (Wako Chemicals, Japan) (1:200 enzyme:protein ratio, 2 h, rt) and then mass-grade trypsin (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) (1:20 overnight, r.t.). The reaction was quenched with 0.4% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and peptides were desalted and cleaned using C18 stage tips (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) by following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were quantified by BCA peptide assay to inject equal quantities for each sample, dried in a Speed Vacuum concentrator, and resuspended in 5% acetonitrile (ACN), and 0.1% formic acid (FA).
Mass Spectrometer Settings
For each sample, 1 μg of peptides were analyzed (two injections) by liquid chromatography (LC)/MS-MS using an Orbitrap Exploris 240 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) online with a nano ultrahigh pressure LC system (Dionex, Ultimate 3000).
Data-independent acquisition (DIA);
Data-independent acquisition over a different m/z windowing to meet the general criteria for generation of an experiment specific DIA library by gas phase fractionation (GPF);
Data-dependent acquisition (DDA).
Data were acquired under three different modalities:
The parameters used for the analysis are listed in Table S4. A quality control sample (HeLa digest, Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) was injected every day of continuous analysis.
Western Blotting
Western blotting studies on a selected panel of proteins were run to confirm the proteomics data. To increase the robustness of data, in addition to the samples analyzed by mass spectrometry, an additional n = 14 subjects for each experimental group (Table S1) were included in the analysis (for a total of n = 26 subjects/group). Whole-cell lysates prepared as described above (urea buffer) were used. In all cases, samples were heat-denatured and reduced in Laemmli buffer 1× supplemented with 1 mM DTT. Thereafter, 4–20% acrylamide precast gels (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) were used to separate proteins by SDS-PAGE. After separation, proteins were transferred to HyBond-ECL nitrocellulose filters (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and probed with the antibodies indicated. All antibodies used were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, Massachusetts, USA), except for the NADK antibody that was purchased from Proteintech (Rosemont, IL, USA) and Bcl-2 (Santa-Cruz Technology, CA, USA). Antibodies were diluted 1:4000 in 0.1% Tween-PBS 0.1% fat-free milk and, after, incubated with a horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antirabbit or antimouse IgG antibody (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), diluted 1:10.000 in 0.1% Tween-PBS 0.1% fat-free milk. Bands were developed by ECL chemiluminescence and recorded in an iBright (Thermo Fisher Scientific). These parameters were used as a reference to address target proteins toward total protein normalization or normalization on classic internal controls (Sbardella et al., 2021). To obtain a good visualization of proteins, the micrograms loaded were found to fall off the linearity range of β-actin or GAPDH. Therefore, the fold change in individual proteins was calculated by normalizing the protein band intensity to the total proteins loaded in each lane. To this aim, filters were stained with Ponceau S and gels by Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) (this last stain is not shown).
The dynamic linear range for internal controls (e.g., tubulin, actin, and GAPDH) was previously calculated in our lab and calculated here again providing the same plots.
Uncropped Western blotting filters are provided in Figure S4.
Bioinformatic Analysis
DIA.raw files were analyzed by DIA-NN software under library-free search mode and using the UniProt database (UP000005640–9606, containing 82685 entries). By enabling the Match Between Run (MBR) and the library generation tool, an experiment-specific DIA spectral library was generated, and samples were reprocessed using this library. Data commented below are based on this output.
In the case of GPF, the GPF-refined library was generated as described elsewhere using DIA-NN software. Thereafter, raw files were analyzed using this library in place of that indicated in the previous point.
DDA data were analyzed by Proteasome Discoverer (2.5) using the Sequest software and Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs) validated using a concatenated target-decoy strategy. A contaminant list was included in the analysis.
According to the different modalities of acquisition, raw proteomics files were analyzed by different strategies, specifically:
Regardless of the acquisition modality, the following parameters were used for all the searches: carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as static modification and N-terminal acetylation of peptides and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was set in all cases to 1%.
Data Analysis and Statistical Analysis
A quantile normalization strategy was preferred over other approaches. A Mann–Whitney test with Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons was used (p ≤ 0.05). In the case of Wb data, Student’s t test was generally applied. Data analysis and visualization of data (Volcano plot, Venn diagram, GO enrichments, multivariate analysis) were done by R software (4.3.1) with the preprocessCore and clusterProfiler packages (Bolstad B (2024). preprocessCore: A collection of preprocessing functions. R package version 1.66.0) and by STRING Network. GraphPad Prism software (8.0) was used for the analysis of Wb data. Significance in all cases was set at p ≤ 0.05.

RESULTS:
Results
Clinical Characteristics of Subjects Enrolled in the Proteomic Study
Twenty-five subjects (n = 26) for each experimental group were enrolled in the study (Figure 1). Mean age (±SD) was 71.81 (±11.49) for nonglaucomatous controls (control) and 71.42 (±7.06) for POAG subjects, and regarding the gender ratio, it was 11:15 (males:females) for control and 13:13 for POAG (Table S1).
To minimize bias of interpretation, attention was paid to comorbidities as well as local and systemic medications.
The fraction of subjects with no known comorbidities was n = 8 for POAG and n = 9 for control. Hypertension was among the most prevalent comorbidities across all subjects enrolled (n = 16 for POAG, n = 13 for control). In these subjects, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE) were the most represented class of drugs (n = 10 for POAG, n = 5 for control), followed by β-blockers (n = 5 for POAG, n = 8 for control) and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) (n = 2 for POAG, n = 3 for control). No subjects reported local or systemic drug use that would interfere with the study outcomes. Exclusions included severe comorbidities and the use of drugs with immunosuppressive activities.
n = 4 fast progressor subjects, identified by a visual field rate of progression >−1 dB/y;
n = 12 subjects with controlled glaucoma defect;
n = 10 subjects without available visual field data including those who received their first glaucoma diagnosis the day of blood withdrawal.
To explore the heterogeneity of structural and functional damage across POAG subjects, we enrolled
Considering the eye with the worst visual field test, two subjects demonstrated better than MD −6 dB, 5 subjects were between −6 and −12 dB, and 9 had MD worse than −12 dB. Additional demographic and clinical details are shown in Table S1.
DIA Approach Identified >4000 Unambiguous Proteins in POAG and Nonglaucomatous Cataract PBMCs
A pilot shotgun proteomics study was undertaken enrolling the n = 12 subjects group (demographic and clinical parameters are introduced in Supporting Information 1) to compare the proteome of PBMCs of POAG and control groups. As described in the Materials and Methods section, spectra were acquired by three different MS modalities. The data analysis discussed below refers to the submission of DIA.raw files to DIA-NN software under library-free search, that is using the experiment-specific DIA library generated from the input files, in accordance with the software instructions (Demichev et al.). However, the overall biological outcome was confirmed also by DDA (Tables S2 and S3 and Figures S1 and S2) and by an additional DIA analysis run with different technical parameters to enable the generation of a GPF-refined library (not discussed in detail) from the samples.
First, in the output file, proteins were filtered according to the following criteria: (a) q-value (Lib.Q.Value in the output matrix) ≤ 0.01; (b) identification of at least one proteotypic peptide; (c) identification of the protein in ≥9 out of 12 subjects of the same experimental group. Different visualization strategies were then used to analyze the technical soundness of the experiment. The Christmas tree plot (Figure 2A), which shows the log2-fold change (FC) ratio of proteins identified versus their abundance (i.e., weight), was consistent with a comparable distribution of data between POAG and control groups. The coefficients of variation (CVs) were <30% for the vast majority of all proteins identified and the shape of CV distribution overlapping between POAG and control (Figure 2B). Considering the phenotypical variability between subjects, this parameter was interpreted as promising for further interpretation of the data; the contamination with blood proteins was negligible (<1% of all proteins) for all samples enrolled (Figure 2C).
The principal component analysis (PCA) plot highlighted a clear separation of POAG and control groups across PC1 and PC2 (Figure 2D).
Even adopting stringent criteria for protein identification, the approach identified a remarkable 4006 proteins common to POAG and control groups. Additional 465 proteins were identified as POAG-specific and 118 as control-specific (Figure 3A).
Based on the filter posed and considering that DIA approaches are less burdened by the missing values problem as DDA actually does, the proteins identified as group-specific were not filtered out. The identity of these proteins is reported in Tables S2 and S3 for POAG and control, respectively.
Although the distribution of data was clearly comparable between experimental groups, a class-specific quantile normalization strategy, which was found to outperform the canonical quantile normalization strategy, was applied to normalize the intensity values before analyzing for differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The intensities ratio of proteins common to POAG and control groups were calculated by setting a log2FC ≥ 0.5 and ≤−0.5 (expressed as POAG/control ratio). The statistical significance of observations was determined by the Mann–Whitney nonparametric test (p ≤ 0.05) and p values corrected by the Benjamini–Hochberg test for multiple hypotheses (Figure 3B).
Interestingly, a significant proportion of proteins (353) were found as upregulated in POAG PBMCs. Conversely, a lower number (82) of targets were identified as downregulated in the same experimental group. The full list of proteins upregulated and downregulated in the POAG/control ratio is provided in Tables S2 and S3, respectively.
Data Clustering and Rationalization (KEGG and GO) Highlights Alterations of Key Metabolic Pathways in POAG PBMCs
Structural component of chromatin and chromatin and nucleosomal DNA binding proteins, as well as RNA polymerase II activity: histone deacetylase complex subunit SAP18 (O0042), DNA fragmentation factor subunit alpha (O00273), ATP-dependent RNA helicase DHX15 (O43143), pre-mRNA-processing factor 6 (O94906), U1 and U2 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (P08579 and P08621), histone H1.3, H1.4, H3.3, and H4 (P16402, P10412, P84243, and P62805), DNA topoisomerase 1 (P11387); DNA-directed RNA polymerase II subunit RPB1 and RBP11a (P24928, P52435), DNA-directed RNA polymerases I, II, and III subunit RPABC3 (P52434), DNA topoisomerase 1 (P11387); histone deacetylase 2 (Q92769);
Hydrolase activity: neutrophil elastase (P08246), cathepsin G (P08311), myeloperoxidase (P05164), eosinophil cationic protein (P12724), granzyme M (P51124), MMP-9 (P14780);
Superoxide-generating NAD(P)H oxidase activity: NAD kinase (O95544), nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (P43490), NADH dehydrogenase 1 beta subcomplex subunit 5 (O43674), DNAJ homologue subfamily C member 17 (H0YLV4), cytochrome c oxidase, subunit 6 (P09669), NAD-dependent protein deacetylase sirtuin-3, mitochondrial (Q9NTG7); aldehyde dehydrogenase (P05091);
Autophagy and apoptosis proteins: beclin-1 (Q14457) and Bcl2 (P10415); Bcl2 associated transcription factor 1 (Q9NYF8), apoptosis inhibitor 5 (Q9BZZ5);
A heterogeneous panel of proteins involved in immune system regulation: protein S100-A9 and S100-A12 (P06702, P80511), annexin A2 (P07355), A4 (P09525), A6 (P08133), A7 (P20073), A11 (P50995), brain acid soluble protein 1 (P80723), dynein axonemal heavy chain 5 (Q8TE73);
Toll-like and RAGE receptor binding: rab11 family interacting protein 1 (Q6WKZ4), myeloid differentiation primary response protein Myd88 (Q99836), ras-related protein Rab-3D (O95716)), TRAF3-interacting JNK-activating modulator (Q9Y228), stimulator of interferon genes protein (Q86WV6), and inactive ubiquitin thioesterase OTULIN (Q9NUU6).
To reveal the terms enriched in POAG PBMCs, upregulated and exclusive proteins were subsequently analyzed by Gene Ontology (GO) and KEGG pathway. By inspecting the molecular function (MF) and biological processes (BP) charts (in both cases p ≤ 0.05, plots show only terms identified with >10 and >15 proteins, respectively), Our results show POAG PBMCs were significantly enriched (proteins are identified by UniProt primary accession number) (Figure 4A,B, Figure S2, and Table S2):
In addition, enrichment of proteins critical for lineage determination and controls of proliferation of lymphoid system and of T-cell immunity were documented: DNA-binding protein Ikaros (Q13422) and Ets-related transcription factor Elf-1 (P32519), CD2 antigen (O95400), T-cell surface glycoprotein CD5 (P06127), and tyrosine-protein kinase ZAP-70 (P43403).
To further investigate the data set, upregulated proteins in POAG PBMCs were submitted to STRING Network software. A meaningful 2428 edges for 348 nodes, with an average node degree of 14 and an average clustering coefficient of 0.465 (p < 10–16) was documented, indicating that this protein data set had significant biological connections (Figure S3).
Regarding the KEGG analysis, a significant enrichment of different pathways (p ≤ 0.05) (Figure 4C), namely, protein export (hsa03060), DNA replication (hsa03030), spliceosome (hsa03040), mRNA surveillance pathway (hsa03015), ribosome (hsa03010), RNA transport (hsa03013), Systemic lupus erythematosus (hsa05322), phagosome (hsa04145), and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (hsa05014), was documented in POAG PBMCs.
Interestingly, among nodes supporting this enrichment, there were proteins, such as beclin-1, Bcl2, ubiquilin-2 and ubiquilin-4, cytochrome c oxidase subunit, and NADH dehydrogenases that are robustly involved in pathological pathways of neurodegeneration, cell proliferation and death, and energy and redox metabolism (Figure 4C).
Based on these data, GO enrichment charts were further generated for proteins identified as downregulated in POAG PBMCs. For the sake of readership, these proteins are now labeled in figures as enriched in controls PBMC (p ≤ 0.05) (Figure 5A,B, Table S3).
Mechanisms of regulation of peptidase and protease activity: heparin cofactor 2 (P05546), TIMP-1 (P01033), TIMP-3 (P35625), alpha-1-antitrypsin (P01009), alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (P02763), and glia-derived nexin (serpin E2, P07093);
Soluble mediators of inflammation: C–C motif chemokine 5 (P13501), C-X-C motif Chemokine 5 (P42830), platelet basic protein (P02775), and platelet factor 4 (P02776);
Proteins involved in regulation of mitochondrial and autophagic processes through lipid mobilization: caveolae-associated protein 2 (O95810) autophagy-related protein 9A (Q7Z3C6), and atlastin-2 (Q8NHH9);
Complement factors and adhesion molecules: complement C3 (P01024), complement component C8 beta chain (P07358), intercellular adhesion molecule 2 (P13598), and c-type lectin domain family 1 member B (Q9P126).
Of specific note, in this case, proteins specular to those identified as upregulated in POAG PBMCs were documented, namely:
Western Blotting Analysis of Selected Proteins Confirms Proteomic Data Sets
Beclin-1 together with microtubule-associated light chain I and II (LC3B–I, LC3B–II), which are validated markers of autophagy;
TIMP-1, TIMP-3 and MMP-9;
Bcl2;
NAD kinase (NADK).
To strengthen the evidence regarding the dysregulation of pathways central for immune system function, including those identified by the KEGG analysis and previously mentioned (Figure 4C), a selection of proteins was interrogated by Western blotting (Figure 6):
To strengthen the outcome, the intensity of beclin-1, Bcl2, and NADK calculated during the first analysis on n = 12 subjects was used to impute the number of additional subjects to enroll to reach a power of >90% (considering α = 0.05). This threshold was chosen to partially compensate for the semiquantitative nature of the study’s approach.
The analysis indicated that enrollment of 20 or more subjects for each experimental group would provide a power of >90 for NADK, Bcl2, and beclin-1. Therefore, n = 14 additional subjects for each experimental condition (n = 26 subjects per group in total) were enrolled.
In our analysis, Wb data indicated that TIMP-1 levels were slightly higher in the control subjects, although the observation did not reach statistical significance. Conversely, TIMP-3 was detectable, at least for the sensibility of the approach, exclusively in control subjects. Interestingly, a specular behavior was documented for MMP-9, which is targeted by TIMP-3 in vivo, and was detected almost exclusively in POAG subjects.
Regarding autophagy, beclin-1 levels were significantly upregulated in POAG subjects. To validate this finding further, filters were probed with an anti-LC3B antibody, although the protein was not detected by the MS approach. LC3B–II levels, which more truthfully represent the rate of pathway activation, were above the detection limit in the case of control PBMCs, and they were robustly detected in POAG cells. Furthermore, compared to control PBMCs, the intracellular content of Bcl2 was significantly increased in POAG cells, as well as that of NADK, a cytosolic enzyme involved in the generation of NADP+ using NAD+ as precursor.
Thereafter, to verify the effect of potential confounders, the relationship between beclin-1, Bcl2, and NADK intensities with the main ocular, demographic, and systemic parameters of the study subjects was computed by multivariate regression analysis in POAG and control groups (Figure 7A,B). We included in the model covariates with observed values in ≥15% subjects.
The analysis did not retrieve any significant relationship (p ≤ 0.05) between individual protein intensities and main ocular and systemic parameters, nor for control or POAG groups, with the exception of Bcl2 and treatment with oral acetazolamide (p ≤ 0.047). However, the assumption of oral acetazolamide was documented for 4 out of 26 subjects and was not reported in control subjects.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Glaucoma represents a group of neurodegenerative conditions characterized by the progressive degeneration of the optic nerve and the irreversible loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) with consequent impairment of the visual field. According to the World Health Organization, glaucoma is the second cause of irreversible blindness, accounting for 4.2 million (2.2%) of the 191 million visually impaired individuals on a global scale. Aging is an established risk factor for open-angle glaucoma (OAG), and as life expectancy is constantly increasing, the number of people affected by the disease is estimated to significantly increase to 112 million by 2040 (Tham 2014).
Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG), the most prevalent clinical form of OAG, is a multifactorial disease with a pathogenesis that has yet to be fully described. Although elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) has long been associated with POAG, its reduction has been shown to decrease but not eliminate the risk of POAG development or progression.−
A broad array of alterations encompassing the turnover and remodeling of the eye’s anterior chamber tissues, regulation of systemic and local hemodynamic factors, mechanisms of inflammation, and genetic traits have all been suggested to combine and synergize during glaucomatous disease.− In this framework, great attention has been paid over the past decade to the pathological role of non-IOP factors in glaucoma etiology, including the process of neuroinflammation.
The paradigm of neuroinflammation in POAG and its relationship to hemodynamics and glaucomatous disease have been investigated in previous pilot work. Proteomics, metabolomics, and immune-enzymatic assays have been concordant in identifying increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines [e.g., interleukin-1β (IL-1β), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), etc.], adhesion molecules (e.g., selectins), enzymes and their inhibitors [e.g., Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs), tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs)], stress-proteins [e.g., crystallins, heat shock proteins (HSPs)], and immune system components (e.g., complement) in local (e.g., aqueous humor) and systemic (e.g., plasma) fluids of glaucoma patients.− Unlike within other tissues, the dynamics of inflammation within the nervous tissues originates from two distinct cell lineages: (i) the resident glia (microglia and macroglia, represented by Muller cells and astrocytes in the retina), which provide support and protection to RGCs; and (ii) blood-borne immune cells. The cross-talk between these two lineages is thought to serve key roles in the homeostasis of nervous tissues and is currently being investigated also for brain neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases.
Research-based evidence has progressively highlighted that glial activation has prominent roles in shaping the adaptation of the retinal and optic nerve tissues to mechanical insults, which are characteristic of glaucoma pathogenesis (i.e., microbead injection into the anterior chamber of murine models). Furthermore, glial cells stimulate the adaptive and innate immunity during the early and advanced phases of disease pathogenesis. More recently, preclinical data have pointed out phenotypical and molecular alterations of the immune system and in particular of T-lymphocytes primed against gut microbiota antigens, such as HSPs, during disease onset and progression.
Very recently, oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) levels of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) have been found to highly correlate with disease progression, thereby emerging as biomarkers of progressive glaucoma.
Therefore, the purpose of this pilot study was to shed further light on cellular and molecular pathways of PBMCs isolated from the peripheral blood of subjects diagnosed with POAG and nonglaucomatous controls (control) (Figure 1). To this aim, we interrogated global perturbations of proteome composition by high throughput mass spectrometry analyses run by label-free quantification (LFQ) adopting different acquisition modalities, including data-independent acquisition (DIA) using libraries generated in silico or refined by gas phase fractionation (GPF)-DIA, and further data-dependent acquisition (DDA).
This novel approach seeks to reveal differences between the proteome of POAG and control PBMCs, highlighting molecular signatures, including regulation of immune system compartments, proteolytic balance, mitochondrial, and redox metabolism, which are worth being explored further to elucidate their potential involvement in neuroinflammation and glaucomatous neurodegeneration.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD059976 and 10.6019/PXD059976.
Supporting Information Available
Additional experimental details, materials, methods, and analysis (including raw Western blotting images) (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.4c10035.
Supplementary Material