PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Hela cell
diseases: Cervix carcinoma
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Interactome mapping; Turboid; Ap; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
In recent years, proximity labelling has established itself as an unbiased and powerful approach to map the interactome of specific proteins. While physiological expression of the labelling enzyme is beneficial for the mapping of interactors, generation of the desired cell lines remains time-consuming and challenging. Using our established pipeline for the rapid generation of C- and N-terminal CRISPR-Cas9 knock-ins (KIs) based on antibiotic selection, we were able to compare the performance of commonly used labelling enzymes when endogenously expressed. Endogenous tagging of the μ subunit of the AP-1 complex with TurboID allowed identification of known interactors and cargo proteins that simple overexpression of a labelling enzyme fusion protein could not reveal. We used the KI-strategy to compare the interactome of the different adaptor protein (AP) complexes and clathrin and were able to assemble lists of potential interactors and cargo proteins that are specific for each sorting pathway. Our approach greatly simplifies the execution of proximity labelling experiments for proteins in their native cellular environment and allows going from CRISPR transfection to mass spectrometry analysis and interactome data in just over a month.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
When less is more – A fast TurboID KI approach for high sensitivity endogenous interactome mapping

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Peptides were reconstituted in 10 µl of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 4% acetonitrile, and 5 µl were analyzed by an Ultimate 3000 reversed-phase capillary nano liquid chromatography system connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected and concentrated on a trap column (PepMap100 C18, 3 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 2 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equilibrated with 0.05% TFA in water. After switching the trap column inline, LC separations were performed on a capillary column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 75 µm i.d. x 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at an eluent flow rate of 300 nl/min. Mobile phase A contained 0.1 % formic acid in water, and mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile / 20% water. The column was pre-equilibrated with 5% mobile phase B followed by an increase of 5–44% mobile phase B in 100 min. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode utilising a single MS survey scan (m/z 300–1650) with a resolution of 60,000, and MS/MS scans of the 15 most intense precursor ions with a resolution of 15,000. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 seconds and automatic gain control was set to 3x106 and 1x105 for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively.

DATA PROCESSING:
Only the unprocessed raw files are provided here. Further data processing is described in the publication.