PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Neuroblast; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized amino-terminal residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Label free
keywords: Neuronal nos; Starvation; Rapamycin; Sh-sy5y human neuroblastoma

ABSTRACT:
Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS/NOS1) is upregulated in the aging brain and contributes to age-and stress-associated neuronal dysfunctions. To mimic this situation for the study of underlying mechanisms we generated a cell model in which human SH-SH5Y neuroblastoma cells constitutively express NOS1 at a level comparable with the rodent brain, whereas the control cells have only low levels. SH-SY5Y cells are the most widely used cell model for neurodegenerative and aging research. They were stably transduced with a lentiviral vector for NOS1 and FACS sorted. Control cells were transduced with the backbone vector, referred to as MOCK or "WT-LV205".  Neuronal aging of SH-SY5Y can be imposed with a number of pharmacological, genetic or stress stimuli including retinoic acid and repeated cycles of starvation. Hence, to further challenge the cells we imposed proteostasis stress by treatment with 1 µM rapamycin for 24h or culture in serum-free medium for 24h. Control cells were cultured in full medium, which was RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and 2 mM glutamine. All cells were kept at 37°C in 5% CO2 atmosphere in a humidified tissue culture incubator.  Rapamycin elicits mTOR dependent autophagy, whereas starvation is a stimulus for chaperone-mediated autophagy, but also affects proteolysis by the proteasome and lysosome and eventually, ER stress. During stimulation, all cells were supplemented with NOS cofactors including 10 µM NAD, 40 µM NADPH, and 100 µM tetrahydrobiopterin.  The proteome data set shows nNOS/NOS1-dependent alterations of protein expression in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells in full medium, on stimulation with rapamycin or exposure to serum-free starvation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Protein expression in MOCK and neuronal nitric oxide synthase 1 (NOS1) transduced SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells on stimulation with rapamycin or serum free starvation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell harvest and protein extraction  After 24h starvation or rapamycin treatment, cells were washed twice with PBS, scraped off and pelleted by centrifugation. Cell pellets were homogenized in 1% Triton, 100 mM Tris pH 7.4 using a motor-driven Potter–Elvehjemn with 15 strokes, and then incubated on ice for 15 min. Following centrifugation at 16000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and precipitated with 20% TCA. The pellet was resolved in extraction buffer (10% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.8). Precipitated proteins were washed twice with ice-cold acetone and finally resolved in extraction buffer. Sonification for 5 s facilitated resolubilization of proteins. 100 µg of protein from each fraction was diluted in 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 M DTT, mixed with 200 µl 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 and loaded onto spin filters with a 30 kDa cut off (Microcon). The filter aided universal sample preparation protocol (FASP) [1] was used as described. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin/LysC (sequencing grade, Promega). Following the protocol of Kulak and Mann [2], acidified peptides (final concentration 0.1% v/v TCA) were fractionated on multi-stop-and-go tips (StageTips) composed of C18-tips and strong cation exchange (SCX) tips. Peptides from the pellet fraction were eluted in 3 steps. Peptides from the supernatant fraction were eluted in 6 steps. All fractions of each sample were eluted in wells of microtiter plates. Peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  Label free mass spectrometry  For proteome analysis, the LC/MS was performed on a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase pre-column (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on in-house packed picotip emitter tips (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long from New Objectives) with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The gradient was from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 80% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. Lock mass option [3] was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy between multiple runs. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts. The maximal ion injection time was 160 ms. Higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions. The maximal ion injection time was 150 ms. Ions were excluded if they occurred within a time-window of 20 s following a fragmentation event. Full scan data were acquired in profile mode and fragments in centroid mode by Xcalibur software

DATA PROCESSING:
Xcalibur raw files were analyzed using the proteomics software Max Quant (1.5.3.30) [4] The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. Acetylation of N-terminus (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were set as variable modifications, and  carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines was set as fixed modification. The human proteome set from Uniprot (Download April 2015, 68511 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins. The False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Label free quantification values were obtained from at least one identified peptide. Identifications from the reverse decoy database, identified by site only and known contaminants were excluded.

METHODS:
Methods
Cell culture
Human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and 2 mM glutamine at 37 °C in 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37 °C in a humidified tissue culture incubator. For SILAC experiments cells were grown in SILAC™ Protein ID & Quantitation Medium (Invitrogen) with SILAC stable isotopic [13C6]-L-arginine and [13C6] L-lysine and supplemented with 10% dialysed fetal bovine serum, 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were grown in SILAC medium for more than 10 passages before starting experiments.
Nitric oxide synthase (nNOS/Nos1) expressing neuroblastoma cells
A stable cell line of nNOS expressing SH-SY5Y cells was produced by lentiviral-mediated transduction of mouse nitric oxide synthase 1 (nNOS) using a lentiviral plasmid vector (GeneCopoeia, Mm04153 pReceiver-Lv). Control cells were transduced with the control lentivirus and are referred to as MOCK. Lentiviral particles were produced by transient co-transfection of HEK293T cells with 10 µg of vector DNA, together with three helper plasmids (5 µg of pMDL/RRE, 3 µg of RSV-Rev, and pMD2G-VSVG) using the calcium phosphate precipitation method. Cell supernatants containing lentivirus particles were harvested 48 h after transfection, passed through a 0.45 µm filter, and concentrated by centrifugation for 90 min at 40,000 rpm at 4 °C. The virus pellet was suspended in 25 µl cold 1x PBS and the titers were adjusted to 2–3 × 107 transduction units/ml. SH-SY5Y cells were transduced at 10 MOI in complete medium. After 3 days, the efficiency of virus infection was determined by flow cytometry of EGFP expression, and EGFP-positive cells were FACS sorted (FACS-Aria Cell sorter, Becton Dickinson, Germany).
Cell stimulation
To induce mTOR-dependent autophagy MOCK and nNOS+ SH-SY5Y cells (1 × 106) were grown to 60% confluence and were stimulated with 1 µM rapamycin (1 mM stock in ethanol or DMSO), which was added to the culture medium. An equal volume of vehicle was added to the control cells. Cells were supplemented with NOS cofactors including 10 µM NAD, 40 µM NADPH, and 100 µM tetrahydrobiopterin. For starvation, cells were cultured in serum free medium for 1–3 days.
Saville-Griess assay of NOS activity
The concentration of nitrite/nitrate was determined with the Saville-Griess assay in a microtiter plate. A standard curve was prepared with serial dilutions of freshly prepared 40 μM NaNO2. One hundred micrograms of protein were added to a well and adjusted to 100 µl. 30 µl of 0.5% ammonium sulfamate (ASM; Aldrich) in water was added, followed by 30 µl of 2 N HCl, and incubation for 1–2 min. Subsequently, 40 µl of Griess reagent (sulphanilamide/N-1-napthylethylenediamine dihydrochloride (Promega) was added and incubated for 10 min at room temperature and the absorption at 595 nm was then measured using Spectra Fluor Plus® instrument and XFluor® software (Tecan, Crailsheim).
Quantitative RT PCR and Western blot
Total RNA was extracted from homogenized cells or tissue with the RNAeasy tissue Mini Kit (Qiagen), and reverse transcribed using poly-dT as a primer to obtain cDNA fragments. QRT-PCR was performed using an ABI prism 7700 TaqMan thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems) with the SybrGreen detection system and primer sets recommended by the manufacturer.
Whole cell protein extracts were prepared in RIPA lysis buffer (Sigma) or PhosphoSafe Buffer (Sigma Germany) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and PMSF 10 µg/ml, separated on a 10, 12 or 14% SDS-PAGE gel (30 µg/lane), transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Freiburg, Germany) by wet-blotting or electro-blotting. Blots were blocked and developed in Odyssee buffer or 5% skim milk in 1xPBS/Tween 20. For detection of specific proteins, blots were incubated with primary antibodies (Suppl. Table 1). β-actin, β-tubulin, GAPDH and Hsp70 were used as loading controls. Secondary antibodies conjugated with IRDye 680 or 800 (1:1000; LI-COR Biosciences, Bad Homburg, Germany) were used for detection. Blots were sequentially developed and analyzed on the Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences), superimposed and quantified using ImageStudio Light.
UBE2D activity
We assessed the concentration-dependent effects of nitric oxide on UBE2D3 activity employing an in vitro ubiquitination assay (MDM2 Ubiquitin Ligase Assay - p53 Substrate, BostonBiochem), in which UBE2D3 activates the Ring finger E3 ubiquitin ligase, MDM2 (murine double minute 2), which in turn conjugates ubiquitin with its substrate, His6-p53. Ubiquitination of the latter is subsequently quantified per Western Blot analysis with anti-His or anti-p53 antibody detection. The assay employs recombinant proteins for E1, UBE2D3, GST-MDM2 and the substrate, His6-p53. The reaction was prepared in 30 µl on ice by adding the components one by one in the absence and presence of 0.1–100 µM NO donors, DEA/NO and NOC-5 (both Sigma, added after UBE2D3), and finally started by adding ubiquitin. After 1 h incubation, the reaction was terminated by adding 8 µl 5X SDS-PAGE sample buffer and 2 µl 1 M DTT. Samples were directly submitted to standard 10% SDS-PAGE, electro-blotting onto nitrocellulose membranes and detection with anti-p53/anti mouse-IR-dye on an Odyssee infrared scanner.
Proteasome activity
Proteasome activity was analyzed according to the instructions for the Proteasome 20S Activity Assay (Sigma, # MAK172), which measures the chymotrypsin-like protease activity associated with the proteasome complex. The assay uses LLVY-R110 as a fluorogenic substrate. nNOS+ and MOCK cells were stimulated with 1 µM rapamycin for 6 h or 24 h, the last 2 h in the presence of the substrate, which was added to the culture medium. Cleavage of LLVY-R110 by the proteasome generates strongly green fluorescent R110, which was quantified on a SPECTRAFluor Plus 96-well plate reader at ex/em 492/535 nm.
Cell cycle analysis using flow cytometry
nNOS+ and MOCK cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes and starved or stimulated with 1 µM bafilomycin for 6 h and 24 h. Cells were harvested by trypsinization, fixed with 80% ethanol, washed, incubated for 5 min with 0.125% Triton X-100, washed again and stained with propidium iodide in PBS containing 0.2 mg/ml RNAse A. Stained cells were analyzed by flow cytometry (FACSCanto II, Becton Dickinson). The cell cycle distribution i.e. the percentage of cells in subG1, G0/G1, S and G2/M phase, was assessed using FlowJo V10.6.
Immunofluorescence analysis of autophagy and cell proliferation
Immunofluorescence studies in nNOS+ and MOCK cells assessed the cytoskeleton (F-actin labeling with phalloidin-Alexa-594), ER structure (calnexin), proliferation (Ki67), autophagy (CytoID, LC3b-II) and lysosomes (LysoTracker). Cultures were washed in PBS, fixed in 4% PFA in 1xPBS and immunostained or labeled with the respective dyes. Images were captured on an inverted AxioImager Z1 fluorescence microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany). FIJI ImageJ was used for counting Ki67 positive proliferating cells after threshold setting and generation of binary images. Nuclei were counter-stained with DAPI. Autophagy was estimated based on the strength and thickness of LC3b-II or CytoID® (CytoID® detection kit Enzo Life Sciences) positive dots. The CytoID® Autophagy Detection measures autophagic vacuoles and monitors autophagic flux in live cells using a cationic amphiphilic tracer dye that rapidly partitions into autophagic vacuoles where it shows bright fluorescence. The dye only weakly stains lysosomes. Quantification of immunofluorescence images was performed with ImageJ, using the particle counter. Images were split into the channels, transformed into binary images by setting the threshold according to the Isodata or Yen algorithm with minor adjustments. Size inclusion/exclusion thresholds and circularity limits were set for analysis of cells or subcellular structures.
Redox proteomics
The principle of the analyses of posttranslational redox modifications in proteins is similar for all techniques, which were employed in the present study and evolved over time. In the first step, non-oxidized sulfhydryl groups are masked with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM). Subsequently, originally oxidized residues are reduced, either mildly with ascorbic acid to reduce S-nitrosylated SH-groups (SNO sites) or generally with DTT to reduce reversible oxidations including sulfoxides and disulfides. Finally, the now newly generated SH-groups (i.e. the original oxidation sites) are labeled with biotinylated iodoacetamide or with Cy-dyes. Proteins are trypsinized, modified peptides are captured via streptavidin and analyzed per liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry or ELISA. The details of the different extraction procedures and LC/MS settings are described in accompanying Data in Brief articles DIB1 "Redox Proteomics" and DIB2 "Full Proteome". The raw MS proteomics data of the Full Proteome have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD010538. Project Webpage: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD010538
Proteomic data analyses
For data analysis MaxQuant 1.6.1.0, Perseus 1.6.0.2 and ArrayStar (DNASTAR 15) were used. N-terminal acetylation (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99), N-ethylmaleimide on cysteines (+125.05) and biotinylated iodoacetamide (+414.19) were selected as variable modifications for SNO/Redox-BIAM-Switch. The human reference proteome set (Redox-BIAM-Switch: Uniprot, July 2017, 701567 entries, SNO-BIAM Switch and Full proteome: April 2015, 68511 entries) was used as template to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. The minimal ratio count for label-free quantification (LFQ) was 1.
Proteins were quality filtered according to unique peptides, sequence coverage, putative contaminants and a minimum of 4 valid values or 6 valid samples in total. LFQ protein intensities were Log2 transformed and missing/zero values were imputed from the normal distribution (scattered missing values) or set to a minimum. ANOVA was performed before and after imputation, and consistent results considered as significant. Global averaging (i.e. adjustment to have a common mean, implemented in ArrayStar) was used as further adjustment to account for differences in cell morphology and hence relative differences of cytoplasm/cytoskeletal proteins and nuclear or organelle protein mass. Global averaging was used for SNO-BIAM Switch and Proteome before transforming the experiment into a BS/Proteome ratio, the latter to address changes of protein expression that may obscure or overestimate changes of protein oxidation. BS/Proteome ratios were then Log2-transformed and used for further analysis. Hierarchical clustering was employed to assess protein and treatment patterns using Euclidean distance metrics. Results are displayed as heat maps with dendrograms. For thumbnail line graph views, the Pearson correlation coefficient was used. Clusters were further analyzed for gene ontology annotation enrichments for “cellular component”, “biological process” and “molecular function", KEGG and reactome pathways, SMART domains and SP-PIR-Keywords to assess common localizations and functions. GO analyses were done with Perseus, ArrayStar or using the ”term enrichment analysis” and "functional gene clustering" tools of The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, version 6.8) (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp). STRING (https://string-db.org/) was used to generate protein networks and assess network GOs. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (http://www.gsea-msigdb.org) was used to further assess functional implications, and regulated proteins were compared with genes listed in the Human Cellular Senescence Gene Database (HCSGD) (http://bioinfo.au.tsinghua.edu.cn/member/xwwang/HCSGD/). The P value was set at 0.05 adjusted according to Benjamini Hochberg. A batch peptide search (http://pir.georgetown.edu/pirwww/) for published/confirmed CMA-recognition sequences was used to find known and putative CMA substrates, which were subsequently compared with significantly upregulated proteins.
Statistics
SPSS 24.0 and Graphpad Prism 6.0 were used for statistical evaluation for non-proteomic data. Data are presented as means ± SD. Data were analyzed using univariate or multivariate ANOVA and subsequent posthoc t-tests versus vehicle treated MOCK cells or baseline conditions according to Dunnett, or group-vise according to Sidak. Two groups were compared with 2-sided, unpaired Student's t-tests. Contingency tables and Chi Square tests were used to compare the number of modified proteins in SNOSID experiments. P was set at 0.05 for all statistical comparisons. VENNY (http://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/index.html) and NetVenn (http://wheat.pw.usda.gov/NetVenn/) were used to compare gene/protein lists.

RESULTS:
Results
2D-SNO DIGE and SNOSID: S-nitrosylation upon rapamycin stimulation
Naïve and MOCK-transduced SH-SY5Y cells did not express nNOS protein at a level strong enough to be detectable by standard infrared Western Blotting (Fig. 1A), but label-free proteomics revealed MOCK nNOS at a level comparable to low abundant proteins. Therefore, we generated SH-SY5Y cells by lentiviral transduction of NOS1, which constitutively express nNOS/NOS1 (nNOS+) at a level comparable to mouse cerebellum and cortex (Fig. 1A) and exceeding MOCK nNOS about 250fold (please see proteomics below), associated with an increase of nitrite/nitrate (Fig. 1B). Hence, nNOS+ cells replicate the situation of neurons, which express nNOS in the brain and upregulate it on aging or in the context of neurodegenerative diseases.
In initial experiments employing 2D-DIGE, SNOSID and SNO-SILAC, we used rapamycin to challenge proteostasis and impose a "starvation"-like stress. Rapamycin reduced free nitrite/nitrate levels (Fig. 1B), and in parallel, 2D-SNO-DIGE revealed rapamycin-evoked changes of SNOed proteins, which occurred with a maximum between 4 h and 8 h (Fig. 1C, D: spot map and time course; Fig. 1E exemplary gel). SNO-modified candidates are summarized in the accompanying Data-in-Brief article "Redox proteomics" in Table 1 (DIB1_Table 1). The most interesting hits were heat shock cognate of 70 kDa (HSC70/HSPA8), the small heat shock protein HSP27/HSPB1 and calreticulin (CALR), all chaperones and represented in more than one spot (Fig. 1E, F), possibly reflecting phospho-SNO switches. Bold printed hits (Fig. 1C) were confirmed in subsequent analyses.
SNOSID identified some crucial SNO-sites (DIB1_Table 2) in key candidates (Fig. 1G) including HSPA8 (Cys17) and the ubiquitin E2 ligase, UBE2D, the latter particularly interesting because the modified cysteine, Cys85, is the highly conserved catalytic site cysteine of all UBE2D isoforms essential for ubiquitin conjugation (mass spectrograms in Suppl. Figs. 1a, b). UBE2D ligases engage with a number of U-box or single Ring finger type E3 ligases, including CHIP/STUB1, SIAH1, RING1, SCF, XIAP, MDM2, TRAF6 and BRCA1, some of them additional SNO targets as revealed in subsequent analyses (CHIP/STUB1, RING1). Cysteine 17 of HSPA8 is localized within the nucleotide binding region (NBR, subdomain Ia), which is also involved in interactions with its cochaperone, BAG1 and essential for ATP/ADP binding.
Some further SNO-sites were identified in Super SNO-SILAC experiments (DIB1_Table 3), and gene ontology of pooled SNOed proteins (72 individual proteins in 2D-DIGE, SNOSID and SNO Super SILAC) pointed to NO-mediated regulations of proteins involved in protein and carbohydrate metabolism, ubiquitination and Parkinson's disease (DIB1_Table 4).
Super SILAC: protein accumulation on rapamycin stimulation
The initial screens suggested that nitric oxide by direct S-nitrosylation impacts on protein homeostasis under "starvation"-like stress evoked by mTOR inhibition. Indeed Super SILAC proteomics revealed higher protein levels in rapamycin-stimulated nNOS+ cells at 6 h as compared to MOCK cells, likely caused by protein accumulation (Fig. 2A-C, Data in Brief "Full Proteome" DIB2_Table 1) rather than transcription, because mRNA levels of candidate proteins were similar in nNOS+ and MOCK cells (Fig. 2D). Differentially expressed proteins (131 hits; ANOVA P and q < 0.05; DIB2_Table 1) encompassed 18 documented and putative CMA substrates, which carry one or more of 20 published KFERQ-like motifs (Fig. 2A, some highlighted in pink) including HSPA8, GAPDH, PGK1, PKM2, ANXA2, ALDOA and EEF1 and 2. Transcription of these candidates rather decreased on rapamycin stimulation or remained constant and did not differ between cell lines as far tested (Fig. 2D). Further CMA substrates were increased in nNOS+ cells on serum-free starvation including RND3 and EPS8 (Fig. 7C). Gene Ontology Overrepresentation analysis (ORA) revealed that differentially expressed proteins were involved in four major "biological processes" that can be captured with “protein folding”, “glycolysis”, “response to stress” and "protein complex assembly” (DIB2_Table 2).
Deep redox proteome analyses on starvation
Motivated by the initial observations pointing to SNO-mediated changes of HSPA8 and in ubiquitination-dependent protein degradation pathways we performed deep proteome analyses to identify SNO-modified protein networks and pathways (SNO-BIAM Switch, Fig. 3), reversibly oxidized proteins (REDOX-BIAM switch, Fig. 4) and consequences for the full proteome (Fig. 5) on serum-free starvation. Starvation is considered to trigger CMA and links autophagy with ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal degradation.
SNO-BIAM Switch and REDOX-BIAM Switch assays (DIB1_Table 5 and DIB1_Table 6) provided quantitative data of redox-modified proteins including low-abundant proteins, and the respective cysteine sites were identified in a number of proteins. Both Thiol-BIAM-switch approaches confirmed oxidation of Cys85 of UBE2D3 (Peo-Biotin site in DIB1-Table 6), and revealed Cys17 (also identified by SNOSID), Cys574 and Cys603 as redox sensitive sites in HSPA8 (DIB1-Table 5).
SNO-BIAM Switch assay for cysteine S-nitrosylations
In total, 2777 SNO-modified proteins were identified, out of which 2554 were matched with the full proteome and then transformed into the ratio to account for changes of protein levels. The proportion of nitrosylation of NOS1 (Fig. 3A, DIB1_Table 5) remained nearly constant despite its higher expression in nNOS+ cells (about 250fold according to the full proteome), showing that the SNO-BIAM Switch / Proteome ratio was well corrected for changes of protein expression. ANOVA of these ratios identified 1830 significant proteins (ANOVA P and q < 0.05, Benjamini Hochberg adjusted), which grouped into 10–12 major clusters (Fig. 3A) and revealed a clear separation of genotypes and treatments. Starvation for 24 h had minor effects in MOCK cells but increased levels of SNO modified proteins in nNOS+ cells (Fig. 3A–C). Thumbnail line graphs views of highlighted clusters (Fig. 3B) show key candidates, and scatter plots (Fig. 3C) reveal major gene ontology terms for "biological process" (GO BP) and "cellular compartment" (GO CC). In particular, proteins involved in protein and carbohydrate metabolism and redox control were increasingly SNO-modified in nNOS+ cells on starvation (Fig. 3B, C), whereas SNO modifications decreased in proteins involved in RNA processing (Fig. 3C).
REDOX-BIAM Switch Assay for oxidative protein modifications
The REDOX-BIAM switch assay primarily detects reversible oxidations including disulfides and sulfoxides and identified 1590 modified proteins in total (Fig. 4; DIB1_Table 6), out of which 1242 were significantly different between groups (ANOVA P and q < 0.05; 870 if only proteins were considered, which were detected in ≥2 samples of at least 2 groups). The number of oxidized proteins increased substantially on starvation, both in MOCK and in nNOS+ cells, particularly in proteins localized to the endoplasmic reticulum and the lysosome (GO CC) and involved in carbohydrate binding (GO BP) (Fig. 4B shows effects of starvation). Comparison of genotypes irrespective of treatments (Fig. 4C) reveals an nNOS+ mediated pro-oxidation of proteins involved in extracellular matrix organization, cytoskeleton and adhesion but down-oxidation of proteins involved in RNA processing. The similarity of starvation-evoked oxidation in MOCK and nNOS+ cells suggests that the presence of nNOS does not generally increase oxidation but rather specifically S-nitrosylation.
Full Proteome under starvation and rapamycin stimulation
Full proteome analysis identified 8825 non-ambiguous proteins with ≥ 6 valid samples in total, out of which 3099 were differentially expressed between nNOS+ and MOCK cells on full nutrition (95% confidence, plus 2fold change) (Fig. 5A–D; DIB2_Table 3), with major differences between genotypes (5A, B, D) but mild effects of starvation or rapamycin at this time point. Treatment effects were stronger in nNOS+ than MOCK cells (Fig. 5B, D). NOS1/nNOS itself (indicated in 5A and C) was 250fold higher in nNOS+ as compared with MOCK cells. HSPA8a protein levels did not differ and UBE2D3 levels were lower in nNOS+ (Fig. 5C white dots). Overall, there was an even distribution of up- and downregulated proteins in nNOS+ versus MOCK cells (Fig. 5A, C), but GO analyses revealed different functions (Fig. 5A, B). Increased proteins in nNOS+ cells were involved in ER stress response, extracellular matrix organization, adhesion and metabolic processes (GO BP), whereas proteins localized to lysosomal membranes or chromatin (GO CC) or involved in cell cycle processes were reduced (Fig. 5A). Filtering proteins for those carrying known or predicted KFERQ-like motifs revealed a strong increase of cytoskeletal-associated proteins in nNOS+ cells.
Macroautophagy and chaperone mediated autophagy
Rapamycin
To further assess the impact of NO on specific protein degradation pathways, we analyzed standard markers of macroautophagy and chaperone mediated autophagy (CMA) using Western Blot and immunofluorescence analyses. On stimulation with rapamycin, we observed a time dependent increase of HSC70/HSPA8 in nNOS+ cells, but not in MOCK cells with a peak at 3–6 h (Fig. 6A; cell homogenate). The result agrees with the rapamycin-proteomes (Fig. 2, Fig. 5), i.e. increase at 6 h, but no difference at 24 h. LC3b-I (cytoplasm) and LC3b-II (autophagosome) levels were both higher in nNOS+ cells irrespective of the stimulation with rapamycin. LC3b-II mildly increased in MOCK cells at 6 h (Fig. 6A), which is the time of maximum effects of rapamycin. Rapamycin had no effect on p62 (not shown) but blocking the autophagic flux with bafilomycin resulted in a p62 accumulation in both cell lines (Fig. 6B), somewhat earlier/stronger in nNOS+ cells. The latter agrees with the proteomic results (SQSTM1/p62 9.9fold higher in nNOS+, -LogP 13.25). Immunofluorescent detection of LC3b-positive, p62-positive and CytoID-positive dots (Fig. 6C, D, E) revealed a higher number of p62-positive and CytoID-positive dots per cell in nNOS+ cultures, but similar numbers per area of the cytoplasm. In addition, the average p62 dot size was larger in nNOS+ cells. The abundance of LC3b-positive dots was similar in both lines. The results were somewhat inconclusive but pointed to lower efficiency of protein removal in nNOS+ cells.
Starvation
The differences in HSPA8 levels pointed to changes in CMA, which is not normally affected by mTOR inhibition but may get constitutively active to remove toxic protein waste. To further address CMA, cells were exposed to serum free starvation. HSC70/Hsp8 levels were similar in MOCK and nNOS+ cell homogenates (Fig. 7A). The most striking difference was a strong reduction of LAMP2A in nNOS+ cells and in parallel, accumulation of β-actin, GAPDH and p62 (Fig. 7A Western Blots, 7B quantification). GAPDH is a CMA substrate, while β-actin is supposed to undergo proteolytic cleavage on starvation but its ubiquitin-dependent degradation via the proteasome depends on HSPA8. A search of the proteome for proteins carrying a motif highly similar to KFERQ retrieved 750 proteins, out of which 75 were significantly increased in nNOS+ cells (Suppl. Fig. 2). If they constitute CMA substrates depends on the exposure of the motif towards HSPA. Along with the accumulation of proteins, we observed enlarged lysosomes and an expansion of the cytoplasm or nNOS+ cells (Fig. 7C), whereas cell proliferation was reduced (Fig. 7D).
Ube2D activity and proteasome functions
Our initial experiments suggested that Cys85 of the catalytic site of UBE2D isoforms is a functionally relevant SNO-target in the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). Cys85, identified in SNOSID, SNO-SILAC and REDOX-BIAM, is highly conserved, and is required for the transfer of ubiquitin from E2 to E3 ligases. The SNO-BIAM Switch proteome revealed SNO modifications of further UBE2 enzymes (Fig. 8A). UBE2D3 was one of the strongest hits and its SNO-modification was further confirmed by SNO-immunoassay (Fig. 8B). QRT-PCR analysis showed that SH-SY5Y cells primarily express UBE2D3 (Fig. 8C, lowest cycle number) in line with the proteomic data. Hence, we assessed effects of NO-donors on UBE2D3 enzyme activity in vitro. The test relies on in vitro ubiquitination of p53 by the E3 ligase MDM2, which is activated by UBE2D3. The NO donors DEA/NO and NOC-5 reduced the levels of ubiquitin-conjugated p53 in a dose dependent manner (Fig. 8D), and nNOS+ cells showed an increase of p53 levels upon rapamycin stimulation (Fig. 8E) suggesting reduced or slower ubiquitination-dependent removal of p53, which occurs mostly via the proteasome. General poly-ubiquitination as assessed per anti-ubiquitin Western Blotting and ELISA was not impaired in nNOS+ cells (Fig. 8F, G) but proteasome activity was reduced and further decreased on rapamycin stimulation (Fig. 8H), suggesting a profound impairment of UPS mediated protein degradation.
Cell cycle, proliferation and senescence
CMA and UPS are crucial for the regulation of the cell cycle, which was one of the GO terms associated with differentially expressed SNO-modified proteins. In addition HSPA8-BAG3 complexes are crucial for proper actin dynamics and spindle orientation during mitosis. Indeed, FACS analyses of the cell cycle revealed a higher fraction of subG1 cells in nNOS+ cultures, considered as apoptotic, and a lower fraction of G2/M cells (Fig. 9A) in line with the observed decrease of proteins involved in chromatin condensation and mitosis (proteome Fig. 5). Consequently, the number of Ki67 positive proliferating cells was reduced in nNOS+ cultures (Fig. 9B) and the proteome revealed a lower expression of cyclin dependent kinases but increase of cyclin D1, which is normally degraded via ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis at the end of the S-phase, allowing the entry into the M-phase. In addition, the CDK inhibitors p21-CIP1 (CDKN1A) and p16-Ink4 (CDKN2A) were strongly increased (Fig. 9C), in agreement with an "aged" phenotype of nNOS+ cells. Both are markers of senescent cells. The change of the phenotype was reflected by morphometric changes of the cell architecture (Fig. 9D) showing an expansion of the cytoplasm and large distances to neighboring cells, the latter suggesting alterations of the secretome and extracellular matrix, reminiscent of senescent cells. Regulated genes were therefore compared with senescence-associated genes provided by the Human Senescence Gene Database (HSCGD; http://bioinfo.au.tsinghua.edu.cn/member/xwwang/HCSGD/index.html), which is based on an integrative meta-analysis comprising 20 GEO datasets. Out of consistently age-associated genes (-logP > 3) 680 could be matched with the full proteome, and two-third were significantly regulated in nNOS+ cells (Fig. 9E, F). There was particularly high agreement with upregulated "pro-aging" candidates (Fig. 9F), whereas "anti-aging" genes that are supposed to be downregulated on senescence, were up or down-regulated in nNOS+ cells. The analysis agrees with a pro-aging phenotype but not/not yet with cellular senescence.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Nitric oxide is produced by nitric oxide synthases, and the neuronal isoform, nNOS/NOS1, is upregulated in the aging brain suggesting that NO-dependent posttranslational redox modifications such as S-nitrosylations (SNO) promote aging and interfere with neuronal functions and longevity. Indeed, protein S-nitrosylations precipitate protein misfolding, contribute to the toxicity of beta amyloid protein or mutant Huntingtin and lead to disruptions of protein homeostasis, the latter a hallmark of a number of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.
Protein degradation machineries can be direct targets of NO-evoked modifications, or these machineries are over-loaded with oxidized substrate proteins that are hard to digest, particularly in the form of oxidized protein aggregates. The latter are normally not present in unstressed cells because endogenous quality control systems maintain protein homeostasis by coordinating protein synthesis and degradation. Likewise, SNO modifications are normally well balanced and constitute subtle transient regulations of protein functions, but prolonged cellular stresses such as starvation, radiation, hypoxia or ROS exposure increase the SNO and aggregate burden, which is particularly detrimental for neurons.
Initial screening experiments revealed SNO modifications of key proteins involved in protein degradation, in particular the heat shock protein, HSC70/HSPA8, a master regulator of chaperone mediated autophagy (CMA), and ubiquitin 2 ligase, UBE2D suggesting that NO-dependent protein allostasis may be key to the understanding of its functions in neuronal aging. Hence, our study was centered on NO-evoked changes of proteostasis.
Eucaryotic cells utilize two major mechanistically distinct, complementary systems for protein degradation, the 26S proteasome, which recognizes client proteins labeled with ubiquitin, and the autophagolysosome. The concerted actions ensure a specific and tightly regulated degradation process, which is highly sensitive to oxidative stress. Oxidized proteins are prone to form large aggregates due to covalent cross-linking or increased surface hydrophobicity and unless repaired or removed, these oxidized proteins are toxic.
Autophagy can be disrupted by SNO-modifications of upstream signaling molecules such as c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK1), and of the autophagosome assembly machinery. Ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation is affected by S-nitrosylation of the substrate, of proteasome subunits or ubiquitin ligases. Further SNO-ing may impair selective ubiquitin-dependent removal via the autophagosome by masking recognition sites for cargo adapter proteins like sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1/p62). SQSTM1 accumulates itself if autophagy is impaired, which results in secondary deficits of proteasomal degradation.
A further link between the key degradation pathways is the very versatile HSPA8, which contributes to proteasomal degradation of some proteins such as beta actin, catalyzes protein folding and clathrin uncoating and contributes to multiple transport and sorting mechanisms for endocytosis, organelle import and export and ubiquitin dependent selective autophagy. All of these functions require ATP binding. HSPA8 is the key carrier in chaperone-mediated autophagy, in which substrate proteins are recognized on the basis of a KFERQ-like motif, and then transferred into the lysosome via the receptor, LAMP2A.
CMA is activated in response to prolonged starvation, exposure to toxic compounds, or oxidative and nitrosative stress, and a decline of CMA efficiency has been linked with aging processes. Its substrates are heterogeneous, mostly cytoplasmic long-lived proteins including GAPDH, pyruvate kinases, annexins, RNAse A, RND3, EPS8 and HSC70/HSPA8 itself, which are all important for neuronal integrity.
Hence, NO-mediated redox changes are key to the understanding of proteostasis in the context of cellular stresses, aging and neurodegeneration. To further understand the implications of NO-mediated redox imbalances in this context we generated a cell model, in which the prototypical SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells constitutively express nNOS/NOS1 at a level similar to the mouse brain. These nNOS+ versus MOCK SH-SY5Y cells were exposed to "starvation"-evoked stresses and analyzed by a set of proteomic and functional analyses. The results show that NO-evoked protein allostasis leads to neuronal aging.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.redox.2018.10.002.