PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Kidney; Stem cell
diseases: X-linked alport syndrome
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum count/molecular weight
keywords: Proteomics; Kidney organoids; Extended culture; Renal disease modeling

ABSTRACT:
We conducted a global proteomics analysis on kidney organoids at three distinct culture time points: day 22, day 33, and day 38. Our objective wasto investigate the impact of extended culture, beyond the standard differentiation endpoint of day 21, on the organoid protein expression profile.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Profiling of Kidney Organoids in Extended Culture Conditions

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Kidney organoid samples (days 22, 32, and 38 of differentiation) were pooled (n=16 organoids, obtained from 25 K cells at day 10) and subjected to cellular soluble protein and matrix protein enrichment, as previously described14. Samples were collected and washed three times with 1x PBS, then manually homogenized in freshly prepared Tris-lysis buffer (10mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1% Triton X-100, 25 mM EDTA in LC-MS grade water, along with an EDTA-free Roche complete protease inhibitor cocktail, final volume 10mL). The organoids were incubated in this solution for an hour in a cold room with constant rotation. The samples were then centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was then collected, transferred to a fresh microtube, and labeled as fraction 1 (enriched with soluble cellular proteins). The pellet from the first step was resuspended in a freshly prepared alkaline detergent buffer (containing 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.1 M PBS, and 20 mM ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH), with a final volume of 10 mL) by repeating the pipetting process until the pellet was completely resuspended. The second round of incubation was carried out under gentle rotation for an hour in a cold room to disrupt the cell-matrix interactions. The sample was then centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was placed in a new tube as fraction 2, which contained the cell surface and transmembrane proteins. The remaining pellet was resuspended in 50 µL of TEAB/SDS lysis buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate in 9mL LC-MS grade water) by repetitive pipetting, and the samples were subjected to sonication using Covaris AFA glass tubes in the Covaris LE220+ system. The sonication parameters for kidney organoids were set as follows: duration of 40 s per sample, peak power of 500 watts, duty factor of 20%, 50 cycles per burst, and average power of 100 watts.  Fractions 1 and 2 were mixed in a 1:2 ratio, and fraction 3 (ECM fraction) was analyzed separately. To reduce the samples, 5l of a 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution was added to 100l of the soluble fraction, followed by incubation for 10 minutes at 60oC using a heating block. After cooling, 15l of 100l iodoacetamide (IAM) solution was added to the fractions and stored for 30 min at room temperature to alkylate the proteins. Sample preparation for label-free mass spectrometry-based proteomics involves digesting samples (overnight) with Trypsin Gold (Promega, V528A) in S-Trap Spin Columns, followed by purification using OLIGO R3 Reverse beads in acetonitrile (ACN). The resulting peptides were dried and subjected to mass spectrometry data acquisition using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Dionex Corporation UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC nanosystem at Manchester University.

DATA PROCESSING:
We utilized MaxQuant (MQ) software (version 2.4.9) on the biocluster server at the Imagine Institute, which was operating under dotnet version 3.0, to analyze the raw proteomics data. Raw data were obtained from the Orbitrap mass spectrometry instrument and imported into the Windows version of the MaxQuant software. Separate MQ parameter files (mqpar.xml) were generated for the cellular fraction and ECM data, with Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, proline, and lysine, and N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. These modifications were added to improve the collagen peptide identification. The mqpar file was subsequently transferred to the server, and the file paths for both the raw data and the reference files were adjusted to reflect their new locations on the server. Next, the MS data were searched against UniProt and TREMBL databases for humans (txid, 9606). MQ produces a separate peptide file for each analysis, including cellular fraction and ECM fraction. We used Perseus software to analyze the MQ peptide.txt file.