PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Embryonic stem cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Chromatin-associated proteomics; mda5; pluripotency stem cells

ABSTRACT:
The type I interferon (IFN) response is inactive during early mammalian development and becomes functional only after gastrulation. As a result, the totipotent and pluripotent embryonic stages remain susceptible to pathogens, including viruses. Here, we demonstrate that pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) suppress the RIG-I-like receptor sensing pathway by silencing the expression of the dsRNA sensor MDA5. This silencing is necessary to avoid the recognition of dsRNAs of endogenous origin, which accumulate in mESCs. Reintroducing MDA5 results in recognition of these endogenous dsRNAs and triggers the activation of the IFN response through IRF3. The production of IFN alters the differentiation ability of mESCs, and affects the pluripotency gene expression program, as shown by epigenetic, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. These findings are conserved in zebrafish, where MDA5 is also expressed at later developmental stages. Similarly, zebrafish lack earlystage IFN activation, and dsRNA-mediated signalling results in developmental defects. Altogether, we conclude that silencing the RIG-I-like receptor pathway during early development is widely conserved and is essential to prevent aberrant immune recognition of endogenous dsRNAs, safeguarding normal development.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Silencing of double stranded RNA sensing is required for early embryonic development

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Chromatin enrichment for proteomics (ChEP) was conducted based on previously established protocols with slight modifications. Briefly, 1 × 10⁷ cells were crosslinked using 1% formaldehyde at room temperature (RT) for 10 minutes, followed by quenching with 0.25 M glycine. The cells were lysed in 1 ml ice-cold cell lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 0.1% Triton X-100, 85 mM KCl, and 1× Roche protease inhibitor) and centrifuged at 2,300 × g for 5 minutes at 4 ℃ to isolate the nuclei. After discarding the cytoplasmic fraction, the pellet was resuspended in 500 μl SDS buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 10 mM EDTA, 4% SDS, and 1× Roche protease inhibitor) and incubated at RT for 10 minutes. The solution was diluted to 2 ml using urea buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, and 8 M urea) and centrifuged at 16,100 × g for 30 minutes at RT, repeating the step once. Subsequently, the pellet was resuspended with 2 ml SDS buffer and centrifuged at 16,100 × g for 30 minutes at RT. The resulting protein pellet was dissolved in 250 μl storage buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 25 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 1× Roche protease inhibitor) and sonicated using a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for five cycles (30 seconds on/off) to enhance solubility. Protein concentration was quantified via a Qubit protein assay (Invitrogen). For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, 100 μg of protein extract was de-crosslinked at 95 ℃ for 30 minutes. Each sample included two biological replicates. De-crosslinked chromatin protein extracts (100 μg) were precipitated by adding 10 volumes of ice-cold 100% acetone and incubated at -20 ℃ for 15 minutes. The samples were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 minutes in a pre-cooled centrifuge. The resulting protein pellets were washed with 500 μl ice-cold acetone, centrifuged, and the acetone was discarded. The pellets were resuspended in 100 μl urea buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT) and incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes. Subsequently, 10 μl iodoacetamide was added, and the mixture was incubated in the dark for 15 minutes at room temperature. For protein purification and on-bead digestion3, 5 μl of pre-washed carboxyl magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) and 154 μl binding buffer (100% acetonitrile, ACN) were added, followed by incubation for 18 minutes at room temperature. The beads were washed twice with 180 μl of 70% ethanol and once with 200 μl of 100% ACN. Proteins were eluted and digested on beads in 100 μl of ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC) containing 3 μl trypsin (Promega) at 37 ℃ for 2 hours. After removing the beads, the solution was incubated at 37 ℃ overnight to complete digestion. The digested peptides were fractionated using strong anion exchange (SAX) into three fractions4: flow-through (FT), pH 8 elution, and pH 2 elution. The pH 8 and pH 2 fractions were combined. Finally, peptides were enriched and desalted using Stage-Tip5 desalting before liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteomic data analysis was carried out following previously described protocols with minor modifications. Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant software6 (v2.4.2) with searches performed against the mouse UniProt database (downloaded June 2017). Default parameters were used, with LFQ, iBAQ, and the “match between runs” feature enabled. Protein identification was validated against a decoy database generated within MaxQuant. Biological replicates were grouped to identify differentially expressed proteins. Data were filtered for three valid values in at least one group. Missing values were imputed using default settings in Perseus (v2.0.11) based on the assumption that they were not detected because they were under or close to the detection limit. Differentially enriched proteins were determined using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (P < 0.05) with a fold change threshold of >2. The differential proteins at 8hr, 24hr, and 48hr were calculated by subtracting the differential proteins at 0hr. Downstream analyses, including data visualization, were performed using R software (version 4.4.1).