PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Uterine cervix
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: Oxidation
experiment types: SRM/MRM
keywords: Cervical cancer; Proteomics; Prm; Lcm; Biomarker

ABSTRACT:
Cervical cancer is characterized by a well-defined pre-malignant phase, cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). Identification of high grade CIN lesions by population-based screening programs and their subsequent treatment has led to a significant reduction of the incidence and mortality of cervical cancer. Cytology-based testing of cervical smears is the most widely used cervical cancer screening method, but is not ideal, as the sensitivity for detection of CIN2 and higher (CIN2+) is only ~55%. Therefore, more sensitive and specific biomarkers for cervical cancer and its precancerous stages are needed.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic alterations in early stage cervical cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We compared an equivalent of 8000 tumor, normal epithelium and stroma cells of frozen cervical tissue from 22 patients with cervical squamous cell cancer (early- and late stage, each stage 11 samples) and 13 healthy subjects obtained by laser capture microdissection. The proteins were enzymatically digested into peptides and measured by high-resolution mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Identical numbers of the tissue samples were measured by PRM to quantify MCM3, CEACAM5, S100P and ICAM1 in digests of whole tissue lysates using stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides purchased from Pepscan BV (Lelystad, the Netherlands). Measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument according to our previous work (Guzel et al, 2017, doi: 10.1002/prca.201700107).

DATA PROCESSING:
Identified proteins were visualized by Scaffold Proteome software and the Bonferroni correction was applied to adjust the p-value for multiple testing within the different groups. Results were loaded into the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis to assign proteins to different network interactions. The PRM signals were integrated using Skyline-daily software (version 4.1.1.11725) tool and the MCM3, CEACAM5, S100P and ICAM1 concentration of tissue samples were determined by peak area ratios of endogenous:SIL peptides (calculated by the software).

METHODS:
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sample procurement
All patients referred to the outpatient clinic of the University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) with squamous cervical cancer were routinely asked to participate in our ongoing ‘Methylation study’ which has been approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the UMCG. Cervical tissue and clinicopathologic data were prospectively collected and stored in our tissue bank. Within our ‘Methylation study’ tissue samples and clinicopathologic data that were collected from normal cervical tissues, were also collected from patients who planned to undergo a hysterectomy for non-malignant reasons. All cervical tissues that were used for the healthy control group was judged as histopathological normal. For determination of the percentage of tumor in the cancer specimen, 4 μm sections were cut and haematoxylin & eosin (HE) stained. Only specimens with more than 70% tumor were used. For LCM, we selected frozen tissue of 22 SCC patients and from thirteen controls (Table 1). The median age of the cervical cancer patients was 55 years (IQR 44–75) and for the patients with normal cervices 43 years (IQR 41–50). The stage of SCC patients was: 3 (14%) FIGO stage IB1, 5 (23%) FIGO stage IB2, 3 (14%) FIGO stage IIB, 2 (9%) FIGO stage IIIA, 6 (27%) FIGO stage IIIB and 3 (14%) FIGO stage IV. FIGO stages I–II and III–IV were defined as early stage and late stage cervical cancer, respectively. All tissues were primary tumors and patients did not receive neoadjuvant therapy.
LCM
Areas for LCM were selected on HE-stained cryosections. Cryosections of 10 μm were prepared from each of the eleven early and eleven late stage cervical cancer, and the thirteen healthy cervical tissue samples. The sections were mounted on polyethylene naphthalate (PEN)-covered glass slides (Carl Zeiss, Zwijndrecht, the Netherlands). An area corresponding to approximately 8,000 cells was microdissected. We calculated the number of cells by assuming an average volume of 10 × 10 × 10 μm for one cell. The tissue pieces were collected in 20 μL 0.1% Rapigest SF detergent (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and reduced using 4.7 mM dithiothreitol at 60° C for 30 minutes followed by alkylation using 16.9 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 30 minutes. Subsequently, the tissue pieces were enzymatically digested by adding 2 μL trypsin (Mass Spectrometry grade, 100 μg/mL in 3 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8) at 37° C overnight.
Protein identification by nano-LC-MS/MS
Online nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS using an application of a shotgun proteomics workflow was used for identification of tryptic peptides. A digested peptide mixture equivalent to 8,000 cells was separated on an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germering, Germany) and subsequently online measured in an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) in the data-dependent acquisition mode. Samples were loaded on to a trap column (PepMap C18, 300 μm ID, 5 mm length, 5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific), washed and desalted for 8 minutes using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid as loading solvent at a flow rate of 20 μL/min. The trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 μm ID × 500 mm, 2 μm particle size and 100 Å pore size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were eluted with a 90-minute acetonitrile gradient ranging from 3% to 30% (and formic acid concentration from 0.1% to 0.08%, respectively). All LC solvents were purchased at Biosolve (Valkenswaard, the Netherlands). Column flow rate was set to 250 nL/min, and eluting peptides were measured at 214 nm in a 3 nL nano flow cell (Thermo Fisher Scientific), online coupled to the mass spectrometer. For electrospray ionization nano ESI emitters (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) were used and a spray voltage of 1.7 kV was applied. For MS detection, a data-dependent acquisition method was used with a survey scan from 350–1650 Th at 120,000 resolution (AGC target 400,000) and consecutively isolated and fragmented by collisional induced dissociation (CID) at 35% normalized collision energy (AGC target 10,000) of the most abundant precursors in the linear ion trap until a duty cycle time of 3 seconds was reached (‘Top Speed’ method). Precursor masses that were selected once for MS/MS were excluded from further fragmentation for the next 60 seconds.
Proteins from the LCM-derived samples were assigned by exporting features, for which MS/MS spectra were recorded, using the ProteoWizard software (version 3.0.9248; http://proteowizard.sourceforge.net). Resulting .mgf files were submitted to Mascot (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science, London, UK) and applied to the human database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, version 2013_07, human taxonomy, 20,265 entries) for protein identifications assuming trypsin digestion and applying the following parameters: fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da, parent ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm, maximum number of missed cleavages of two. Oxidation of methionine was specified in Mascot as a variable modification, while carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Scaffold (version 4.7.2, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to summarize and filter the MS/MS-based peptide data from all Mascot searches. The number of proteins was derived from the peptide data according to the following criteria. Peptide identifications needed to have more than 95% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications had to have more than 99% probability and contain at least one peptide identified.
Data analysis
Technical and methodological reproducibility was determined by performing the measurements in triplicate and doing the entire experiment (microdissection and tryptic digestion) also in triplicate. For technical reproducibility, a tryptic digested tissue lysate was used, while for methodological reproducibility an LCM-derived sample was taken and measured. A diagram illustrating the experimental design is shown in Figure 9. For both reproducibility types, the total number of overlapping identified proteins was analyzed by Scaffold and eventually the percentage was used as a readout. For both reproducibility types an overlap greater than 50% was indicated as acceptable.
A volcano plot was created to determine changes in protein abundances indicated as 2log fold-changes between individual early and late stage cervical cancer with the healthy epithelium group (p < 0.05). The 2log fold-changes were calculated based on comparison of the individual early and late stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium according to spectral counts (zero counts were converted to 0.125 to enable log calculations). Three different analysis methods were chosen for comparison of the early stage cervical cancer with the healthy epithelium and late stage cervical cancer group with the healthy epithelium group. Two stringent analyses were used i.e. an analysis based on an “all-or-nothing” criteria and second a Bonferroni analysis to correct for multiple testing, and third a less stringent correction for multiple testing i.e. Benjamini-Hochberg. The “all-or-nothing” analysis was deemed discriminative when 1) a protein was not identified in healthy epithelium and stroma and when 2) a protein was at least identified in seven out of the eleven early stage cervical cancer subjects. In addition, the identified proteins from early stage cervical cancer were allowed to be present in late stage cervical cancer. We have chosen for these three analyses to classify in a restrictive way (Bonferroni) and a more relaxed analysis (Benjamini-Hochberg), and the “all-or-nothing” analysis that offers more possibilities to handle missing values in mass spectrometry. The differentially abundant proteins found by these three analysis methods, have been introduced into pathway analysis using the IPA software. Data were entered into the IPA tool to assign the differentially expressed proteins to different network interactions according to their respective significance levels to fit in that network. A permutation test was performed to determine a threshold score by selection of random 31 (comparable numbers with those analyzed by the “all-or-nothing” criteria), 30 and 13 proteins (comparable numbers with those analyzed by Bonferroni analysis between individual early and late stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium, respectively), 319 and 140 proteins (comparable numbers with those analyzed by Benjamini-Hochberg between individual early and late stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium, respectively) that were extracted from the UniProt database (uniprot_sprot_HUMAN_v151112; 20194 entries). The test was repeated ten times and from the networks with highest score (as calculated by IPA using right-tailed Fisher's Exact test) the mean value of the ten repeats was calculated and subsequently the lower- and upper 95% confidence level (Cl) of the mean were calculated. Network scores which exceeded the 95% Cl of the mean threshold (assumed as background) were taken into account as confidential differential.
To determine the heterogeneity among patients, a hierarchical clustering analysis was performed of fourteen differential IPA classified proteins that belonged to Bonferroni analysis when comparing early stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium. The IPA classified proteins were clustered individually in samples from the groups early and late stage cervical cancer and healthy epithelium. For hierarchical clustering analysis PermutMatrix 1.9.3. was used (http://www.atgc-montpellier.fr/permutmatrix) selecting the Euclidean distance for dissimilarity, Wards’ method, as a cluster method and Bipolarization seriation.
Confirmation by PRM mass spectrometry
Identical numbers of the tissue samples (Table 1) were measured by PRM to quantify MCM3, CEACAM5, S100P and ICAM1 in digests of whole tissue lysates using stable isotope-labeled (SIL) peptides purchased from Pepscan BV (Lelystad, the Netherlands). A subset of nine peptides were selected to be quantified by PRM (Supplementary Table 5). Collected tissue pieces were compiled in 200 μL 0.1% Rapigest SF detergent, sonicated for 3 minutes using a horn sonifier bath (Ultrasonic Disruptor Sonifier II, Bransons Utrasonics, Danbury, CT, USA) at 85% amplitude and heated for 5 minutes at 99° C for protein denaturation. Subsequently, 50 out of the 200 μL tissue lysates were each spiked with 10 fmol of the SIL peptides prior to enzymatic digestion. Samples were subsequently digested by adding 2 μg trypsin at 37° C overnight. One microliter of each sample was measured by PRM, performed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument according to our previous work. Analytical parameters such as linearity, LOD and LOQ were determined. For reproducibility, CVs were calculated for each serial dilution (0, 0.625, 1.25, 2,5, 5, 10 and 20 fmol/uL) using triplicate measurements.
Comparison of protein profiles in LCM-derived early stage cervical cancer tissue with HeLa, U87 and HEK293 cell lines
The identified proteins from the “all-or-nothing”, Bonferroni and Benjamini-Hochberg analysis (comparison of the early stage cervical cancer tissue with healthy epithelium group only) were compared with proteins identified in the cervical cancer derived HeLa cell line and two other cell lines that are unrelated to cervical cancer (U87; primary glioblastoma and HEK293; Human Embryonic Kidney cell line) by calculating 2log fold-changes related to LCM-derived healthy cervical epithelium. Proteins were filtered with the following criterion for each individual group: 2log fold-change relative to healthy epithelium > 1. For HeLa, a standard protein digest (catalog no. 88328, Thermo Scientific, Landsmeer, the Netherlands) was used. From U87 and HEK293 cell lines 106 cells of each cell type were digested according to a protocol as recommended by Thermo Scientific (catalog no. 90110). For all three cell lines one μg of each digest was analyzed by nano-LC-Orbitrap MS/MS. The IPA classified proteins were compared with their abundances in the two cervical cancer groups (early and late stage) and in the various cell lines. Scaffold perSPECtives viewer (version 2.1.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for visualization of proteins found in cervical-derived tissue by using LCM simultaneously with results obtained from these three cell lines.
Comparison to existing genomic data
Proteomic data were compared to transcriptome data published by Ojesina et al.. Transformed 2log expression values were extracted from the transcriptome sequencing data of tumor samples consisting of squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. These genomic data contained no expression data information about healthy tissue as indicated by Ojesina et al. and therefore no comparisons could be made to the healthy controls in our study. Heat maps were created of the proteins from the three analyses performed in this study (Table 2A, 2B; Supplementary Tables 1–3). Genes were selected only from the genomic analysis that overlapped with genes identified with the proteomic approach (set of 4,138 proteins with the removal of decoys). For this selection of genes, an average expression level (across all samples) was defined. Using Wilcoxon rank-sum test, the average mRNA expression levels of genes identified as differentially expressed in proteome analysis (represented in heat maps) was evaluated if this was different from the average mRNA expression products of other genes that were identified on protein level (Significance level p < 0.01).

RESULTS:
RESULTS
The study included patients with squamous cell cervical cancer (SCC, n = 22) and controls collected from patients who have undergone a hysterectomy for non-malignant reasons (n = 13) (see Table 1).
Protein profiling by high-resolution mass spectrometry
By shotgun proteomics, the technical reproducibility of a tissue lysate digest in triplicate showed an overlap of identified proteins of 65%. The methodological overlap for three independently prepared identical LCM samples (performing digestion and microdissection) was 76%. Analysis of eleven early stage and eleven late stage SCC, thirteen healthy epithelium and healthy stroma samples by nano-LC-MS/MS resulted in a total of 2,989 identified proteins with a minimum number of two peptides, an FDR rate of 0.4% and an FDR rate of 0.04% for peptides based on 262,136 MS/MS spectra. On average 1,700 proteins per sample (1,296–2,189) were identified. Interestingly, levels of members of the Minichromosome Maintenance (MCM) family (MCM2, MCM3, MCM4, MCM5, MCM6, MCM7) were found to be highly significantly increased in cervical cancer tissue from early and late stage patients as compared to healthy tissue. A volcano plot illustrates the difference in abundance of proteins in the comparison of both early stage and late stage cervical cancer with the healthy epithelium (Figure 1A and 1B).
Data were analyzed by three analysis approaches to find proteins which were highly discriminative (“all-or-nothing” method, Bonferroni and a third less restrictive method Benjamini-Hochberg). In the most stringent “all-or-nothing” analysis, we searched for proteins being present in the early stage cervical cancer group (it was allowed that these proteins are presented in late stage cervical cancer as well) and not in healthy epithelium or stroma. This approach showed that 31 proteins (p < 0.05) were discriminative between early stage cervical cancer and healthy epithelium (Table 2A). With this analysis, only MCM4 of the MCM2-7 family was observed in early and late stage cervical cancer and not detectable in healthy epithelium and stroma cells. On the other hand, three proteins, ENDOU, MT-ND4 and RDH12 were exclusively present in healthy epithelium (in at least six out of thirteen samples). For stroma, six proteins TNXB, COL21A1, OLFML1, FMOD, HSPB6 and ABI3BP were found (in at least six out of thirteen samples). After correction for multiple testing using the Bonferroni analysis (p = 9.88 ´ 10−6), 30 proteins (Table 2B) were significantly different in the comparison of early stage cervical cancer tissue and healthy epithelium, while thirteen proteins (Supplementary Table 1) were significant different between late stage cervical cancer tissue and healthy epithelium. Using the Benjamini-Hochberg correction (FDR = 5%) for multiple testing as the less stringent method, the abundances of 319 proteins (Supplementary Table 2) were found to be significantly different between early stage cervical cancer and healthy epithelium. Comparison of late stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium resulted in 140 proteins (Supplementary Table 3) having significantly different levels.
The IPA software tool was used to find networks in which the identified differentially abundant proteins might be involved. Fourteen out of the 30 proteins that were significant for early stage cervical cancer after Bonferroni analysis were classified to the cell cycle control network (“DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair”), which comprises a total of 35 proteins (Figure 2) and had a network score of 30. This score was above the upper 95% confidence level of the mean threshold (i.e. upper 95% Cl mean of 27.2) that was calculated by permutation from randomly taken 30 proteins of UniProt database. Six proteins from the network (LMNB2, MCMBP, NF-kB complex, PCM1, RFC1, UBE2l) were identified but not differential by the LCM approach with at least one peptide. Two proteins belonging to this network (MCM5 and WDHD1) were found by Benjamini-Hochberg analysis of the same data.
The “all-or-nothing” analysis and Bonferroni analysis between late stage cervical cancer and healthy epithelium had scores below the upper 95% confidence level of the mean threshold (i.e. 22 < 28.9 and 8 < 11.8, respectively) and for this reason the created networks were not further investigated. On the other hand, for the Benjamini-Hochberg analysis two networks (i.e. “DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair” and “Cardiac Arrhythmia, Cardiovascular Disease, Organismal Injury and Abnormalities”; see Figure 3 and Figure 4, respectively) were found with an identical score that passed the threshold (i.e. 43 > 41.4). For the other group, comparing late stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium one network (also related to “DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair”; see Figure 5) identified by the Benjamini-Hochberg analysis exceeded the threshold score of 40.8 (i.e. 48 > 40.8). Proteins indicated in the “DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair” network identified by IPA (i.e. Figure 2, Bonferroni analysis; Figure 3 and 5, Benjamini-Hochberg analysis) showed an overlap close to 30% of all network proteins mentioned. The other network (“Cardiac Arrhythmia, Cardiovascular Disease, Organismal Injury and Abnormalities”, Figure 4) consisted of almost 50% of down-regulated proteins that did not show any overlap with the first network mentioned (Figure 3). An overview of the different analyses achieved by comparison of individual early and late stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium is displayed in Table 3.
Hierarchical clustering of the differentially abundant fourteen proteins found in the “DNA, Replication, Recombination and Repair Network” by IPA analysis of the Bonferroni analysis resulted in clusters of proteins showing similarities between the early and late stage cervical cancer, while for the healthy epithelium group this was significantly different (Figure 6).
Protein profiles in early stage cervical cancer tissue by LCM with HeLa, U87 and HEK293 cell lines
From the 31 proteins (Table 2A) that were exclusively found by the “all-or-nothing” analysis in early stage cervical cancer and that all meet an extra criterion: 2log fold-change > 1, 30 were up-regulated in late stage cervical cancer tissue, 24 in the HeLa cell line, eleven in U87 and nine in HEK293 cells. From the 30 significantly different proteins selected after using Bonferroni analysis (Table 2B), according to identical criterion as mentioned above, 22 were up-regulated in both early stage cervical cancer and in the HeLa cell line and nineteen in late stage cervical cancer tissue. Fifteen out of the 30 significantly different proteins were up-regulated in the U87 cell line, while fourteen proteins were up-regulated in HEK293 cells. From the 319 significantly different proteins selected after using Benjamini-Hochberg correction (Supplementary Table 2) using identical criterion, 249 were up-regulated in early stage cervical cancer, 210 in the late stage cervical cancer, 244 in the HeLa cell line, 163 in the U87 cell line and 109 were up-regulated in the HEK293 cell line.
Three out of the 35 proteins (Figure 2) that were related to the network “DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair” were significantly up-regulated (2log fold-change > 1) in both early and late stage cervical cancer and in the HeLa cell line compared to healthy epithelium (NF-κB complex, PLAA, POLD1, S100P and WDHD1), but were absent in the other two cell lines (U87 and HEK293). In Figure 7, the presence or absence of the differential proteins found by Bonferroni analysis only related to this network observed in early and late stage cervical cancer is illustrated.
Furthermore, comparison of results derived from all proteins identified with LCM-derived tumor cells from early and late stage cervical cancer and HeLa cell line (following criterion: 2log fold-change relative to healthy epithelium ≥2.5), with non-cervical U87 and HEK293 cell lines showed nineteen highly significantly up-regulated proteins. Following the same criterion, fourteen proteins were found to be exclusively discriminative for the LCM dissected tumor cells only (Table 4).
Quantification of MCM3, CEACAM5, S100P and ICAM1 in whole tissue lysates by PRM
The concentrations of four proteins, MCM3, CEACAM5, S100P and ICAM1, that were highly significant in cervical cancer tissue found by the shotgun approach of each sample are represented in Supplementary Excel Data File 1. The PRM data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008723 and 10.6019/PXD008723. An example of the calculated concentrations of the four targeted proteins by PRM is illustrated in Figure 8. Linearity, LOD (limit of detection), LOQ (limit of quantification) and reproducibility of serial dilutions of SIL peptide standards are represented in Supplementary Excel Data File 2.
Comparison of protein profiles with transcriptome data
All proteins of the “all-or-nothing” and Bonferroni analyses (n = 55, which were commonly and exclusively found for both analyses, see Table 2A and 2B, respectively) were observed as relative high gene expression levels extracted from transcriptome data (Ojesina et al.). Most of these overlapping proteins were found as highly differential in early stage cervical cancer when compared to the average gene expression level in the Ojesina et al. transcriptome data. This is illustrated in the Supplementary Figure 1 (“all-or-nothing” analysis) and Supplementary Figure 2A (Bonferroni analysis). In these heat maps it is shown that only four out of the 55 selected genes have low abundance, i.e. MPO (Supplementary Figure 1), CRNN, DSG1, and PDIA3 (Supplementary Figure 2A); CRNN and DSG in agreement with our proteomics study. The other 51 out of 55 genes were expressed at relatively high level, around 2log (FPKM) of 5. In general, many genes had undetectable transcript expressions, with 2log (FPKM) below −5 and those which were expressed had low values, i.e. 2log (FPKM) of 3 and 4. To prove that genes were differentially expressed on protein level among highly expressed genes on RNA level, an analysis of gene expression of a background gene list was performed. This set was based on a selection of genes, corresponding to the list of the total identified proteins from LCM-derived samples (where 3,847 out of 4,138 genes from single peptide identification with removal of decoys were found in the transcriptome sequencing data) showed that about 10% of the proteins were expressed at a very low level, see Supplementary Figure 2B. With this taken in account, for the early stage cervical cancer analysis using Bonferroni (Table 2B) and for both early (Supplementary Table 2) and late stage cervical cancer analysis (Supplementary Table 3) using Benjamini-Hochberg the genes were significantly higher expressed (compared to background set, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, p < 0.01) on transcriptome level. The early stage cervical cancer using the “all-or-nothing” analysis (Table 2A) and the late stage cervical cancer using the Bonferroni analysis (Supplementary Table 1) did not exhibit a significantly elevated RNA expression (p = 0.427 and p = 0.395, respectively). Heat maps, which were created for proteins analyzed by Benjamini-Hochberg for the comparison of individual early and late stage cervical cancer with healthy epithelium are represented in the Supplementary Figures 3 and 4, respectively.
Furthermore, mutated or expressed genes as listed by Ojesina et al. were compared for presence or absence in the total number of 2,989 proteins (identified with at least one peptide) identified by our LCM approach. The comparisons are compiled in Supplementary Table 4 resulting in five overlapping proteins (CBFB, CEACAM5, MAPK1, PARN and TP63). For this panel, only CEACAM5 was significantly different in abundance (p = 0.007) between early stage cervical cancer and healthy epithelium found by LCM and mass spectrometry.

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
Cervical cancer is one of the most common cancers in women worldwide. It is more prevalent in developing countries, where 83% of cases occur and where squamous cell cervical cancer (SCC) accounts for 15% of newly diagnosed cancers in women. In developed countries, it accounts for 3.6% of all new cancer cases. It was shown that 99% of cervical cancers are linked to infection with “high-risk” strains of human papillomavirus (HPV). HPV type 16 and 18 together are responsible for 70% of cervical cancers. HPV infections are associated with the development of high-grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN2/3), which may eventually lead to SCC. It seems that the HPV E7 gene, which disrupts Rb function is devoid of genetic variants in precancer and cancer cases and strict conservation of 98 amino acids is critical for HPV16 carcinogenesis. To gain a deeper insight into the relation between genomic alterations and the development of cervical cancer, Ojesina et al. performed exome and whole genome sequencing and showed relationships between recurrent somatic mutations, copy-number alterations, changes in transcript levels and gene alterations as a consequence of HPV integration, and the development of cervical cancer. Whole-genome sequencing showed that HPV integration disrupts HPV genes as well as probably nearby host genes. These disruptions can lead to specific mechanisms in cervical cancer. Linking genomics to proteomics data has recently led to new insights into these mechanisms in cancer development. Laser capture microdissection (LCM) is a technique that allows the capture of different cell types or well-defined structures in tissue for subsequent genomics and proteomics analyses. Notably tissue from cancer patients has been analyzed by proteomics following this LCM technique. Although this approach is very challenging due to the minimal amount of tissue material available for analysis, it was shown previously that a few hundred proteins can be identified from about 12,000 isolated cells from cervical cytological specimen. We compared by semi-quantitative analyses the protein abundances of 4,488 proteins based on one peptide using approximately 8,000 cells obtained from LCM-derived cervical cancer tissue with healthy cervical epithelium or stroma from women with a normal cervix. Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) was applied to confirm selected differential proteins found by the shotgun proteomics approach. Data was subjected to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) linking published genomics data to proteomics data generated in this study. From the networks acquired, we learned that specific tumor mechanisms become effective during the early stage of cervical cancer.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS FIGURES AND TABLES
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors report no conflicts of interest.
FUNDING
This work was financially supported by the Dutch Cancer Society (KWF, grant RUG2011-5021) and supported by ZonMW, grant 91113020.