PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics
keywords: Chemoproteomics; Wdr5

ABSTRACT:
A chemoproteomics experiment was performed to investigate the selectivity of the WDR5 targeting compound LH168. Therefore, a biotinylated adduct of LH168, namely LH205, was used to enrich potential target proteins of LH168. The addition of LH168 in excess competed only the interaction with LH168, demonstrating a proteome wide selectivity of LH168 for WDR5.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Discovery of an Exquisitely Selective WDR5 Chemical Probe Accelerated by a High-Quality DEL-ML Hit

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HEK293 cells (ATCC CRL-1573) were grown to confluency in 15 cm dishes. The cells were detached with 10 mL phosphate buffered saline (1x PBS) containing 1 mM EDTA. After washing the cells once with 1x PBS (1 mM EDTA) and removing the supernatant, they were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Cells were lysed by resuspension in HNN lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 0.5% IGPAL-630, 400 nM Na3VO4, 1 mM PMSF and 0.2% protease inhibitors (Sigma). Following 10 minutes of incubation on ice, the lysate was centrifuged for 30 minutes at 18.000g. After pooling the cleared lysate, it was distributed into 1900 µL aliquots per sample (equivalent to 2x 15 cm dishes).  50 µM of LH168 or DMSO together with 5 µM LH205 or DMSO were added to the individual samples with 4 replicates per condition and incubated for 1 hour at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Next, the treated lysate was added to 80 µL of Strep-Tactin beads (50% slurry, IBA Lifesciences) previously modified to be resistant to tryptic cleavage (reference: Mol Syst Biol(2020)16: e9370https://doi.org/10.15252/msb.20199370) followed by incubation of the samples on a rotating wheel for 1 hour at 4°C. After the transfer of the beads to a 96-well 1 µm glass filter plate (Pall corporation), the residual lysate was filtered away and the beads washed with two times HNN lysis buffer without protease inhibitors and PMSF, twice with 1 mL of HNN lysis buffer without protease inhibitors, PMSF and IGPAL-630 and twice with 1 mL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). The beads were resuspended in 100 mM ABC and transferred to a 10 kDa cutoff plate (Pall corporation).The supernatant was removed via centrifugation at 1500g for 15 minutes. The samples were resuspended in 8 M Urea in 100 mM ABC, reduced with 10 mM TCEP (40 minutes, 37°C and 200 rpm) and alkylated with 20 mM Iodoacetamide (30 minutes, 37°C and 200 rpm). The 8 M Urea was removed by centrifugation at 1500g for 15 minutes, followed by two wash steps with 100 mM ABC, where the centrifugation time was increased to 30 minutes after the last wash. The beads were resuspended in 203 µL 100 mM ABC containing 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) and 0.5 µg of LysC (FUJIFLM Wako) for overnight digestion (37°C, 200 rpm). The supernatant containing the peptides was collected via centrifugation at 1500g for 20 minutes and remaining peptides were eluted in 100 µL of 100 mM ABC. Both solutions were pooled and acidified through the addition of formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 5%. The peptides were loaded on a equilibrated 96-well C18 plate (Nest group, HNFR S18V) via centrifugation (1500g, 1 min), washed three times with 200 µL of 5% Acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% FA and finally eluted with 2x 100 µL of 50% ACN with 0.1% FA into a fresh collection plate. Peptides were dried in the speed vac and resuspended in 20 µL of 2% ACN with 0.1% FA and 0.2x iRT standard (Biognosys). Samples were injected into a Waters nanoACQUITY coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. In the samples, where the intensity in the chromatogram deviated from the other replicate, the injection volume was adjusted.  The peptides were separated on a 30 cm column packed with 3 µm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch) by a 120 min gradient from 3% to 35% buffer B (100% ACN containing 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Each sample was measured in data-independent acquisition (DIA) and data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. The DDA mode was performed with the following parameters: the full scan range was 350 – 1’150m/z at 120’000 resolutions. The data dependent scans were acquired within a cycle time of 3 sec. Only charge states between or equal to 2 – 7 were included. Fragmentation was obtained with HCD collision energy 30%. The MS2 spectra were measured with an Orbitrap resolution of 30’000 with isolation windows of 1.6 m/z. The normalized AGC target was set to 200% with maximum injection time of 54 msec. The DIA mode was performed with the following parameters: the scan range was 350 – 1400 at 120’000 resolutions. The normalized AGC target was set to 50% with a maximum injection time of 100 msec. The RF lens was set to 30%. The targeted MS2 spectra for the desired masses in the variable isolation windows together with the normalized AGC target percentage listed below were acquired by fragmentation with a HCD of 28%. The Orbitrap resolution was 30’000 with variable scan ranges. The maximum injection time was set to 54 msec and the RF lens to 30%.

DATA PROCESSING:
A hybrid spectral library was generated from all DDA and DIA runs, using Pulsar search engine in Biognosys Spectronaut v.19.1. The standard settings were used except that LysC/P was added to the cleavage rules. The DIA runs were searched in Biognosys Spectronaut v.19.1 against the generated library with the default setting with the following changes: Cross-Run Normalization was unselected and Used Biognosys’ iRT Kit was selected. The precursor-level data were exported and further processed in protti version 0.9 R version 4.4.1. Data normalization was performed on the precursor level and protein abundances were calculated for proteins with at least three observed precursors in each sample. Following differential abundance calculation, significance was determined using a moderated t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction. Changes in protein abundances were considered significant, if the absolute fold change (log2) is greater than one unit and the adjusted p values are below 0.05.

RESULTS:
Results and discussion
MR43378 was identified using DEL–ML screening as a small molecule WDR5 ligand. Given its drug-like structure, synthetic tractability and double digit nanomolar potency, MR43378 represented an excellent starting point for further optimization towards a selective chemical probe or lead for drug discovery.
Medicinal chemistry optimization of MR43378 was further facilitated by the obtained co-crystal X-ray structure with WDR5 (PDB ID: ), revealing its binding to the WIN-site pocket. Mining publicly available structural information and binding interactions of other known WIN-site WDR5 ligands (Fig. S1, ESI†) led us to hypothesize that further decoration of the central phenyl ring (Fig. 1, substituent R2) and structural modification of the imidazole moiety (Fig. 1, substituent R1) might be an efficient approach for improving biological activity, aiming to develop a high-quality chemical probe.
Prior to incorporating the additional moiety on the phenyl ring, we decided to develop a relatively straightforward synthetic route (Scheme 1) to explore variations of the imidazole moiety (SAR Table 1), which mimics a conserved arginine residue present in SET1 protein family members, natural binding partners of WDR5, forming important binding interactions. Inspired by published SAR data for other WDR5 ligands, we assumed that introduction of additional amine (or imine as there is a tautomeric equilibrium) might contribute to stronger affinity. In addition, we also re-synthesized the DEL–ML hit (S)-MR43378 (5a) as a pure S-enantiomer.
To establish SAR for our chemical series, selected compounds were profiled using surface plasmon resonance (SPR), differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) and NanoBRET target engagement to monitor the interaction with WDR5 in cellular environment. SPR and DSF assays indeed confirmed that introduction of 1-methyl-1H-imidazol-2-amine moiety led to more potent compound (5b) in vitro. Therefore, we have established a modified synthetic sequence allowing for modification of the R2 substituent in the last synthetic step and convenient preparation of 12 analogues 11a-l (Scheme 2 and Table 2).
However, the aminoimidazole series suffered from poor cellular activity, likely due to poor cell membrane penetration, as determined by NanoBRET experiments comparing target engagement activity in intact versus digitonin-permeabilized cells. Therefore, we returned to the imidazole moiety and synthesized four additional analogues (compounds 11m–p), which demonstrated improved potency in live cells despite lower in vitro potency.
Notably, NanoBRET EC50 values measured in permeabilized cells were, in some cases (including LH168), significantly higher than in intact cells. This phenomenon has been observed consistently across several biological replicates and different chemical series targeting WDR5, including published ligands. We hypothesize that this may result from complex kinetic effects related to the formation of multi-component complexes in the cellular environment. Upon rupture of the cell membrane by digitonin, kinetics governing the formation and dissociation of these complexes might be disturbed by changes in concentrations, possibly affecting interactions with the WDR5 WIN site.
Based on its favorable in cellulo potency, LH168 was selected for further characterization as our chemical probe candidate. Subsequently, we aimed to develop a structurally related negative control compound by introducing a slight modification to the LH168 structure. Inversion of the configuration at the chiral center, or introduction of the dimethyl imidazole moiety alone, did not sufficiently reduce WDR5 binding affinity (Fig. S2, S5 and S6, ESI†). However, the combination of both modifications resulted in LH222 (Fig. 2), showing sufficiently low binding activity.
The probe candidate LH168 and the negative control LH222 were evaluated side by side in a comprehensive set of bioassays (Fig. 3 and 4), in some cases alongside the known WDR5 ligand OICR9429 as a positive control and reference compound. SPR and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) assays consistently confirmed the potent binding of LH168, with low nanomolar KD values (KD = 38 nM by ITC and 1.9 nM by SPR), whereas the negative control was inactive or exhibited only very weak binding. The thermodynamic parameters obtained from ITC experiment indicate that the LH168-WDR5 binding interaction is mainly driven by enthalpy (ΔH = −38.7 kJ mol−1) with a minor contribution of the entropy (TΔS = 3.64 kJ mol−1 at 298 K). Interestingly, LH168, along with several other analogues containing the R2-substituent, displayed a long residence time, as demonstrated by kinetic SPR measurements. Strikingly, this contrasted with the less potent analogues (S)-MR43378 and 5b lacking the R2-substituent, as well as the published WDR5 ligand OICR9429, which belongs to a distinct chemotype (Table 2 and Fig. S2, ESI†).
To gain further insights into the WDR5-LH168 binding interaction and potential explanations for its slow binding behavior (slow koff and kon rates), we resolved the corresponding X-ray co-crystal structure (Table S2, ESI†) and compared it with both the original DEL–ML hit (S)-MR43378 and the known WDR5 inhibitor OICR9429 (Fig. 2). (S)-MR43378 and LH168 adopt similar binding pose, with the primary difference being a slight distortion of the central phenyl ring in LH168. This distortion is likely caused by an additional substituent that extends into the binding pocket, forming additional interactions. Notably, the overall shape of the binding pocket remains nearly unchanged. In contrast, there is a dramatic difference in the binding pose between LH168 and OICR9429, since they bind to very distinct WDR5 conformations (as illustrated by the Video in ESI†). We hypothesize that the prolonged residence time of LH168 is due to its ability to induce a more closed conformation of the protein, effectively filling the binding pocket, and forming a tight interaction with the WDR5 binding pocket. Unlike (S)-MR43378 or OICR9429, the dissociation of LH168 appears to require conformational rearrangement of the binding site, which presumably results in slow on- and off-rates.
LH168 and its negative control compound, LH222, were additionally profiled in the NanoBRET cell-based target engagement assay (Fig. 3). Gratifyingly, LH168 showed potent target engagement with an EC50 value of 10 nM (n = 12) in intact cells, demonstrating excellent cell membrane penetration. Consistent with the previous data, the negative control LH222 did not show any measurable binding to WDR5 in the NanoBRET assay with intact cells, while in permeabilized cells it showed more than a 150-fold difference in binding affinity (EC50) compared to the chemical probe compound LH168.
To probe the selectivity, LH168 was tested against a panel of methyltransferases and methyl-lysine and methyl-arginine binders. Specifically, as depicted in Fig. 3, LH168 was profiled at 50 μM against 13 histone/arginine methyltransferases using radioactivity-based assay as well as against WDR5 and seven arginine binders in DSF assay. Both assays revealed high selectivity of LH168 for WDR5.
The effect of LH168, LH222 and OICR9429 on cell viability of MV4-11 (frequently found to be sensitive to WDR5 loss) and K562 (not sensitive to WDR5 loss) cells was assessed using the CellTiterGlo assay. In contrast to previously reported WIN-site WDR5 inhibitors that reduce viability of MV4-11 cells, we did not observe any cytotoxity up to a concentration of 1 μM (Fig. S3, ESI†). The cytotoxicity observed at higher concentrations of LH168 in both MV4-11 and K562 cells was likely due to unspecific effects unrelated to WDR5 inhibition, as a similar toxicity was observed with the negative control LH222. In comparison, the chemical probe OICR9429, which served as a control in these assays also showed minimal toxicity across the tested concentration range. Notably, MV4-11 and K562 cells exhibited comparable sensitivity profiles, with MV4-11 displaying only slightly increased sensitivity to inhibitor treatment.
Encouraged by these results, we decided to synthesize a biotinylated LH168 analogue that would allow assessment of proteome-wide selectivity by MS-proteomics. Exploiting the structural insights into the binding mode from the co-crystal structure, we synthesized analogue 16 bearing a solvent exposed alkyne functionality instead of aliphatic chain (Scheme 3). The alkyne analogue 16 proved to be readily accessible from inexpensive chemicals and was envisioned to be a convenient synthetic building block, for instance for click chemistry, and therefore well suited for attachment of linkers and development of bifunctional modalities.
 Via Cu-catalyzed click reaction and Sonogashira coupling we synthesized compounds 17a (LH205), 17b and 18 to probe the chemistry as well as the effect of the attached moieties on the in vitro binding affinity and cellular activity. While the binding potency of 17b and 18 to isolated WDR5 protein is only slightly lower than for LH168, as determined by SPR, the in cellulo binding is diminished which is likely due to reduced cell penetration (Table 3 and Scheme 3). Due to the presence of biotin moiety, compound 17a was not evaluated in the SPR experiment as it would likely result in interference due to biotin binding to the chip.
To further investigate the selectivity of LH168 in the cellular context, the biotinylated compound LH205 was incubated with HEK293 lysate and interacting proteins were pulled down using Streptactin beads and analyzed by label-free proteomics. In the presence of LH205, endogenously biotinylated proteins such as PCCA were depleted, indicating a successful immobilization on the Streptactin matrix. WDR5 was found to be one of the most strongly enriched proteins. No significant enrichment of other components of WDR5 containing complexes was observed, suggesting that only WDR5 protein that was not associated with chromatin was enriched or that the complex was not sufficiently stable to allow enrichment by this method. In addition, it is important to consider that LH168 acts as a protein–protein interaction inhibitor which further abrogated enrichment of intera ction partners dependent on binding to the WIN-site. Since several other proteins were significantly enriched alongside WDR5, we set up a competition experiment where the original probe LH168 was added in excess. In this setup, only specific interactors of LH168 are expected to be depleted. Gratifyingly, only WDR5 was significantly depleted in the protein fraction pulled down by the Streptactin beads, demonstrating the exquisite selectivity of LH168 for WDR5 (Fig. 4).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
WDR5 is a highly conserved WD40-repeat protein that plays a central role in numerous biological processes through its function as a molecular scaffold. Structurally, WDR5 is composed of a WD40 domain with an N-terminal extension and features a distinctive 7-bladed β-propeller architecture. Its primary function is to mediate the assembly of large protein complexes, such as the non-specific lethal (NSL) acetyltransferase complex, the nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex, and the mixed-lineage leukemia protein (SET1/MLL) methyltransferase complexes. Through these interactions, WDR5 regulates chromatin modification and gene expression, including the recruitment of c-MYC to chromatin, a key process implicated in the pathogenesis of c-MYC-dependent cancers such as acute myeloid leukaemia. Overexpression of WDR5 has been correlated with poor prognosis in a range of cancers, including neuroblastoma, breast, bladder, and colorectal cancers, further underscoring its potential as a therapeutic target.
Two distinct binding sites have been identified on the WDR5 WD40 domain: (I) the WDR5-interacting (WIN) site, which engages with SET-family methyltransferases and has been successfully targeted by small-molecule inhibitors such as OICR-9429 and MM-598 or degraders and (II) the WDR5-binding motif (WBM) site, which is responsible for c-MYC recruitment and features a shallower binding surface that has also been targeted by small-molecule inhibitors. The WIN site contains a characteristic arginine-binding cavity which mediates the interaction with proteins containing an arginine-containing WIN motif.
The chemical space of drug-like compounds is estimated to include around 1060 possible molecules, offering immense opportunities for medicinal chemistry. However, efficient mapping of this vast chemical space to identify suitable hits remains one of the biggest challenges in drug discovery. Traditional high-throughput screening methods, while effective, often struggle to navigate this vast diversity efficiently. In response to this challenge, DNA-encoded library (DEL) technology has emerged over the past decade as a revolutionary approach in lead discovery. DEL technology enables the simultaneous interrogation of millions to billions of compounds in a single, multiplexed experiment. This method not only dramatically reduces the cost of high-throughput screening (HTS) but it also facilitates the exploration of unprecedented chemical diversity in minute reaction volumes.
By integrating DEL with machine learning, the sensitivity and throughput of hit identification can be significantly enlarged by mining also commercially available compounds that may be difficult to synthesize in the presence of DNA. This approach significantly expands the exploration of chemical space, potentially increasing the probability for identification of high-quality hits and accelerating the progression from screening to potent biologically active compounds.
In this article we demonstrate the rapid development of a potent and exquisitely selective WDR5 chemical probe, which was streamlined by use of a high-quality DEL–ML hit which we have identified and disclosed recently in a WDR domain focused DEL–ML effort. This includes comprehensive profiling in a variety of in vitro and cellular assays, selectivity assessment using chemoproteomics and binding mode elucidation by crystallographic methods.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Data availability
The data supporting this article have been included as part of the ESI.† Crystallographic data for LH168-WDR5 has been deposited at the PBD under PDB ID:  and can be obtained from . The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium () via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD063455.