PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Lc-ms; E-coli

ABSTRACT:
Reliable enzymatic digestion is crucial for successful mass spectrometry-based proteomics. This study compares the arginine-specific protease, GingisREX, with a traditional trypsin/lys-C mixture for identifying E. coli proteins. Using GingisREX resulted in more protein identifications due to fewer peptides per protein, creating a simpler mixture. GingisREX also showed better digestion efficiency, fewer missed cleavages, and improved MS/MS data quality for larger peptides. These findings suggest GingisREX is a valuable complement to trypsin for detecting bacterial proteins and could be optimized as an effective alternative for identifying HCPs in biotherapeutics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
GingisREX: A complimentary enzyme for the detection of bacterial proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Peptides were separated using online RP-LC (Dionex UltiMate 3000), using a binary solvent system consisting of mobile phase A (LC-MS grade water (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) and mobile phase B (LC-MS grade acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Peptides were separating using a ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column (130 Å, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 150 mm) (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) over a 45 minute gradient at 0.2 mLmin-1. Samples were directly eluted via a heated electrospray ionization (HESI) source into the mass spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
RAW files were submitted to Byosphere® v 5.0 for protein identification. Each set of triplicate results was analyzed separately. The database consisted of the most recent uniprot E. coli database, the cRAP database, along with sequences for the corresponding drug substance where relevant.

METHODS:
Methods
Samples
Three biotherapeutics (A–C) as well as an E. coli null cell lysate were provided. Two batches of biotherapeutic A produced with different processes were tested (processes 1 and 2). Each of these generated a product with different amounts of HCPs. Samples were buffer exchanged into PBS to a final concentration of ∼2 mg/mL.
Sample Preparation
Trypsin/Lys-C Digestion
22.5 μL of 0.2% RapiGEST SF (Waters, Milford, USA) (reconstituted in 10% Acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added to 30 μg of each sample and digested using a trypsin/lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI) at a concentration of 1:20 for 3 h at 37 °C. Samples were reduced by the addition of 1.5 μL of 500 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) and quenched by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1%.
GingisREX Digestion
GingisREX (Genovis AB) digestion was performed as per manufacturer’s instructions without significant method development. Briefly, 30 μg of each sample was mixed with 6 M Urea and 5 mM DTT and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Iodoacetamide (IAM) was added to a concentration of 20 mM and was incubated in the dark for 30 min. IAM was quenched by the addition of 100 mM cysteine, and GingisREX was added at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:20 and incubated for 3 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 1%.
LC-MS
See the Supporting Information.
Data Analysis
RAW files were submitted to Byosphere version 5.0 for protein identification. Each set of triplicate results was analyzed separately. The database consisted of the most recent uniprot E. coli database, the cRAP database, along with sequences for the corresponding drug substance where relevant.

RESULTS:
Results
To assess the effectiveness of GingisREX enzymatic digestion, an E. coli null cell lysate as well as biotherapeutics A-C were digested in triplicate and analyzed via LC-MS/MS. Data was processed using Byosphere, and 2 unique peptides were required for a protein to be classed as identified. For comparison, the samples were also digested using a trypsin/lys-C combination enzyme using a method previously optimized for HCP identification (note that no alkylation step has been used in the digestion). Venn diagrams presenting the number of proteins identified across both digests are shown in Figure 1.
A total of 824 protein IDs were noted across both enzymatic methods for E. coli null cell lysate digests. The number of Protein IDs for each individual analysis was within 5% of the average for both digest types. Of these IDs, 156 proteins were uniquely identified across the GingisREX digests and 104 in the trypsin/lys-C digests. The remaining 564 protein IDs were identified using both enzymes, though the variation in the identified peptides for each method should be noted. By digesting the null cell lysate with both GingisREX and typsin/lys-C, we were able to increase the number of proteins identified by ∼23% as compared to trypsin/lys-C alone, which is highly appealing. Furthermore, the absolute identification of an increased number of proteins in the GingisREX digests (720 vs 668 in the trypsin/lys-C digests) suggests that using this method may offer a viable and superior approach to the traditional method of trypsin/lys-C digestion for certain applications.
Interestingly, despite the number of protein IDs being ∼10% higher when using GingisREX, there were actually more peptide IDs in the trypsin/lys-C digest. By cleaving exclusively at arginine residues, GingisREX digestion theoretically generates larger yet fewer peptides than a trypsin/lys-C digest. The reduced number of peptides resulting from GingisREX digestion is likely to simplify the ensuing chromatographic separation and reduce the overall sample complexity for more efficient MS identification.
Golghalyani et al., who restricted trypsin to only digest the C-terminal of arginine by chemically modifying lysine residues, similarly showed the number of protein IDs could be increased by ∼9% when including data from a complementary enzymatic digest of E. coli. A smaller total number of proteins was noted in our work, which we attribute to the more sensitive equipment used in that study such as a nanoflow source. These data highlight a potential trend that arg-C-like digestion may be of high value to the proteomics community.
Figure 2 shows a scatter plot for the protein IDs shared between the GingisREX and trypsin/lys-C E. coli null cell lysate digests. Each data point represents an identified protein with respect to the number of peptide spectral matches (PSMs) for each digest. The size and color of each spot is plotted in accordance with the protein abundance, as estimated by the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF). There are 301 spots plotted above the red line with 243 below it. This implies that proteins are determined with a higher number of PSMs during trypsin/lys-C digestion. This point is emphasized in the highly abundant proteins. For example, Aconitate hydratase B showed an average of 184 PSMs (107 unique peptide IDs) using the trypsin/lys-C method and 115 (58 unique peptide IDs) using the GingisREX method. In this instance, the trypsin/lys-C digest contributes to a substantially more complex peptide mixture, without promoting additional protein identification. This consolidates our belief that the lower number of assigned peptides for abundant proteins in GingisREX digests is a key factor in the identification of more proteins.
Furthermore, for all of our data evaluations, two missed cleavages were taken into consideration. Figure 3a shows a comparison of mis-cleaved peptides for both enzymatic digests of E. coli. For the trypsin/lys-C digest, ∼8% of peptides were identified with one missed cleavage, and a further ∼0.7% with two. For the GingisREX digest <2% of peptide IDs contained one missed cleavage, and <0.1% showed two missed cleavages. The high digestion efficiency of GingisREX increases confidence in protein identifications and potentially aids quantitation.
The ability to detect specific proteins with good quality MS/MS solely in the GingisREX digest highlights the fact that this might be a useful complementary approach for identifying so-called “high-risk” HCPs—ones which, if they are not monitored and removed, might have a detrimental impact on the safety and/or efficacy of the therapeutic protein.
For example, the protein Glucokinase was identified only in the GingisREX digests. The MS/MS data for Glucokinase peptide LPENLKPKDITER is shown in Figure 3b. The MS/MS data are of good quality, with almost complete sequence coverage being observed. This is, in part, due to the lysine residues that are present within the sequence that aid positive ionization. As a rule, lysine residues would not be present in the middle of tryptic peptides unless they proceeded by a proline residue.
The quality of the MS/MS data can be reflected by the peptide’s “score”. A higher score will reflect an increased certainty that the assigned peptide is a true positive and has not been designated by chance. Figure 3c illustrates the distribution of scores for each peptide identified across each E. coli enzymatic method. It is clear that peptides of longer length have significantly higher scores in the GingisREX digests, with more comparable distributions for shorter peptides. These data further suggest that while GingisREX digests may produce fewer peptides than tryptic methods, the resulting data are of higher quality, ultimately aiding in more protein IDs. We hypothesize that a contributing factor to the higher scores is the longer, lysine-containing peptides observed in the GingisREX digests.
While some proteins were uniquely identified in each of the four biotherapeutic GingisREX digests (see Figure 1b–e), the only sample which showed an absolute increase in protein IDs versus the trypsin/lys-C digest was the E. coli lysate. Though it should be noted, digestion using GingisREX increased the total number of HCPs identified across the 4 samples.
The difference in identified proteins observed between GingisREX and trypsin/lys-C would likely be improved by further optimizing the GingisREX digestion parameters. For example, the null cell lysate is prepared in water, whereas the drug substance samples are all prepared in formulation buffers which may impact the digestion efficiency. In addition, peptides from the drug molecule are lower in intensity in the GingisREX digest but not as significantly as those of the HCP peptides.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Trypsin has long been established as the protease of choice for mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics. The cleavage specificity, at the carboxy-terminal of Arg and Lys residues, ensures each peptide efficiently gains multiple charges for MS analysis. Furthermore, the positive charge gained at the peptide C-terminus facilitates the generation of an effective y-ion series. Nevertheless, other proteases are often also used to acquire complementary data.
It has been suggested that proteolytic digestion by trypsin alone may prove to be a limiting factor in bottom-up proteomics. This includes missing particular sites of post-translational modifications, protein segments, or even subsets of proteins. Numerous works have shown that analyzing the same proteome with multiple proteases generates complementary data increasing the proteome coverage.
Recently, Golghalyani and colleagues proposed an enzymatic digestion method that exclusively cleaved at the C-terminal of arginine residues. The authors chemically modified lysine residues such that they were resistant to tryptic digestion and showed a higher number of protein IDs in an Escherichia coli digest against a traditional tryptic approach. Similar methods involving modified lysines have shown more specific peptides are produced, i.e., with fewer missed and nonspecific cleavages.
Over the years, E. coli has been extensively studied as a model organism. Indeed, this remains the most well-characterized of all prokaryotes. MS-based proteomics has proven to be an invaluable tool for comparing the expression levels of many proteins in a variety of genetic and environmental conditions.
Biotherapeutics are often produced in nonmammalian host cells, such as E. coli, and through product development, clearance of host cell impurities and contaminants must be demonstrated. These include nucleic acids, lipids, and proteins expressed endogenously. These are termed host cell proteins (HCPs).
In our study, we consider the analysis of an E. coli cell lysate via a trypsin/lys-C enzyme mix and a commercially available protease, GingisREX (RgpB, Genovis AB). GingisREX is a cysteine protease, purified from Porphyromonas gingivalis, that exclusively digests at the C-terminal of arginine residues, including at arginine-proline linkages, which can be difficult to digest using other proteases, such as trypsin. Additionally, we compare the bacterial HCPs that can be identified via these two enzymatic methods in three different biotherapeutics with differential amounts of HCPs.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD056345.
Supporting Information Available
Description of Mass Spectrometry Parameters (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jasms.4c00347.
Supplementary Material