PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Aml-12 cell
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Masld;m6a;proteomic;mettl3;proteomic

ABSTRACT:
Background: N6-methyladenosine (m6A) RNA modification plays a crucial role in various biological events and is implicated in various metabolic-related diseases. However, its role in MASLD remains unclear. This study aims to investigate the impact of Mettl3 on MASLD through multi-omics analysis, with a focus on exploring its potential mechanisms of action. Methods: MASLD mouse models were established by feeding a high-fat diet for 12 weeks, and Mettl3 stable overexpression AML12 cell models were constructed via lentiviral transfection. Subsequent transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, as well as integrated analysis between different omics datasets, were conducted. Results: Mettl3 expression significantly increased in MASLD mouse models. In the transcriptomic and proteomic analyses, we identified 848 genes with significant inconsistencies between transcriptomic and proteomic datasets. GO/KEGG enrichment terms may involve post-transcriptional modifications, particularly Mettl3-mediated m6A modification. Subsequently, through integrated proteomic analysis of Mettl3-overexpressed AML12 cell models and MASLD mouse models, we selected the top 20 co-upregulated and co-downregulated GO/KEGG terms as the main biological processes influenced by Mettl3 in MASLD. By intersecting with pathways obtained from previous integrated analyses, we identified GO/KEGG terms affected by Mettl3-induced m6A modification. Protein-protein interaction analysis of proteins involved in these pathways highlighted GAPDH, ENO1, and TPI1 as three key hub genes. Conclusion: In MASLD, Mettl3 regulates the glycolytic pathway through m6A modification, influencing the occurrence and development of the disease via the key hub genes GAPDH, ENO1, and TPI1. These findings expand our understanding of MASLD and provide strong evidence for potential therapeutic targets and drug development.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Exploring the Impact of m6A Methyltransferase Mettl3 on MASLD through Multi-Omics Analysis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
1.Protein extraction, trypsin digestion, and malonylation peptide enrichment Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g., 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. To enrich malonylation-modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with prewashed antibody beads (PTM-904, PTM Bio) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. Then, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC–MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. LC–MS/MS analysis of differentially modified proteins The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient comprised an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, an increase from 23% to 35% in 8 min, a ramp to 80% in 3 min and then a hold at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for the full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

DATA PROCESSING:
Statistical analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the PD2.4 search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot human database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme with allowance of up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and malonylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The label-free quantification (LFQ) method was used, the FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was performed via the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The GO annotations of proteins are divided into three major categories: biological process, cellular composition and molecular function. Fisher's exact two-terminal test was used to test the enrichment degrees of the differentially expressed proteins in each GO classification against the background of identified proteins. A corrected p value < 0.05 was considered to indicate significance.