PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Testis
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Non-obstructive azoospermia; Nxf3; Nxf2; Nuclear transport; X chromosome; Nuclear rna export; Male infertility; Nxt2

ABSTRACT:
In eukaryotic cells, the nucleocytoplasmic export of bulk poly(A)+-mRNAs through the nuclear pore complex is mediated by the ubiquitously expressed NXT1-NXF1 heterodimer. In humans, autosomal NXT1 has an X-chromosomal paralogue called NXT2, which was subject to adaptive selection in primates and exhibits testis enriched expression, suggesting a role in spermatogenesis. Here, we report on the in vivo interactome of NXT2 in the human adult testis and demonstrate a specific association with key components of the nuclear export machinery, including not only NXF1 but also the testis-specifically expressed NXF1 paralogues NXF2 and NXF3 and nuclear pore complex proteins NUP93 and NUP214. By identifying infertile men with loss-of-function variants in NXT2 and NXF3, we link the impaired NXT2-NXF interactome to disturbed germ cell maturation. The concordantly observed absence of germ cells in the patient affected by NXT2 variants suggests an NXT2-mediated function in early stages of spermatogenesis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A novel nuclear RNA export pathway in the human testis – NXT2 is key player and azoospermia candidate gene

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source and FAIMS interface. Compensation voltages of -50 V and -70 V were used. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 3 μm 120 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A 60 min gradient was used to elute peptides (28 min from 5 % to 21 % solvent B followed by 22 min from 21 % to 36 % solvent B and in 5 min from 36% to 100% of solvent B, followed by 5 min wash stage with solvent B). MS data was acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 4.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A data dependent acquisition method consisted of repeated cycles of one MS1 scan covering a range of m/z 350 – 1750 followed by HCD fragment ion scans (MS2 scans) for the most intense peptide ions from the MS1 scan.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data files were searched for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 3.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an in-house server running the Mascot software. Data was searched against a SwissProt Homo sapiens (2024_3) database.