PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; cysteinylation (disulfide with free L-cysteine); deamidated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition; Immunopeptidomics
keywords: Allergy; Hla; Penicillin; Beta-lactam; Immunopeptidomics; Benzylpenicillin

ABSTRACT:
This study characterised the array of benzylpenicillin-modified ligands within the immunopeptidome of HLA-A*02:01. We further describe a novel target of penicillin within the immunopeptidome and proteome. Identification of penicillin-modified ligands within the immunopeptidome will allow future immunogenicity assays to aid in understanding how T cells can mediate penicillin-induced hypersensitivities.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Naturally presented benzypenicillin-modified HLA-A*02:01 ligands

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For immunopeptidomic analysis, peptides presented by HLA-A*02:01 on C1R.A*02:01 pellets were isolated and analysed via LC-MS/MS as described by Purcell et al. 2019. Cell pellets were lysed in a non-denaturing lysis buffer containing 0.5% IGEPAL-630 (Sigma-Aldrich), and HLA-A*02:01 were immunopurified by solid-phase bound anti-HLA-A2 antibody BB7.2. To isolate peptides from the other components of the HLA, samples were fractions by RP-HPLC. HPLC fractions of interest were vacuum dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS/MS data were searched with PEAKS Xpro 10.6 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) against the reviewed human proteome (UniProtKB/Swissprot, downloaded on 10/11/2018). All files went through default data refinement defined by PEAKS Xpro prior to a de novo-assisted database search. Parent mass error tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da were allowed. For all searches, enzyme specificity was turned off. A maximum of 3 variable modifications were allowed per peptide. The 5 variable modifications considered were oxidation of Met (+15.99), deamidation of Asn/Gln (+0.98), cysteinylation of Cys (+119.00), BP modification on cysteinylated Cys (CysBP) (+453.10), and BP modifications on Lys/Arg/His/Cys (+334.10). All analyses were conducted with a peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%, which was estimated using a decoy fusion method.