PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Lecithin-cholesterol acyl transferase; Proteome; Csl112; High-density lipoprotein; Acute myocardial infarction

ABSTRACT:
Background:  High-density lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol is inversely correlated with cardiovascular risk, but increasing its circulating concentration is insufficient to prevent adverse cardiovascular outcomes. Instead, the emerging paradigm is on increasing the function of HDL and its major protein constituent, apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) to increase reverse cholesterol transport.  Objective:  To investigate the effect of apoA-I [human] (CSL112) infusion on HDL protein composition, and provide further insights into the mechanism of action of CSL112 administered post-acute myocardial infarction (AMI).   Methods:  A mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic approach was used to evaluate changes in HDL protein composition in patients (n=50) from the AEGIS-I (ApoA-I Event Reducing in Ischemic Syndromes I) study who received either placebo or CSL112 post-AMI. HDL was immuno-isolated from patient plasma using anti-apoA-I antibodies. Cholesterol esterification rate (CER) was measured to determine lecithin-cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT) activity. Cholesterol efflux capacity (CEC) and hepatocyte uptake were assessed using patient serum in ex vivo cell-based assays.  Results:  CSL112 induced extensive rearrangement of HDL proteins at 4 hours post-infusion. Levels of apolipoproteins A2, B, C, and E, as well as the acute phase proteins serum amyloid A1 and A4 were significantly reduced. By contrast, apoA-I, apoM, and LCAT significantly increased. Elevated apoA-I and LCAT levels on HDL were associated with an increase in CEC, plasma HDL-C levels, and CER in CSL112-treated patients. Furthermore, enhanced CEC was strongly associated with cholesterol uptake by hepatic cells (r=0.95 p<0.001).  Conclusions:  CSL112 altered HDL composition and increased HDL functionality by promoting multiple steps of the reverse cholesterol transport pathway.  Clinical trial registration:  URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov. Unique identifier: NCT02108262

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ApoA-I [human] (CSL112) infusion increases LCAT levels in HDL particles and promotes reverse cholesterol transport

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For HDL protein digests, approximately 180 ng digested peptide mixture was analyzed using an Evosep One (Evosep, EV-1000) coupled directly to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Using the 30 sample per day method (44 minute gradient), peptides were eluted from the Evotip, and further separated on a 15cm Endurance column (Evosep, EV1106) coupled to an EASY-Spray™ Source (ThermoFisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a single acquisition cycle comprising one full-scan (m/z 300–1800) in the Orbitrap (70,000 resolution), followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 7 most intense precursor ions, (17,500 resolution) using 27 collision energy, and dynamic exclusion enabled for 10 s.  For plasma protein digests, approximately 4 ug digested peptide mixture was analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled directly to a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were resolved over a 20 min analytical gradient using an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column, 130Å, 1.7 µm, 2.1 mm X 50 mm (Waters, 186002350). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a single acquisition cycle comprising one full-scan (m/z 350–1800) in the Orbitrap (70,000 resolution), followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 10 most intense precursor ions, (17,500 resolution) using 27 collision energy, and dynamic exclusion enabled for 6 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw spectral files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0). Peptides spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant, against a combined Uniprot database comprising Human proteins (Taxon ID: 9606, 20,432 entries). Generally, MaxQuant default search parameters were used, with limited changes. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a ‘fixed modification’, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as ‘variable modifications’, and trypsin/P selected as the ‘digestion enzyme’. Peptide length was set between 7 and 25 residues with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages allowed. ‘Label-free quantification (LFQ) with no ‘normalization’, ‘match between runs’ enabled, and protein false discovery rate set to one percent with a minimum number of 2 ‘razor and unique peptides’ required for identification.

METHODS:
Methods
Data availability
Data are available within the article and in the Supplemental Appendix. Additional data supporting this study’s findings are available from the corresponding author by reasonable request.
Study oversight
The study design was in accordance with the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments The protocol, patient information sheet, and informed consent forms were reviewed and approved by the Independent Ethics Committee or Institutional Review Board of each participating center. All patients provided written informed consent before enrollment.
Study drug and administration
CSL112 is human purified ApoA1, formulated with phosphatidylcholine. CSL112 or placebo (0.9% sterile saline solution), was administered intravenously over 2 hours.
Study design
AEGIS-I was a phase 2b, multicenter, randomized, dose-ranging, placebo-controlled trial assessing the safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), and pharmacodynamics (PD) of CSL112 administered at weekly intervals for 4 weeks in patients after AMI. Plasma samples from a subset of patients and from the PK-PD substudy were investigated in the present study. A subset of patient demographics and baseline characteristics (n = 50) are presented in Table 1 and have been described previously. Patients that had experienced an AMI in the previous 7 days were assigned randomly to receive either 2 g CSL112 (n = 19), 6 g CSL112 (n = 15), or placebo (n = 16). Sampling was conducted to assess the molecular changes occurring at various time points after infusion compared with the corresponding baseline sample (preinfusion 1).
Immuno-affinity purification of HDL from plasma
Goat anti–human ApoA1 antibodies (Bethyl Laboratories; A81-104A-5MG) were coupled to Dynabeads MyOne Epoxy (ThermoFisher Scientific; 34002D), according to the manufacturer’s instructions (20 μg antibody per mg beads). A 10-μL plasma sample (in technical triplicate) was diluted 1:6 with phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS), and ApoA1-containing HDL immuno-isolated from using 5 mg of antibody-coated Dynabeads for 60 minutes at 4 °C with gentle agitation. Bead-containing immuno-isolates were washed 3 times with PBS, and HDL eluted with 40 μL of 100 mmol/L Glycine-HCl at pH 2.5 for 10 minutes at 70 °C. Eluates were neutralized with 1 mol/L Tris (pH 8), and 10 μL aliquots were prepared for subsequent analysis.
Ex vivo incubation of CSL112 with patient plasma
A stock solution of CSL112 was spiked into preinfusion patient plasma to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL (∼1:30). Mixtures were incubated for 60 minutes at 37 °C, diluted 1:6 with PBS, and HDL immuno-isolated and eluted, as described above.
Digestion of plasma and HDL proteins
Two μL of neat plasma was diluted 1:10 with buffer containing 4 mol/L guanidine HCl (Sigma; G7294), 50 mmol/L Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution, and 50 mmol/L chloroacetamide, and was heated for 10 minutes at 95 °C. Samples were diluted 1:5 with 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate containing 2 mg trypsin/LysC (Promega; V5071), and incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C. Digests were acidified to 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and frozen at −80 °C until liquid chromatography–MS/MS analysis.
Ten μL of HDL immuno-isolated sample was mixed with 70% trifluoroethanol, 50 mmol/L Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution, Neutral pH (ThermoFisher Scientific; 77720), and 50 mmol/L chloroacetamide, and heated for 10 minutes at 95 °C. Samples were diluted 1:5 with 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate, 200 ng trypsin/LysC (Promega; V5071) was added, and they were further incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C. Digests were acidified to 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, and either loaded onto Evotips (Evosep; EV2001) according to manufacturer’s instructions or frozen at −80 °C.
Tryptic digests were further analyzed by liquid chromatography–MS, as described in the Supplemental Methods.
Raw MS data files were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD057196.
Cholesterol esterification rate assay
LCAT-mediated cholesterol esterification was assessed in ApoB-depleted samples by measuring UC in plasma kept on ice (inhibited LCAT-esterification) and plasma incubated at 37 °C for 60 minutes (activated LCAT-esterification) as described in detail in the Supplemental Methods. Briefly, cholesterol concentration is measured using a plate-based enzyme-coupled fluorometric assay method. Unesterified cholesterol within the mixture was oxidized by cholesterol oxidase to generate hydrogen peroxide and a cholesterol-derived ketone (cholest-4-en-3-one). In the presence of horseradish peroxidase, hydrogen peroxide reacts with Ampliflu Red to generate the fluorescent dye resorufin (7-hydroxy-3H-phenoxazin-3-one). The resulting fluorescence absorption and emission were measured at 560 nm and 590 nm, respectively, and the emission intensity correlates with the amount of UC present in the HDL fraction. The difference in concentration between the baseline and LCAT-activated samples was calculated and expressed as the molar cholesterol esterification rate (CER).
Ex vivo cholesterol efflux capacity and hepatic cholesterol uptake assays
CEC was assessed by Vascular Strategies using 2% ApoB-depleted serum in a subset of patients from the AEGIS-I study (n = 15, 2 g CSL112; n = 15, 6 g CSL112; n = 15, placebo) at baseline, 2 hours (end of infusion), and 24-48 hours (after the first infusion) as previously described. Briefly, J774 cells seeded on 24-well plates were labeled with [3H]-cholesterol overnight and then stimulated with 0.3 mmol/L cyclic AMP for 15-17 hours to up-regulate ABCA1 transporters. After 4 hours of incubation with the serum samples, condition medium was then divided and analyzed for CEC and hepatocyte cholesterol uptake.
For CEC, released [3H]-cholesterol was measured by liquid scintillation counting (LSC), and cholesterol efflux expressed as the percentage of [3H]-cholesterol released over 4 hours. Total and ABCA1-independent cholesterol efflux, with and without cyclic AMP induction, respectively, were assayed. ABCA1-dependent efflux was calculated as the difference between total and ABCA1-independent efflux.
For hepatic cholesterol uptake, Fu5AH rat hepatoma cells were seeded on 24-well plates in growth media for 2 days before being washed with MEM-HEPES/0.5% bovine serum albumin and the CEC-conditioned medium applied to cells (triplicate wells). After 2 hours, media was aspirated off and cells were washed twice with PBS. Cellular lipids were then extracted with the use of isopropanol and [3H]-cholesterol quantified by means of LSC. Hepatocyte uptake was expressed as counts per million in each well.
Nondenaturing polyacrylamide gradient gel electrophoresis, Western blotting, and Filipin staining
HDL-C was measured in patient plasma by enzymatic assay as previously described.
ApoB-depleted plasma was obtained with polyethylene glycol precipitation, and plasma lipoproteins were resolved by nondenaturing polyacrylamide gradient gel electrophoresis on 4%-25% polyacrylamide gradient gels as described previously. Molecular size markers (GE Healthcare) included 17 nm thyroglobulin, 12.2 nm ferritin, 9.5 nm catalase, 8.4 nm lactate dehydrogenase, and 7.1 nm bovine serum albumin. For immuno-detection of ApoA1, blots were probed with goat anti–human ApoA1 polyclonal antibody (Rockland Immunochemicals; 600-101-109).
Filipin staining of UC was conducted as previously described. Details are described in the Supplemental Methods.
Statistical analysis
Continuous data are presented as mean ± SD, mean ± SEM, or median (Q1-Q3).
For proteomic comparisons, proteins were identified and quantified for each patient by means of label-free quantification. Protein abundance was assayed at each selected time point, and the values baseline adjusted by averaging the differences across technical replicates (to the preinfusion time point) within each patient. To compare individual proteins between the treatment groups (placebo or 2 g or 6 g CSL112), the nonparametric Wilcoxon rank-sum test was applied to the baseline-adjusted values, and the Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to calculate P values adjusted to control the false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins with more than 90% missing values across all treatment groups were excluded from analysis (requiring an identification in at least 10% of samples in at least 1 group). For each protein, dose-dependent effects of CSL112 compared with placebo were calculated as differences in mean within-patient log2 fold change (to the preinfusion time point) using nonzero intensity values.
For CER, the area under the effect curve from 0 to 24 hours was compared among all groups by means of pairwise comparisons corrected for multiple testing, and for both CER and HDL-C within each group, predose levels were compared with all available postinfusion time points by means of linear mixed models with gaussian error distribution fitted by restricted maximum likelihood (REML) including fixed effects for all time point and treatment group combinations and random patient intercepts to incorporate correlation between repeated measures made on the same patient. Within each group the fixed effects estimates were used for simple linear contrasts comparing mean predose levels with all available postinfusion time points. The results are presented (Supplemental Table 3) as mean differences with 95% CI and P values adjusted for multiple testing.
For CEC and hepatic cholesterol uptake, responses were log transformed and analyzed using marginal models with gaussian error distribution fit by REML including fixed effects for all time point and treatment group combinations with an unstructured symmetric covariance matrix incorporating correlation between repeated measures made on the same patient. Within each group, the effects estimates were used for simple linear contrasts comparing baseline levels with all available postinfusion time points. The results were back-transformed to the original scale and presented (Supplemental Table 4) as fold change in geometric means with 95% CI and P values adjusted for multiple testing. Intrapatient correlation of hepatic cholesterol uptake with CEC and ApoA1 was also determined for all time points.
All statistical analyses were conducted in the statistical software R (version 4.0.3). P values <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

RESULTS:
Results
CSL112 infusion increases ApoA1 and ApoM levels in plasma
An MS-based proteomic approach was implemented to profile the effects of CSL112 on plasma proteins levels. A total of 114 proteins were identified and quantified across time points (Supplemental Table 1). Compared with placebo, patients given 6 g CSL112 exhibited over 2-fold higher levels of ApoA1 in their plasma 4 hours after infusion (Figures 1A and 1B). Similarly, patients given 2 g CSL112 also had elevated ApoA1 in their plasma 4 hours after infusion, albeit with a smaller fold change compared with placebo (Supplemental Figure 1A). Consistently with previously reported PK, elevated ApoA1 levels were sustained 24 hours after infusion (Figures 1B and 1C) in patients treated with 6 g CSL112, but not with 2 g CSL112 (Supplemental Figure 1B), which is consistent with measurements of plasma ApoA1 by means of nephelometric assay. ApoM was also identified to be significantly elevated in patients administered 6 g CSL112 at 4 and 24 hours after infusion (Figures 1A, 1C, and 1D), as well as in patients given 2 g CSL112 at 4 hours after infusion, compared with placebo (Supplemental Figure 1A).
CSL112 infusion induces transient changes in HDL protein composition and increases LCAT levels
To identify proteins specifically within HDL, an immuno-affinity method was developed to isolate ApoA1-containing HDL from plasma. Although a minority of HDL particles do not contain ApoA1, and ApoA1 can be present on non-HDL particles, the scalability of an immuno-affinity–based method compared with ultracentrifugation was essential. Thus, a highly reproducible and specific ApoA1-enriched HDL proteome (Supplemental Figures 2A and 2B) was collected and examined. A total of 97 proteins were identified and quantified across time points, and 18/97 proteins displayed a significant change in abundance at 4 hours after infusion of 6 g CSL112 (Figure 2A, Supplemental Table 2). Similar trends were observed in patients administered the 2 g dose (Figure 2B, Supplemental Table 2). For example, a small cluster of proteins were consistently depleted from HDL in patients given 6 g CSL112 (Figure 2C) including ApoB, which was dramatically reduced, and structural HDL proteins ApoA2, and ApoE (Figure 2D). Similarly, acute-phase proteins serum amyloids A1 and A4 were also diminished, as were the 4 apolipoproteins C1, C2, C3, and C4 (Supplemental Figure 2C). In contrast, ApoA1 and ApoM had increased abundance (Figures 2A and 2B), consistent with total plasma analyses. Most saliently, elevated HDL-associated LCAT was observed at 4 hours after 6 g CSL112 infusion (Figures 2A and 2D). By the 24-hour time point, the extensive protein depletion in HDL had been largely restored, with only ApoL1 maintaining significant reduction, whereas ApoA1 and ApoM remained elevated (Supplemental Figure 2D). No significant changes were detected in patients 24 hours after administration of 2 g CSL112 (Supplemental Figure 2E).
Ex vivo incubation of CSL112 with plasma recapitulates HDL remodeling induced by infusion
To examine HDL protein remodeling further, samples containing CSL112 only, preinfusion plasma HDL from four patients, and ex vivo incubations of CSL112 with the preinfusion plasma were compared. It should be noted that although CSL112 is primarily composed of ApoA1 purified from human plasma, it also contains some additional proteins that co-purify. Nonetheless, comparison of label-free quantification intensities established the relative levels of individual proteins across all 3 samples (Figure 3). Encouragingly, many proteins that were identified to have altered HDL abundance at 4 hours after infusion with CSL112, behaved similarly upon incubation of preinfusion plasma with CSL112 ex vivo. Three main trends/groups were observed and plotted for a subset of HDL proteins (Figure 3).
In the first group, apolipoproteins C1, C2, C3, A2, and E were all depleted by at least 2-fold after ex vivo incubation of plasma with CSL112 (Figure 3A). Further examination of their abundance in the drug-only CSL112 isolations revealed lower levels compared with preinfusion plasma.
The second subset of HDL proteins appeared to maintain similar levels after ex vivo incubation of CSL112 and plasma (Figure 3B). ApoA4, hemopexin, and alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein (AHSG) had abundance comparable to the drug-only CSL112 product. In contrast, several HDL proteins were either absent from CSL112 (serum paraoxonase/arylesterase 1, ApoH, and vitamin D–binding protein) or had significantly lower abundance in the drug compared with preinfusion plasma (ApoD, ApoJ), but did not decrease after incubation. Curiously, this trend for these HDL proteins was the opposite to proteins described in Figure 3A.
A third subset of proteins were identified to accumulate in HDL after ex vivo CSL112 incubation in plasma (Figure 3C). Despite lower abundance in drug-only samples compared with preinfusion plasma HDL, alpha-1-antitrypsin, transthyretin, serotransferrin, and alpha-1B-glycoprotein had increased levels in HDL after incubation of CSL112 and plasma (1.4-1.6 fold). In addition, ApoM, ApoA1, ApoF, and LCAT were present in the CSL112 drug-only samples at higher relative levels than preinfusion plasma HDL. Importantly, these 4 proteins were the most enriched HDL proteins after ex vivo incubation (increasing 1.8-3.7 fold in abundance) and recapitulated the ApoA1, ApoM, and LCAT accumulation observed in the large-scale clinical HDL proteomic analysis (Figure 2A).
Taken together, these findings support the interpretation that the changes observed in vivo were not simply from isolation of the drug only. Instead, it demonstrates the extensive remodeling that occurs when CSL112 and endogenous HDL interact ex vivo, and its similarity to what occurs during in vivo infusion.
CSL112 increases cholesterol esterification
Assessment of HDL-C revealed a rapid dose-dependent increase in concentration in AEGIS-I patients administered CSL112 (Figure 4A). Maximal HDL-C levels were observed 2-6 hours after infusion in both dose groups (2 g and 6 g CSL112). In the 6 g CSL112 dose group, HDL-C was significantly elevated from baseline at all time points up to 48 hours, and in the 2 g CSL112 dose group, HDL-C remained elevated up to 24 hours (Figure 4A).
To determine the activity of LCAT, an assay was developed to assess the rate of cholesterol esterification in plasma HDL after CSL112 infusion. The CER assay revealed that LCAT activity was significantly increased in the 6 g CSL112 group up to 12 hours after infusion (P < 0.001) (Figure 4B), as consistent with elevated LCAT levels observed in HDL particles (Figures 2A and 2D), further confirming important functional effects induced by CSL112. Infusion of 2 g CSL112 only transiently increased LCAT activity at 4 hours after infusion (P = 0.022). No change in LCAT activity was observed in the placebo group.
To identify HDL subpopulations that may be relatively enriched in UC, ApoB-depleted plasma of patients infused with 6 g CSL112 was separated on nondenaturing gradient polyacrylamide gels and either stained with Filipin or probed by Western blotting for ApoA1 (Figure 4C). CSL112 induced transient changes in plasma HDL particle size distribution from 2 to 12 hours after infusion (Figure 4C, Left). At 2 hours after infusion, a specific subpopulation of large remodeled HDL (L-HDLrem) particles with mean average particle diameter of 11 nm were preferentially stained by Filipin (Figure 4C, Right). Between 4 hours and 12 hours after infusion, there was a gradual shift in Filipin-positive L-HDLrem particle size from 11 nm to 9 nm (Figure 4C, Left), and the intensity of Filipin staining sharply declined (Figure 4C, Right). Lipid-poor ApoA1 and small remodeled HDL particles were not stained by Filipin (Figure 4C), an observation consistent with their extremely low cholesterol content and high capacity to mediate ABCA1-dependent cholesterol efflux.
Taken together, these data suggest that the initial rise of plasma HDL-C in AEGIS-I patients infused with CSL112 was due to the L-HDLrem-associated UC fraction that undergoes subsequent esterification at later time points after infusion. This is consistent with results of previous clinical studies demonstrating that after CSL112 infusion, HDL-UC levels diminish with a quantitatively matching rise in HDL esterified cholesterol.
CSL112 enhances CEC and subsequent hepatocyte cholesterol uptake
To examine the effects of CSL112 infusion on plasma HDL function, ex vivo cell-based studies were performed. CSL112 infusion resulted in a dose-dependent increase in macrophage CEC (Figure 5A, Supplemental Tables 4 and 5) and subsequent uptake of radioactive-labeled cholesterol by hepatocytes (Figure 5B, Supplemental Table 4). The 6 g dose of CSL112 induced a >2-fold increase in cholesterol uptake at the end of infusion, and sustained elevation above baseline at 24-48 hours (P < 0.001) (Figure 5B). CEC (P < 0.001) (Figure 5A) showed very similar changes to hepatocyte cholesterol uptake in terms of magnitude over time at both doses of CSL112. Regression analyses demonstrated that cholesterol uptake by hepatic cells strongly correlated with total CEC (r = 0.95; P < 0.001) and plasma ApoA1 (r = 0.75; P < 0.001) across all dose groups and time points.

INTRODUCTION:
Plasma concentration of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) is an established inverse risk factor for cardiovascular disease (CVD). Recent research shows that the absolute level of HDL-C may be of less clinical significance compared with HDL functionality. Specifically, the cholesterol efflux capacity (CEC) of HDL particles may play an important protective role against atherogenesis and clinical atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD). It has been widely demonstrated that HDL exerts a protective effect in experimental models of ASCVD by modulating reverse cholesterol transport (RCT), whereby excess cholesterol is removed from atherosclerotic plaques and transported back to the liver for excretion. The RCT process begins with cholesterol efflux from plaque macrophages to apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1), an essential component of HDL, via ATP-binding cassette transporter 1 (ABCA1). Once cholesterol is effluxed from cells, it forms nascent HDL particles that undergo maturation processes via the action of the enzyme lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT). LCAT converts unesterified cholesterol (UC) to cholesteryl esters within HDL, enabling growth and remodeling of HDL particles as well as further efflux of UC from plaques. The last step in RCT is the transfer of esterified HDL-C to the liver, which can occur directly via scavenger receptor class B1 or indirectly via cholesteryl ester transfer protein–mediated transfer to very-low-density lipoprotein or low-density lipoprotein (LDL), that mediate cholesterol uptake to the liver via the LDL-receptor.
ApoA1 is the major structural protein of HDL particles, which are highly heterogeneous and can be divided into several subclasses based on their bulk density or size. Up to 500 HDL-associated proteins have been identified by different laboratories using various purification methods coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) for protein identification; however, there are significant disparities in identified HDL-associated proteins between studies. Although these data make the definition of a “core” set of HDL-associated proteins challenging, several properties of HDL-associated proteins have been linked to specific HDL functions, such as lipid metabolism and transport, complement regulation, inflammation or acute-phase response, antioxidation, antithrombosis, and antiplatelet activity, and protease inhibition. In addition to the extensive proteomic studies, more than 500 lipid species have also been reported within HDL particles, and studies have shown that stable and acute coronary syndrome patients can be differentiated by their HDL lipid composition. These studies clearly show that HDL composition is heterogeneous, dynamic, and linked to function in a manner that is HDL subclass dependent.
CSL112 is a novel formulation of human ApoA1 reconstituted with phosphatidylcholine, to form discoid particles suitable for intravenous infusion. The central hypothesis of the mechanism of action of CSL112 is that as an acceptor of cholesterol from atherosclerotic plaque, CSL112 will reduce the cholesterol content and instability of the plaque and thereby reduce recurrent events in the period of high risk following an acute myocardial infarction (AMI). In AEGIS-II (Study to Investigate CSL112 in Subjects With Acute Coronary Syndrome; NCT03473223), a recent large CV outcomes trial in post-AMI patients, CSL112 did not significantly reduce the incidence of the primary composite endpoint of CV death, all MI, or stroke from randomization through 90 days, compared with placebo. However, in exploratory analyses of the AEGIS-II trial, CSL112 therapy reduced the total burden of nonfatal ischemic events and CV death as well as recurrent MI by subtype. Furthermore, the effects of CSL112 were greater in those presenting with LDL-C >100 mg/dL (2.6 mmol/L), in whom there was a significant reduction in the primary composite endpoint at 90, 180, and 365 days of follow-up. The objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of CSL112 infusion on HDL protein composition using samples collected during the phase 2b AEGIS-I study (A Phase 2b Study of CSL112 in Subjects With Acute Myocardial Infarction; NCT02108262), and provide further insights into the molecular mechanisms contributing to the biological activity of CSL112.