PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
diseases: Septic shock; Bacterial sepsis
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X; Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; complex glycosylation; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition; Glycoproteomics
quantification: Relative quantification; Spectrum counting
keywords: Alpha-1-acid-glycoprotein; Lewis fucosylation; Icu; Glycoproteomics; Survivorship; Septic shock; N-glycosylation; Glycomics

ABSTRACT:
Septic shock, the excessive host immune response to pathogen infection, poses a major health concern accounting globally for approximately 20% of all deaths. Current methods to establish disease severity are unacceptably slow, unspecific and insensitive, hindering timely and effective treatment and patient care. Aiming to identify easy-to-assay glyco-signatures that may identify and guide the clinical management of the worst affected patients, we applied quantitative glycomics and glycoproteomics to serum longitudinally collected from septic shock survivors (n = 29) and non-survivors (n = 8). Glycomics of all 134 serum samples (2-7 samples/patient, daily sampling until recovery or death) revealed significant N-glycome dynamics in both septic shock survivors and non-survivors. Interestingly, unsupervised clustering of the serum N-glycome upon ICU admission (day 1) indicated survivorship-specific glyco-signatures. We therefore trained a random forest model using the serum N-glycome data from all ICU samples except for day 1 and tested the model using the clinically informative day 1 data. Excitingly, the model accurately classified survivorship outcomes of 35 of 37 patients (specificity 94.6%) and correctly predicted 6 of 8 non-survivors (sensitivity 75%). Targeted N-glycome analysis revealed raised levels of Lewis fucosylation in non-survivors relative to survivors already upon ICU admission. Elevated Lewis fucosylation was recapitulated by comparative glycoproteomics that also identified α-1-acid-glycoprotein as the principal carrier of Lewis fucosylation. Enabled by integrated -omics approaches, this study has laid a foundation for improved clinical management of septic shock patients by uncovering easy-to-assay glyco-signatures that early in the disease course accurately identify individuals with poor survival outcomes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Serum AGP-1-sLex glycoforms report on survivorship of patients with septic shock upon admission to intensive care unit

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For glyco/proteomics, the serum protein extracts from ICU day 1 (37 samples) were exhaustively digested using sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 ratio (enzyme:substrate, w/w) at 37°C for 17 h. The digestion was stopped by acidification with 1% (v/v) TFA (final concentration). Serum peptides were desalted using Oligo R3-C18-SPE clean up as previously described. The desalted peptides were split into i) a minor fraction (10%) used for proteome analysis by direct LC-MS/MS without glycopeptide enrichment and ii) a major fraction (90%) used for glycoproteome analysis by LC-MS/MS after glycopeptide enrichment. For i), the fraction was dried and resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in preparation for direct LC-MS/MS. For ii), the fraction was dried and resuspended in 50 µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA in 80% (v/v) ACN in preparation for glycopeptide enrichment. Glycopeptides were enriched utilising an established hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC)-SPE based enrichment method. Custom-made HILIC-C8-SPE micro-columns were prepared by inserting 1 mm Empore discs (Octyl C8 47 mm Extraction DISK 66882-U, Thermo Fisher Scientific) into P10 pipette tips (Eppendorf) onto which micro-columns of zwitterionic HILIC resin (ZIC-HILIC, 10 μm particle size, 200 Å pore size, kindly donated by Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) were packed. The HILIC-C8-SPE micro-columns were conditioned after which the serum peptides were gently loaded and reloaded onto the micro-columns. Following thorough washing, glycopeptides were eluted sequentially using 50 µL 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 50 µL 25 mM aqueous NH4HCO3 and finally 50 µL 50% (v/v) ACN. The eluted glycopeptide fractions were combined, dried and resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Unenriched serum peptides were analysed in a single batch on a Q-Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in positive ion polarity mode. To avoid data acquisition batch effects and injection sequence bias, samples were injected in a randomised order. Peptides (900 ng/sample) were loaded on to an Acclaim™ PepMap™ C18 reversed phase HPLC column (5 mm × 300 μm inner diameter, Thermo) and were separated on a nanoLC column (75 μm inner diameter x 30 cm length) packed in-house with Solidcore Halo® 2.7 μm 150 Å ES-C18 resin (Advanced Material Technology) operated at 45°C by an UltiMate™ NCS-3500RS HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HPLC produced a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min using a binary mobile phase system comprising 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 99% (v/v) ACN (solvent B). Following an initial equilibration for 5 min using solvent A, peptides were separated over a linear gradient ramping from 3.2-36% solvent B over 56 min followed by 36-95% solvent B over 2 min and an 8 min wash at 95% solvent B for a total run time of 75 min per sample. MS1 full scans (m/z 350-1,450) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and a normalised AGC target of 3 x 106, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a 1 s cycle time. Data-dependent acquisition was used to select the ten most abundant precursors in each MS1 scan for MS/MS, which were performed using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 27.5% NCE. The precursor isolation window was m/z 1.4 and the MS/MS AGC target was 1 x 105 with a resolution of 15,000. Selected precursors were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Unassigned and singly and highly charged precursors (z > 7) were excluded for MS/MS. Enriched serum glycopeptides were analysed in a single batch on a Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in positive ion polarity mode. These samples were also injected in a randomised order. Glycopeptides (900 ng/sample) were loaded on to an Aurora Ultimate nanoLC column (25 cm × 75 μm, 1.7 μm) operated at 60°C by an Vanquish Neo UHPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HPLC provided a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min using the same solvent A and B as above. Peptides were separated over a linear gradient ramping from 3-35% solvent B over 90 min, 35-50% solvent B over 8 min followed by 50-90% solvent B over 2 min and a 10 min wash at 95% solvent B for a total run time of 110 min per sample. MS1 full scans (m/z 700-2,000) were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 using a standard AGC target with 100 ms maximum accumulation. Data-dependent acquisition with a 3 s cycle time was used to select the ten most abundant precursors in each MS1 scan for MS/MS using HCD at 35% NCE. Fragment spectra were acquired within the orbitrap with an isolation window of m/z 1.6 and resolution of 15,000. The maximum accumulation time was 250 ms with a dynamic exclusion window of 20 s after a single isolation/fragmentation of any given precursor. Unassigned, singly charged and highly charged precursors (z > 7) were excluded for MS/MS.

DATA PROCESSING:
Glyco/proteomics data analysis The raw glyco/proteomics LC-MS/MS datasets were browsed and manually inspected using Xcalibur v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteomics and glycoproteomics data from the unenriched and enriched peptide samples were analysed separately to identify and quantify the non-modified and glycosylated peptides and their source proteins, respectively. As an initial high level analysis, the proportion of fragment spectra featuring the diagnostic marker for Lewis fucosylation (m/z 512.19 ± 2 ppm) was quantified across all LC-MS/MS files using an in house script. The glycoproteomics data (HCD-MS/MS) were searched using Byonic v4.5.2 (Protein Metrics). For the Byonic based searches, searches were performed employing a protein database comprising a reviewed UniProtKB Homo sapiens database (downloaded November 2021, 20,360 entries) alongside a predefined glycan search space of 310 mammalian N-glycans without sodium adducts. The search parameters were: precursor and product tolerance: 10 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively; semi-specific tryptic (RK) search alongside with N-ragged cleavage sites allowing 2 missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da @ M) was considered a common variable modification while cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da @ C) was considered a fixed modification. A maximum of two common and one rare (glycan) modification was permitted for each peptide candidate. A second set of searches were performed which targeted only those fragment spectra that contained a diagnostic ion for Lewis fucosylation at m/z 512.190 (representing Hex-(Fuc)-HexNAc [H+]) with an m/z tolerance of 0.02 Da and a rank cutoff of 50. With the addition of this search parameter only identifications that possessed this diagnostic ion would be included in the results. The output from all glycopeptide searches was filtered to < 1% false discovery rate at the protein level and 0% at the peptide level using a decoy database and only confidently identified glycopeptides (PEP 2D < 0.001) were considered. For all search strategies, the relative abundances of the identified N-glycopeptides or select subsets thereof were determined using a spectral counting approach considering the glycopeptide-to-spectrum matches (glycoPSMs).  For protein identification and quantification, the unenriched raw files were imported into MaxQuant v2.4.13.0. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the HCD-MS/MS data against the reviewed UniProtKB Homo sapiens database (downloaded November 2021, 20,360 entries) with a precursor and product ion mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine (15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.010 Da) were selected as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered to < 1% FDR at the protein and peptide level using a conventional decoy approach. For label-free AUC-based quantification, the ‘match between runs’ feature of MaxQuant was enabled with a 0.7 min match time window and 20 min alignment time window. Protein abundance was calculated based on the normalised protein intensity (LFQ intensity).