PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Urine
diseases: Urinary frequency; Urgency of urination
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue; iTRAQ8plex; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: mass spectrometry imaging
quantification: iTRAQ
keywords: Urgency urinary incontinence; lower urinary tract symptoms; Overactive bladder

ABSTRACT:
The aim of this study is analysis of urinary proteomic pattern in healthy people and patients suffering from OAB symptoms by means of mass spectrophotometry. Establishing characteristic protein profiles, qualitative and quantitative, for OAB will help to define specific protein marker and will allow to develop new investigative protocol enabling to discover at what stage of post-genetic changes urothelium cells change their proteomic profile causing OAB symptoms.  Patients will be divided into two groups: group A – OAB patients and group B – control group, without any urinary tract symptoms. All participants will be questionnaired with appropriate tools evaluating quality of life of patients with lower urinary tract symptoms and bladder diary. Urine samples will be taken twice with 7 day gap and then prepared for further evaluation with mass spectrophotometry. Mass spectrophotometry will be performed for all labeled samples with QExactive spectrophotometer. In order to provide maximal credibility and reliability of acquired data each sample will be managed in triplicate. Those result will be analyzed with specific statistical methods and final results will be correlated between the groups.  In long-term perspective results of this project will help to understand the underlying pathomechanisms of overactive blabber syndrome. In future those results will be applied for further research in OAB sufferers allowing for precise and objective diagnosis and prognosis. In our opinion it will also serve as a tool for estimations of treatment efficacy of new therapeutic methods. In consequence the project will allow us to create a unique toolkit, combining spectrophotometry, urinary proteomic pattern differences and quality of life correlated with OAB symptoms severity. It will enable to develop new perspectives for overactive bladder pathophysiology research and new therapeutic strategies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human urine proteome in overactive bladder syndorme

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sixteen Caucasian women aged 32-78 were included to the study. Patients were divided into 2 groups: OAB group (n=8) and control group (n=8). Sample of the urine (40mL) was collected using the 14 Fr sterile catheter and immediately preserved in the bacteriostatic factor (sodium azide) and Pefabloc, protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MI, USA) and frozen in -80oC. Proteins from urine were precipitated with Wessel-Fluegge method [9] and all samples were further processed according to iTRAQ manual (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Forty micrograms of the proteins was taken from each sample and digested with the trypsin in 37°C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Samples were labelled and analyzed in the Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) conjugated with the high efficiency nanoACQUITY UPLC® liquid chromatograph (LC) (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA).

DATA PROCESSING:
Acquired data was analyzed using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) to search the SWISS-PROT protein database, limited to the Homo Sapiens taxonomy. After the data arrangement, it was searched again using the DECOY database. Statistical analysis was performed using Diffprot software, resampling-based software tool for statistical analysis of data derived from MS-based proteomic experiments

METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods
Sixteen Caucasian women aged 32–78 were included within the study. Prior to the study, all patients signed informed consent and agreed to the use of the obtained data for scientific purposes. Moreover, data acquisition and analysis were performed in compliance with protocols approved by the Medical University of Lublin Ethical Committee (ethical approval number KE-0254/46/2016). In the study, participants were placed within 2 groups: OAB (n = 8) and control (n = 8). Inclusion criteria for patients with OAB symptoms were as follows: average of ≥8 micturitions/day during a 3 day bladder diary period and at least 1 episode of urge urinary incontinence (UUI) a day. Patients from the OAB group did not have any other comorbidities (except OAB) and did not take any medications prior to the study. Patients from the control group just had a routine gynecological check-up and were free of any LUTS and any other comorbidities as well and did not take any medications prior to the study. Urine samples were (40 mL) collected using a 14 Fr sterile catheter, immediately preserved in a bacteriostatic factor (sodium azide) and Pefabloc, protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MI, USA), and frozen at −80 ℃. The obtained urinary proteins were precipitated by applying the Wessel–Fluegge method, and all samples were then further processed according to the the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) manual (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Forty micrograms of the proteins was taken from each sample and digested with trypsin at 37 °C (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Samples were than labeled and analyzed in the Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) conjugated with the high-efficiency nanoACQUITY UPLC® liquid chromatograph (LC) (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). Detailed sample processing is described elsewhere and a separate Supplementary File (File S1) has been submitted. Samples were analyzed in duplicate. Samples were divided into two separate experiments with 4 OABs and 4 controls in each described as ExpOABK_01 and ExpOABK_02. Acquired data were analyzed using the MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) to search the SWISS-PROT protein database, limited to the Homo sapiens taxonomy. After the data arrangement, it was put through a second search using the DECOY database. Statistical analysis was performed by way of the Diffprot software, a resampling-based software tool for statistical analysis of data derived from MS-based proteomic experiments. For demographic analysis Statistica 12.0 PL (StatSoft Polska Sp. z o. o., Krakow, Poland) and the chi2 test were used. “Ratio” is the parameter that says whether the protein is under- or over-expressed. A value of <1.0 means that this protein is under-expressed in OAB patients, and a value >1.0 means it is over-expressed. Fold change describes how great the difference is, no matter the direction. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD017799 and 10.6019/PXD017799. Reviewer account details: Username: reviewer58080@ebi.ac.uk; Password: hPZXyBVu.

RESULTS:
3. Results
There were no statistically significant differences in demographic data between control and OAB groups (Table 1).
The proteome of urine collected from 8 OAB patients and 8 healthy subjects was compared using a combined liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS) relative quantitation of iTRAQ labeled peptides. The sample labeling yield rate with iTRAQ markers for both experiments was 99.7%. From each sample, an equal amount of total protein obtained in urine retentate, after filtration on >10 kDa cutoff filters, was used for the analysis. Qualitative results (protein lists) from two LC-MS experiments were combined, resulting in a dataset with all 953 proteins identified by at least two peptides (Figure 1). Within this dataset, protein identifications based on identical peptide sets were again grouped and each group was treated as a single protein cluster in further processing.
Qualitative proteins, that significantly differed between the OAB and control group in both experiments are presented in Table 2. Herein, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 was the only protein found to have a q value <0.05 in both experiments. In addition, ratio and fold change were similar in both experiments. The complete list of differentiated proteins and full data is provided in separate Supplementary Files: first experiment: Full list ExpOABK_01.xlsx and second experiment: Full list ExpOABK_02.xlsx (Table S1 and Table S2, respectively). All identifications in both experiments are given in Table 3.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Overactive bladder syndrome (OAB) is defined by International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/ International Continence Society (ICS) (IUGA/ICS) as a form of urinary urgency, usually accompanied by frequency and nocturia, with or without urgency urinary incontinence, in the absence of urinary tract infection (UTI) or other obvious pathology. There are several theories regarding the pathophysiology of OAB and detrusor overactivity (DO) including nervous, myogenic, and urothelial involvement but a full explanation is still missing. However, recent genetic studies have shed a light on gene expression engagement on OAB onset. Accordingly, several genes were found to be either over- or under-expressed in OAB sufferers. The use of micro- and macro-array as a methods of elucidating gene changes involved in the development of urgency was crucial for detecting genetic changes associated with this condition. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), microfibrillar-associated protein (MAP), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and tropomyosin were found to be important in regulating the structural integrity of the bladder and its supporting tissues. However, due to post-translational changes, encoded proteins may be altered and their impact on certain conditions can be limited. Proteome analysis may therefore provide significant pathophysiological information and may help in the discovery of novel diagnostic disease biomarkers or even in establishing new therapeutic methods. Urine, being noninvasively collected, seems to be an ideal material for testing in patients with lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). Nevertheless, before urine proteomic markers become clinically known and useful, the urine proteome itself must be thoroughly characterized in diverse populations. In 2015, the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease (NIDDK) invited experts of different specialties to a Urinology Think Tank meeting, and they concluded that features, such as the chemical and physical characteristics of urine, including the microbiota, cells, pH, metabolites, and proteins, might interact in complex ways with one another and with the bladder and/or kidney to potentially affect overall health. Recently, Mossa et al. found that urinary metabolites might be involved in the pathophysiology of OAB and can be helpful in its diagnosis. In their work, increased urinary levels of mitochondrial dysfunction markers, oxidative stress, and ketosis correlated significantly with the OAB symptoms scores obtained through questionnaires. Moreover, multiple linear regression modeling revealed that age, blood glucose, and urine metabolites (malate, fumarate, and α-hydroxyisobutyrate) were significant predictive factors of OAB severity.
Other work has shown that the urothelium is responsible not only for isolating the bladder environment from surrounding tissues, but it also plays a crucial role in molecular transport through the bladder wall via numerous functional receptors, junctions, and channels (i.e., aquaporins, ion channels, gap junctions). Growth factors, cytokines, or proteins such as the epithelial growth factor (EGF); fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR), nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM-1), and inter-cellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) were found to alter urothelial functions in specific circumstances.
The aim of this study was to analyze the urinary proteomic pattern in patients suffering from OAB symptoms and to establish a quantitative and qualitative protein profile for OAB that may be supportive in defining the mechanism of the OAB pathophysiology.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following are available online at , Table S1: Full list ExpOABK_01, Table S2: Full list ExpOABK_02, File S1: Detailed material and methods.