PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Αβ-tubulins; Ttc5

ABSTRACT:
The microtubule cytoskeleton, built from heterodimers of α and β-tubulins, is critically important to physically organize cells, mediate intracellular transport and power cell division. The availability of soluble αβ-tubulins influences the biomechanical properties and dynamic functions of microtubules. When present in excess, soluble αβ-tubulins induce degradation of their encoding mRNAs. This process involves the specificity factor TTC5, which recognizes nascent tubulins and recruits effectors that degrade the mRNA. But how TTC5 activity is regulated is unknown. Our biochemical and structural proteomic approaches reveal that soluble αβ-tubulins sequester TTC5 at steady-state, repressing its activity. The carboxy-terminal domain of TTC5 acts as a molecular switch, toggling between soluble αβ-tubulin-bound and nascent tubulin-bound states. Loss-of-function mutantions that abolish sequestration by soluble αβ-tubulins constitutively activate TTC5, leading to diminished tubulin mRNA levels and compromised microtubule-dependent chromosome segregation during cell division. Our findings provide a paradigm for how cells regulate the activity of a specificity factor to adapt posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression to cellular needs.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Autoregulation of tubulin mRNA via reversible TTC5 sequestration by soluble αβ-tubulins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
In-bead digestion protocol. Digestion with trypsin was carried at 37C overnight at a ratio of 1:50. Tryptic peptides were desalted and inject on a Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Injected samples were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead) coupled to an Orbitrap QExactive HFX? mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The sample was loaded onto the trapping column (Thermo Scientific, PepMap100, C18, 300 ?m X 5 mm), using partial loop injection, for five minutes at a flow rate of 10 ?L/min with 0.1% (v/v) FA in 3.8% acetonitrile. The sample was resolved on the analytical column (AuroraTS 15cm) at a flow rate of 400 nL min-1 using a gradient of 97% A (0.1% formic acid) 3% B (80% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid) to 25% B over 90 minutes, then to 40% B for additional 15 minutes, then to 95% B for another 20 minutes which remained at 95% B for 10 minutes, percentage of B was then lowered to 4% to allow the column to re-equilibrate for 15 minutes before next injection. Data-dependent acquisition consisted of a 60,000 resolution full-scan MS scan (AGC set to 3e6, max fill time of 120ms) using a mass range of 400-1500 m/z. To avoid repeated selection of peptides for MSMS the program used a 40 second dynamic exclusion window. MS/MS was performed on the orbitrap trap 30,000 resolution (AGC set to 5e5 with maximum fill time of 100ms) with an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and an HCD collision energy of 30%.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were imported and data processed in MASCOT.