PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Proteomics; Dia; Ipsc; Axon; Dopaminergic neurons; Protein turnover

ABSTRACT:
Dopaminergic neurons participate in fundamental physiological processes and are the cell type primarily affected in Parkinson’s disease (PD). Their analysis is challenging due to the intricate nature of their function, their involvement in diverse neurological processes, their heterogeneity and localization in deep brain regions. Consequently, most of the research on the protein dynamics of dopaminergic neurons has been performed in animal cells ex vivo. Here we use iPSC-derived, human mid-brain specific dopaminergic neurons to study general features of their proteome biology. We cover the proteome to a depth of 9,409 proteins and use dynamic SILAC to measure the half-life of more than 4,300 proteins. Our study provides a workflow and resource for future applications of quantitative proteomics in iPSC-derived human neurons.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome dynamics in iPSC-derived human dopaminergic neurons – part 1: comprehensive coverage of the proteome using DIA

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
iPSCs were used to generate hDaNs via Neural Progenitor Cell (NPC) intermediates using chemical induction as described in Schwarz, et. al., 2022 and based on a protocol described by Reinhardt, et. al., 2013 with slight modification.  Experiments were performed at day 18 (mature hDaNs) and the cells were harvested at day 23 for proteomic analysis.  Cells pellets were lysed with urea lysis buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 60 mM Tris pH 8.0) and kept on ice for 20 minutes. DNA and RNA were removed from the cell lysate using benzonase (1 U/ml, Merck Millipore) for 10 min at room temperature (RT) and samples centrifuged for 10 minutes at 13,000 rpm and 4oC. Protein quantification was performed with Bradford reagent, using a standard curve with known concentrations of BSA (Bovin Serum Albumin), and the absorbance was measured at 595 nm. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM of dithiothreitol (DTT) for one hour, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for one hour and digested with Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase, Wako Chemicals) for three hours at RT. Afterwards, four volumes of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate were added and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega Corporation) overnight. To stop the digestion, 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added.  Samples were fractionated with the Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Kit #84868). First, the samples were purified by solid phase extraction on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA). 100 ug of peptides were loaded in the conditioned spin columns and separated into nine fractions according to the hydrophobicity. Elution was done with a steep gradient of ACN and ammonia (5%-50% ACN in 10 mM NH4OH). Finally, fractions were acidified to pH to <2.7 with TFA, dried by vacuum centrifugation and purified on C18 StageTips prior LC-MS/MS measurements. Peptide samples were measured on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online-coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were separated using a 20-cm-long, 75–μm–inner diameter analytical HPLC column (ID PicoTip fused silica emitter; New Objective, Berks, UK) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm silica beads (Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany).  Samples were measured using 90 min LC gradient which was optimized for each HpH fraction. The full scan range was set to 400-1000 m/z at a resolution of 120k. Fragment ions were analyzed in 40 DIA windows, with an isolation window of 15 Th (1 Th overlap), at a resolution of 30,000.

DATA PROCESSING:
MaxDIA version 2.2.0.0. was used in discovery mode, and the default parameters were used unless otherwise stated. “Label-free quantification” was enabled.  In silico predicted library for all human peptides with up to one missed cleavage was downloaded from http://annotations.perseus-framework.org. The spectral libraries of peptides were uploaded to the MaxQuant software in the form of ‘evidence’ and ‘msms’ files