PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Tear
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Human; Lcmsms; Tear

ABSTRACT:
Human tear proteomics data from allergy sufferers and healthy controls

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human tear LC-MS/MS on allergy vs healthy controls

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein extraction was conducted using s-trap purification and trypsin digestion protocols.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data-independent acquisition (DIA) was carried out on the Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The settings of nano electrospray voltages, ion funnel RF, and capillary temperature were 1.9 kV, 50 %, 275 °C, respectively. A survey scan with a m/z range of 350 to 1400, a resolution of 120,000, a normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target of 250%, a maximum ion trapping time of 50 ms was performed before 49 DIA windows with an m/z isolation window of 13.7, a precursor ion m/z range of 361-1033, a MS/MS scan range of m/z 200-2000, a resolution of 30,000, an AGC of 1e6, a maximum ion trapping time of 55 ms and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%.  DIA LC-MS data were analysed with Spectronaut 16 using the direct-DIA default settings. In summary, digestion enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerance for full scan MS and MS/MS scans were set at dynamic mode, which optimizes the mass tolerance based on pre-search internal mass calibration. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, as well as oxidation of methionine and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications. Data were searched against UniProt human sequence database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM), peptide and protein level. MaxLFQ of the intensity at MS/MS level was enabled for label free quantification and no imputation was enabled.