PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Breast
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Human; Breast cancer; Peptidomics; Proteomics; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
In our study, we applied high-throughput mass spectrometry, bioinformatic, and machine learning approaches to investigate the proteome, including noncoding RNA (ncRNA)–derived micropeptides, of different breast cancer subtypes. In total, 19 tumor and 18 paired nontumor samples were used to obtain the proteome and peptidome. Among these, 5 samples were classified as LABC (plus 5 paired nontumor samples), 4 as LBBC (HER2−) (plus 4 paired nontumor samples), 4 as HER2+ breast cancer (plus 3 paired nontumor samples), and 6 as TNBC (plus 6 paired nontumor samples). We identified that each subtype depends on different protein expression patterns to sustain its malignancy,and also alterations in pathways and processes that can be associated with each subtype and its biological and clinical behaviors. Regarding subtype biomarkers, our panels achieved performances with at least 75% of sensibility and 92% of specificity. In the validation cohort, the panels obtained acceptable to outstanding performances (AUC = 0.740 to 1.00). We identified 58 peptides expressed on breast tissue, including 27 differentially expressed MPs in tumor compared with nontumor samples and MPs exhibiting tumor or subtype specificity. These peptides presented physicochemical features compatible with the canonical proteome and were predicted to influence the tumor immune environment and participate in cell communication, metabolism, and signaling processes. In addition, some MPs presented potential as anticancer, antiinflammatory, and antiangiogenic molecules.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomics and peptidomics of breast cancer subtypes

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Firstly, 25 mg of each sample was lysed in 250 μl lysis buffer (SDS 4%, Tris-HCl 0,1 M; pH 7,5, DTT 0,1 M), homogenized in TissueLyser II sample disruptor (Qiagen Corp. MD, USA) at an oscillation frequency of 30 Hz, in three cycles of 3 min intercalated by heating at 95 ◦C for 5 min. After, the lysates were sonicated at 25 Hz frequency in three cycles of 30 s, intercalated by intervals of 1 min in ice. Lastly, two centrifugation steps (first 5 mins at 12.880 rcf and 4 ◦C; second 10 mins at 12.000 rcf and 4 ◦C) were performed to remove cell debris. Protein concentration was determined by the tryptophan method. The final protein extracts (25 μg) were separated in 1D SDS-PAGE acrylamide gels (12%) and then reduced with DTT 10 mM, alkylated with iodoacetamide 50 mM, and digested overnight with trypsin 12.5 ng/μl solution in ammonium bicarbonate buffer 55 mM at 37 ◦C. The peptides were extracted through a sequence of twice acetonitrile 30%, trifluoroacetic acid 3%, and twice acetonitrile 30% washes and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge and desalted with C18 Stage Tips. Protein digestion was performed on the whole gel containing the total tissue protein extract. After, the samples were then quantified on 280 nm nano spectrophotometer, and 0.5 microgram of the sample was injected into the chromatographic column. Both liquid chromatography (3000 RSLCnano chromatograph, Thermo Scientific) and mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer, Thermo Scientific) were used for peptide analysis. This step was performed in the mass spectrometry facility (RPT02H) of Carlos Chagas Institute - Fiocruz, Parana. All runs were performed in duplicate.

DATA PROCESSING:
Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. The mass spectra were analyzed in the MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.17), and the protein identification was performed in the human UniProt database (75,777 entries). An FDR of 1% was independently applied for both peptide and protein identification, with at least seven amino acids required for peptide identification. The reverse of peptides was used for FDR estimation. The normalized spectral label-free protein intensity (Label-free quantification, LFQ intensity) was used to determine protein expression.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Breast cancer is a highly heterogeneous disease characterized by different subtypes arising from molecular alterations that give the disease different phenotypes, clinical behaviors, and prognostic. The noncoding RNA (ncRNA)-derived micropeptides (MPs) represent a novel layer of complexity in cancer study once they can be biologically active and can present potential as biomarkers and also in therapeutics. However, few large-scale studies address the expression of these peptides at the peptidomics level or evaluate their functions and potential in peptide-based therapeutics for breast cancer. In this study, we propose deepening the landscape of ncRNA-derived MPs in breast cancer subtypes and advance the comprehension of the relevance of these molecules to the disease. First, we constructed a 16,349 unique putative MP sequence data set by integrating 2 previously published lists of predicted ncRNA-derived MPs. We evaluated its expression on high-throughput mass spectrometry data of breast tumor samples from different subtypes. Next, we applied several machine and deep learning tools, such as AntiCP 2.0, MULocDeep, PEPstrMOD, Peptipedia, and PreAIP, to predict its functions, cellular localization, tertiary structure, physicochemical features, and other properties related to therapeutics. We identified 58 peptides expressed on breast tissue, including 27 differentially expressed MPs in tumor compared with nontumor samples and MPs exhibiting tumor or subtype specificity. These peptides presented physicochemical features compatible with the canonical proteome and were predicted to influence the tumor immune environment and participate in cell communication, metabolism, and signaling processes. In addition, some MPs presented potential as anticancer, antiinflammatory, and antiangiogenic molecules. Our data demonstrate that MPs derived from ncRNAs have expression patterns associated with specific breast cancer subtypes and tumor specificity, thus highlighting their potential as biomarkers for molecular classification. We also reinforce the relevance of MPs as biologically active molecules that play a role in breast tumorigenesis, besides their potential in peptide-based therapeutics.