PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics
quantification: TMT
keywords: Synthesis; Translation; Translatome

ABSTRACT:
One major knowledge gap in systems biology is the quantification of dynamic protein synthesis rates in response to cell perturbation.  To address this gap, we have developed MITNCAT, multiplex isotope tagging / non-canonical amino acid tagging, a novel method enabling the robust quantification of proteome-wide protein synthesis rates with high temporal resolution (15-30 minutes) across multiple time points or treatment conditions, in a single analysis.  MITNCAT combines multiplexed isobaric mass tagging with bioorthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) to label newly synthesized proteins with azidohomoalanine (Aha) and pulsed SILAC (pSILAC), thus providing enrichment and multiplexed quantification of newly synthesized proteins.  We demonstrate the application of MITNCAT to quantify altered protein synthesis rates following induction of the unfolded protein response (UPR) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation.  Eliciting the UPR by blocking N-glycosylation results in a global down-regulation of protein synthesis, with stronger down-regulation of proteins involved in the glycolysis pathway and protein synthesis machinery (ribosomal proteins, initiation factors, and elongation factors), but up-regulation of several key protein-folding chaperones.  MITNCAT enables the quantification of waves of temporally distinct protein synthesis in response to EGF stimulation, with altered protein synthesis on dozens of proteins detectable in the first 15 minutes. Comparison of protein synthesis with RNA sequencing and ribosome footprinting allowed the distinction between protein synthesis driven by an increase in transcription versus that driven by an increase in translational efficiency.  Temporal delays between ribosome occupancy and protein synthesis were observed and found to correlate with altered codon usage in significantly delayed proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A proteomics approach to profiling the temporal translational response to stress and growth

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For all EGF experiments, cells were changed to serum-free media 24 hours before stimulation.  In all experiments, growth media was removed and replaced with lysine/arginine/methionine (KRM)-free DMEM:F12 media 30 minutes prior to time course initiation.  For EGF experiments, EGF was added to the media to achieve a final concentration of 20 ng/mL or an equivalent volume of PBS was added as a control.  For UPR experiments, tunicamycin was added to the media to achieve a final concentration of 10 µg/mL or an equal volume of DMSO was added as a control.  At the appropriate time points following treatment, Aha was added to the media to achieve a final concentration of 3 mM, and R10 and K8 were added to 0.5 mM.  After 30 minutes of Aha/K8/R10 labeling, the media was aspirated, and the cells were washed in ice cold PBS supplemented with 300 µg/mL CHX.  Cells were lysed in 1% SDS in PBS supplemented with 50 mM NEM and 300 µg/mL CHX.  1.5 mL of -20°C acetone was added to each tube immediately following lysis to precipitate proteins.  Proteins were precipitated at -20°C for at least an hour and up to overnight. Following precipitation, the samples were centrifuged at maximum speed (~21,000 x g) for 15 minutes at room temperature to pellet the precipitated proteins.  The supernatant was aspirated off the pellet, and the pellet was allowed to air dry for 15 minutes to evaporate residual acetone.  250 µL of 1% SDS in PBS supplemented with 50 mM NEM was added to the pellet, along with ~1/10th of a vial of 0.7 mm garnet homogenizing beads to aid in pellet disruption.  Samples were alternately vortexed and centrifuged at maximum speed until the pellet was completely solubilized. Following resuspension, protein concentration was measured via BCA assay, and total protein was normalized to 100-300 µg in 500 µL of 1% SDS in PBS.  Each sample was diluted 2-fold in 8 M urea + 850 mM NaCl.  Each sample was applied to 30 µL of DBCO-agarose beads that had pre-equilibrated by washing 3x in 1 mL 0.8% SDS in PBS.  Click enrichment took place overnight at room temperature on a rotor.   After overnight click incubation, the bead/supernatant mixture was transferred to an empty spin column and allowed to drain into Eppendorf tubes to collect the supernatant. 12.5 µL of supernatant was aliquoted for biotin labeling of Aha-labeled proteins and western blot analysis. The tubes were rinsed out with 1 mL MilliQ water and added to the spin column, allowing to drain into a waste container.  To reduce disulfide bridges, 1 mL 10 mM DTT in 0.8% SDS in PBS was added to the columns and the columns were capped and placed on a rotor at 50°C.  Following reduction, the column was drained, and 1 mL 50 mM NEM in 0.8% SDS in PBS was added to the column to alkylate the newly reduced cysteines.  The columns were placed on a rotor at room temperature for 30 minutes.  The column was once again drained, and the beads were washed 8x with 1 mL 0.8% SDS in PBS, 8x with 1 mL 8 M urea, and 8x with 1 mL 20% acetonitrile (MeCN).  After the second wash in each step, the column was capped and allowed to stand for 10 minutes. Following the final wash step, the beads were completely dried by spinning the excess wash buffer into an empty Eppendorf tube.  The beads were resuspended in 300 µL of digest buffer (200 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) + 10% MeCN) and transferred to a fresh tube.  The column was twice rinsed with 300 µL digest buffer, with the rinses being combined with the sample.  The beads were pelleted by centrifuging at 5000 x g for 5 minutes at room temperature.  The supernatant was carefully removed and replaced with 100 µL 1 ng/µL trypsin in digest buffer.  The on-bead digest proceeded overnight at room temperature on a rotor. Following the overnight digest, an aliquot of TMT dissolved in 30 µL anhydrous MeCN was added directly to the tube.  TMT labeling proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature, after which the reaction was quenched with the addition of 15 µL 1 M Tris pH 7.4.  The volumes were reduced to about 50 µL in a vacuum centrifuge.  All samples were combined into a single tube.  The individual tubes were rinsed 3x with 40 µL 50% MeCN + 0.1% AcOH, with the rinses being combined with the pooled sample.  The sample was completely dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Following drying, the sample (beads included) was resuspended in 500 µL 10 mM TEAB pH 8.  The sample was loaded onto a ZORBAX Extend 300 C18 column (Agilent #770995-902) at 750 psi.  The C18 column was placed in line with an HPLC, and the following gradient was run at a flow rate of 1mL/min. (A = 10mM TEAB pH 8, B = 99% MeCN, 10mM TEAB): 0-5 min, 0-5% B; 5-50 min, 5-40% B; 50-59 min, 40-70% B; 59-64 min, 70% B; 64-65 min, 70 to 1% B.  Fractions were collected every minute between 5 min and 65 min.  Every 12th fraction was concatenated together to give 12 total samples (5 fractions per sample).  Samples were placed into a vacuum centrifuge overnight or until the sample reached dryness.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data files were searched on MASCOT version 2.4 with fixed modifications for NEM alkylation on cysteines (+125.047 Da), addition of TMT 6-plex to N-termini and lysine residues (+229.163 Da).  Variable modifications were SILAC R10 on arginine residues (+10.008 Da), SILAC K8 on lysine residues (+8.014 Da), addition of TMT 6-plex to SILAC K8 lysine residues (+237.177 Da), Aha substitution for methionine residues (-4.986 Da), diaminobutyrate (reduced Aha) substitution for methionine residues (-30.976 Da), oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation on tyrosine, threonine, and serine residues (+79.966 Da).  Precursor tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment tolerance was 15 mmu, two missed cleavages were allowed, and the enzyme was set to trypsin.  Peptides were considered to be positively identified if they had a score of at least 25 and newly translated if they contained a SILAC or Aha residue.  Peptides with TMT reporter ion intensities less than 1000 in any one channel were discarded.  To control for technical variation between channels, in the absence of a statistically significant change in global protein synthesis rate across replicates, values were normalized to the median of each channel within each replicate.  Therefore, the EGF dataset was median normalized, but the tunicamycin dataset was not.

METHODS:
Methods
All methods can be found in the accompanying Transparent Methods supplemental file.

RESULTS:
Results
Isobaric Mass Tags Allow for Robust Multiplexed Quantitative Analysis of Newly Synthesized Proteins
Several publications over the past decade have documented the dynamic regulation of miRNA, mRNA, and protein expression following cell stimulation. Realizing that protein synthesis rates are likely similarly dynamic, we developed MITNCAT, a method to accurately quantify the temporal dynamics of protein synthesis rates at a global scale. In MITNCAT, multiplex isobaric tags enable the simultaneous analysis of newly synthesized proteins from multiple discrete time points following cellular stimulation. Briefly, Aha-based BONCAT is used to label newly synthesized proteins with a bio-orthogonal chemical handle and heavy-isotope labeled arginine and lysine pSILAC amino acids are added to the media concurrently with Aha. Proteins synthesized during the labeling period therefore incorporate Aha (for enrichment) and pSILAC (as a marker for specificity). Aha-labeled proteins are solid-phase captured onto a dibenzocyclooctyne (DBCO)-functionalized resin through a copper-free click chemistry reaction. After multiple rounds of highly stringent washes, the bound proteins are digested, on bead, to liberate pSILAC-labeled peptides. In the same tube, multiplex isobaric tandem mass tags are added to each sample to allow for quantitative MS analysis. The samples are then combined, subjected to high pH reverse phase fractionation, and analyzed via liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC)-MS/MS for discovery-mode, quantitative measurement of temporal dynamics of protein synthesis rates.
To validate the accuracy of this quantitative approach to measure newly translated proteins, we chose a model system, MCF10a cells, and incubated the cells with 3 mM Aha for increasing periods of time: 15, 30, 60, and 120 min. Assuming that proteins were being synthesized at a continuous rate over this experiment, Aha-labeled newly synthesized proteins should increase linearly with time. Two negative controls were included in this experiment: methionine (Met) was substituted for Aha to assess the level of background binding, and 300 μg/mL cycloheximide (CHX) was added to the media 30 min before labeling with Aha for 120 min (Figure 1A, left) to determine if blocking translation could prevent Aha incorporation into proteins. Peptides were labeled with one of six different tandem mass tags (Figure 1A, right) that allow for relative quantitation of newly translated proteins among the different samples. The samples were then combined, fractionated (see Methods), and analyzed via LC-MS/MS. During fragmentation in MS/MS scans, low mass reporter ions are liberated for quantitation (Figure 1B). Peptides were identified to be from a newly synthesized protein only if they contained either a SILAC-labeled residue or an Aha residue (proteins could be labeled with more than one Aha residue, and not all Aha residues were necessarily subjected to the click reaction because of steric hindrance).
Since TMT-based quantification is relative and not absolute, the 15-min Aha-stimulated channel was used for normalization. Taking the median of all proteins observed in each channel, a more than 2-fold decrease was observed in the Met and CHX samples compared with the 15-min Aha-labeled sample, whereas the 30-, 60-, and 120-min labeled Aha channels each featured an increase in intensity that corresponded with the increase in duration of Aha labeling (Figure 1C). A line fitted to the four Aha-labeled time points has a slope of 0.87, slightly below the expected value of 1. This slight compression in the MS-based quantification was repeated in a subsequent replicate (Figure S1A). To determine the source of this deviation, we used an orthogonal, fluorescence-based method to quantify Aha-labeled proteins from each time point. An aliquot of the input and supernatant from each pull-down was analyzed by reacting each protein sample with DBCO-biotin to click on a biotin tag. Quantitative western blotting was then performed using a fluorophore-conjugated streptavidin as a probe. This analysis revealed time-dependent increases in Aha-labeling with a slope of 1 (Figure S1B) and robust depletion of Aha-labeled proteins from the supernatant (Figure 1D), suggesting that the decreased slope of the MS-based quantification is mostly likely not due to translation suppression associated with the decreased incorporation of Aha in place of Met but may instead be due to suppression of dynamic range in MS-based quantification. Individual proteins, although showing increased variation, still demonstrate a robust linear increase in protein synthesis in response to longer labeling periods (Figure S1C). Stratifying proteins based on total reporter ion intensity reveals that proteins with the top 10% most abundant report ions have a slope of nearly 1, whereas the bottom 10% has a slope of 0.77 (Figure S1D), further suggesting compression due to isolation interference. Increasing the degree of sample fractionation could potentially improve the dynamic range, but given that we were able to fairly accurately quantify an 8-fold change in translation rate, we determined that the current approach should be suitable for further applications. Stratifying proteins based on degradation kinetics yielded no differences (Figure S1E), suggesting that protein degradation kinetics do not play a major role in quantification on the timescales tested.
Analysis of Protein Synthesis during the Unfolded Protein Response Shows an Up-regulation of Stress Proteins in the Background of Global Translational Repression
To validate the robustness of this method in a biological context, we selected the unfolded protein response (UPR), a stress response known to drive inhibition of protein synthesis to prevent further protein misfolding while also up-regulating protein folding chaperones to aid in the repair of misfolded proteins.
To induce the UPR, 10 μg/mL tunicamycin was added to cells and newly synthesized proteins were labeled with Aha, K8, and R10 for 30 min starting at either 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4 hr after treatment (Figure S2A). DMSO-treated controls were collected at matched time points to account for differences in starvation length as well as any artifacts that may arise owing to the presence of Aha (Figure S2A).
MITNCAT led to the quantification of a total of 3,178 unique proteins, with 2,007 unique proteins appearing in at least two of the three replicates and therefore considered for subsequent analyses. When comparing the median of log2-transformed time points, we observed a global decrease in protein synthesis starting between 30 and 90 min following tunicamycin treatment compared with DMSO controls (Figures 2A and S2B). This observation is consistent with previous reports showing that global translation decreases owing to phosphorylation of eIF2α at approximately 30 min following endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress.
All proteins were subjected to clustering using a self-organizing map. To identify the most robust clusters, this process was repeated 1,000 times using random initial seeds to generate a co-clustering frequency map (Figure 2B). This approach led to the identification of two distinct clusters: one characterized by protein synthesis down-regulated below the median (cluster 1, Figure S2C) and one characterized by protein synthesis up-regulated above the median (cluster 2, Figure S2C).
Gene ontology (GO) term analysis revealed that the down-regulated cluster 1 is statistically significantly enriched for the terms protein targeting to the ER (p = 2.87 × 10−20), translational initiation (p = 2.80 × 10−19), and ribosome biogenesis (p = 7.15 × 10−10). The down-regulation of proteins involved in translation, such as ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factors, and translation elongation factors, (Figure 2C, left and center) may enhance the suppression of protein synthesis in cells undergoing the UPR.
The down-regulated cluster also contained proteins associated with glycolysis. The down-regulation of proteins involved in glycolysis, including GAPDH (Figure 2C, right), ENO1, TPI1, PKM, and ALDOA (Figure S2D), suggests that metabolic flux through the glycolytic pathway may be reduced during the UPR. It has been previously reported that tunicamycin treatment reduces glucose uptake, lactate production, and ATP levels, consistent with the observed down-regulation of proteins associated with these pathways. Interestingly, proteins involved in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, such as citrate synthase, SDHA, and IDH3, were not included in this down-regulated cluster (data not shown).
Cluster 2 contained proteins that were down-regulated to a lesser extent and also included proteins that were up-regulated in the background of global translation repression. One of the most highly up-regulated proteins in this cluster was BIP, which is the canonical ER stress response chaperone. Other proteins that exhibited a large increase in translation rate following tunicamycin treatment were HERPUD1, which is involved in targeting proteins for degradation via the ERAD pathway, and HYOU1, another member of the heat shock family of proteins involved in protein folding and cell survival in response to stress (Figure 2D). Other stress-related proteins were also observed to be up-regulated (Figure S2E).
Since the inhibition of translation during the UPR is mediated by the phosphorylation of eIF2α by PERK, we hypothesized that the observed overall repression of translation would not be seen by measuring RNA transcript abundance. Indeed, mRNA-Seq did not recapitulate this global down-regulation of protein synthesis measured by MITNCAT (Figures S2F–S2H), as only selected transcripts were affected by tunicamycin treatment. Altogether, these data demonstrate the reliability of MITNCAT for quantifying the time course of protein synthesis changes at a global level in a complex biological system.
EGF Stimulation Results in Temporally Distinct Waves of Protein Synthesis
It has been shown that epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activation leads to temporally distinct waves of transcription, in which immediate-early genes (IEGs) are followed by delayed early genes (DEGs) and finally late response genes (LRGs), which are up-regulated 2 to 4 hr after stimulation. To determine whether temporally distinct waves also occurred for protein synthesis, we applied MITNCAT to quantify proteome-wide protein synthesis rates temporally distinct time windows following EGF stimulation. HeLa cells were serum starved for 24 hr and stimulated with 20 nM EGF, and Aha, K8, and R10 were concurrently applied in consecutive 30-min windows following EGF addition, resulting in time points collected at 30, 60, 90, 120, and 150 min (Figure S3A). To account for the effects of the KRM-free media starvation and Aha labeling, matched PBS controls were also collected at the same time points.
Following processing and analysis, 1,749 unique proteins were identified across four replicates, with 1,007 unique proteins observed in at least two replicates and retained for subsequent analysis. To visualize the temporal dynamics of protein synthesis following EGF stimulation, proteins whose synthesis was statistically significantly altered in at least one time point were subjected to hierarchical clustering. The resulting heatmap highlights the temporal dynamics of synthesis of selected proteins, with some proteins peaking at 60–90 min post-treatment, whereas others feature increased synthesis as early as within the first 30 min of EGF stimulation (Figure 3A). Although there was a trend toward increased global protein synthesis following EGF stimulation, this trend did not reach statistical significance (Figure S3B).
To group proteins into temporally distinct clusters, k-means clustering analysis was performed using six clusters and Pearson correlation as the distance metric. To identify the most robust clusters, this process was repeated 10,000 times using a random initial seed; the results of this analysis were then plotted on a co-clustering frequency map (Figure 3B). This analysis revealed four distinct clusters, each with a unique temporal profile (Figure S3C).
Cluster 1 was characterized by increased protein synthesis as early as 30 min following EGF stimulation, with maximum synthesis at 60 min before returning to baseline levels by 150 min. This cluster contained many of the canonical IEGs, including EGR1 (Figure 3C), JUN, CYR61, and IER2 (Figure S3D), consistent with a model of rapid up-regulation of these genes within the first hour following stimulus. Intriguingly, this cluster also contained many of the canonical DEGs, such as DUSP1, ATF3, and ZFP36L1 (Figure S3D). This rapid up-regulation of DEGs was in contrast to the established literature that shows most DEG transcripts being up-regulated between 1 and 2 hr following EGF stimulation. One notable IEG absent from the dataset was MYC, which has previously been shown to be up-regulated on the transcript level in response to EGF stimulation. MYC was modestly up-regulated between 30 and 90 min, but not to an extent that was statistically significant in this analysis. This observation suggests that previously observed increases in MYC protein levels could be due to a combination of increased stability and a modest increase in protein synthesis.
In response to EGF stimulation, synthesis of proteins in cluster 2 increased at 60 min, was maximal at 90 min, and subsequently decreased back toward basal levels. Similar to cluster 1, cluster 2 contained IEGs such as NR4A1 (Figure 3D) and NR4A3 and the DEG KLF10 (Figure S3E). Within clusters 1 and 2, synthesis of both IEGs and DEGs were observed between 30 and 90 min following EGF stimulation. Rather than showing a separate wave of IEGs followed by a wave of DEGs, as has been implicated by transcriptional analysis, IEGs and DEGs appeared to be collectively expressed within the same time frame with maximal synthesis occurring between 60 and 90 min following EGFR activation.
Cluster 3 was characterized by a delayed response to EGFR activation, with protein synthesis beginning at around 90 min and increasing through the final time point, 150 min after stimulation. This cluster contained several LRGs involved in cytoskeletal dynamics and cell motility, such as CTEN (Figure 3E), VASP, EZR, and EPPK1 (Figure S3F).
Finally, cluster 4 was characterized by an increase in synthesis beginning around 30 min and remaining elevated across all time points. This cluster almost exclusively contained proteins associated with the translational machinery, including ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factors such as eIF4B (Figure 3F), and translation elongation factors (Figure S3G). These data suggest that, in response to pro-growth cues such as EGF stimulation, cells increase their translational capacity by synthesizing more ribosomal proteins and associated translation factors to further increase synthesis of new proteins. This observed increase in ribosomal protein synthesis is consistent with the observation that ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) also show an increase in transcription within 30 min following EGFR activation.
Increasing Sampling Frequency Yields New Insights on Protein Synthesis Dynamics
To better characterize the temporal response to EGF, especially for proteins that displayed dynamic protein synthesis such as those in clusters 1 and 2, we tested whether we could increase the temporal resolution of MITNCAT. Aha/K8/R10 labeling times were reduced from 30 min to 15 min, with samples collected at 15, 30, 45, 60, and 75 min following EGF treatment along with matched negative controls as described previously. In this analysis, 1,857 proteins were identified in total, with 1,135 proteins identified in two or more replicates. Somewhat to our surprise, decreasing labeling time to 15 min did not lead to a significant decrease in the number of identified proteins relative to the 30-min labeling experiments, suggesting that the dynamic range of the experiment (the difference between the most abundant and least abundant detectable proteins), rather than the overall sensitivity, might be the limiting factor in number of identified proteins. To visualize the dynamic profiles of protein synthesis, proteins with significantly altered synthesis following EGF stimulation were clustered to generate a heatmap (Figure 4A). This heatmap demonstrates that some proteins are rapidly synthesized within 15 min of EGF stimulation, whereas many additional proteins feature a strong increase between 30 and 60 min post-treatment. Analysis of this 15-min temporal resolution data by k-means clustering yielded similar clusters as compared with the 30-min resolution data. However, because the time course ended at 75 min, before cluster 2 proteins and LRGs in cluster 3 reach their maximum, LRGs and late IEG/DEGs previously found in clusters 2 and 3 were clustered together. Additionally, although ribosomal proteins and translation factors from cluster 4 remained clustered, the improved temporal resolution of the analysis enabled a bifurcation (clusters 4 and 4*) between those proteins that demonstrated an increased synthesis by 15 min compared with those that increased synthesis starting at 30 min (Figure S4A).
Despite the relatively small changes in overall temporal clusters, increasing temporal resolution provided interesting insights at specific time points. For instance, 24 proteins, including DUSP1 (Figure 4B, arrowhead), JUN, and several ribosomal proteins, demonstrated significantly increased protein synthesis as early as 15 min following EGF stimulation. Of these proteins, DUSP1 was one of the fastest responders, with expression increasing nearly 60% within the first 15 min. This rapid up-regulation of a DEG, even before most IEGs, has not been previously observed and stands in contrast to the classical model of DEGs being up-regulated following the expression of IEGs. The ATF3 transcription factor was also notable, as improved temporal resolution highlighted an immediate-early decrease below basal levels in ATF3 synthesis rates at 15 min following EGF stimulation, followed by an increase in synthesis at 30 min that peaked between 45 and 60 min (Figure 4C, arrowhead). This immediate down-regulation of ATF3 is corroborated by RFP analysis (Figure S5B, Table S5) and has not been previously observed.
Comparison of Protein Synthesis to RNA Abundance and Ribosome Footprints Reveal Transcriptionally and Translationally Controlled Groups of Proteins
Increased synthesis of a given protein could be due to many different factors, including an increase in the abundance of the protein-coding transcript or an increase in translation efficiency due to increased number of ribosomes binding to each transcript or the rate at which the ribosomes move along the transcript. To determine the relationship between dynamic transcript expression, ribosome binding, and protein synthesis rates, we performed mRNA-seq and RFP on identical samples corresponding to the 30-, 60-, and 90-min time points following EGF stimulation. TE rates were calculated based on the mRNA-seq and RFP data and represent ribosome occupancy normalized to transcript abundance (see Methods). These data were then compared with the quantitative protein synthesis data at these same time points.
On comparison of protein synthesis with RNA abundance and TE measurements, two distinct groups of genes emerged (Figures 5A and S5A). In the first group, changes in protein synthesis correlated strongly with changes in RNA abundance (Figure 5A blue bar and Figure S5B), suggesting regulation predominantly at the level of transcription. This group contains most of the IEGs and DEGs that are transiently expressed at high levels, such as EGR1 (Figure 5B). This rapid up-regulation of EGR1 was also orthogonally confirmed by western blot, with new EGR1 protein increasing 1.9-fold from 30 to 60 min after EGF treatment (Figure S5C), compared with a 2.2-fold increase as measured by MITNCAT over that time (Figure 5B). Furthermore, co-treatment with proteasome inhibitor MG132 yields no change in newly synthesized EGR1 (Figure S5C), demonstrating that the difference in magnitude between mRNA/RFP levels and protein synthesis is not due to EGR1 protein degradation. In the second group, changes in protein synthesis correlated with variations in TE, with minimal change in RNA abundance (Figure 5A, green bar and Figure S5D), suggesting regulation on the level of translation. This cluster was highly enriched for ribosomal proteins and several translation initiation and elongation factors such as eIF4B (Figure 5C). These proteins were rapidly up-regulated and sustained throughout the duration of the analysis, albeit to a lesser magnitude than the IEGs, DEGs, and LRGs.
One notable difference between the two clusters was the magnitude of the change in protein synthesis. In the transcriptionally driven cluster, protein synthesis increased as high as 7-fold, whereas the most highly up-regulated protein in the translationally driven cluster experienced a 2-fold change in synthesis. Up-regulation solely through increased translation may be limited by the maximum rate at which ribosomes can bind and translate a transcript. Larger changes in protein expression may require increasing the number of mRNA transcripts available to be translated. This observation highlights a potential trade-off between fast but limited up-regulation through translational control and slower but more potent up-regulation through transcriptional control.
Codon Bias Correlates with Temporal Delays between Ribosome Binding and Translation of New Proteins
Generating time course data for ribosome binding and protein synthesis offered the unique opportunity to characterize the temporal relationships between these processes. Because protein synthesis and ribosome binding occur on scales of different magnitudes, the values were standardized to allow for a direct comparison of the temporal profiles for each. To prevent the analysis of random fluctuations in proteins with unchanging RFP values or protein synthesis rates, only proteins with at least one statistically significant time point (p < 0.05) in both the RFP and MITNCAT datasets were considered, and thus only proteins present in at least two of the four MITNCAT replicates were included in the analysis of temporal delay. These restrictions limited the protein dataset to 90 and the RFP dataset to 400; the overlap between these datasets was 27 proteins. The TE data was compared with MITNCAT data for these 27 proteins. From this analysis, a subset of 17 proteins exhibited a clear delay between ribosome binding and protein synthesis (Figures 6A and S6A and Table S6). One potential cause for this delay is a difference between codon frequency usage in these genes and the corresponding tRNA isoacceptor availability. To determine if these genes exhibit codon usage frequencies that deviate from the genome averages, the average frequency for each codon in each gene (Table S6) was averaged across all the genes in the group. Statistical significance was determined by generating randomized groups of the same size and comparing the codon usage frequency with the genome average. This process was repeated 106 times, and a p value was generated by counting how many randomly generated groups showed a frequency deviation from the genome greater than that of the queried group for each codon. Reported p values were statistically significant if they were less than the Bonferroni corrected α = 7.81 × 10−4 (accounting for 64 different codons). The cohort of 17 genes exhibiting delayed translation showed a statistically significant codon bias in 14 different codons for 9 different amino acids (Figure 6B). The other 10 genes that did not show delayed translation did not have codon bias compared with the genome average (Figure S6B). To determine if this bias was unique to this group of proteins, 17 random proteins were selected from the whole dataset and queried for codon bias, and this process was repeated 500 times. Of the 500 sets of randomly selected proteins, 469 sets exhibited no statistically significant deviations from the genome average and no sets had a codon bias in more than three amino acids (Figures 6C and 6D). It has been previously reported that longer proteins tend to exhibit a codon bias, but the distribution of protein length in the set of proteins with delayed translation is not statistically different from that of the entire dataset (Figure S6C).
A majority of the proteins in the delayed translation set share the GO annotation “response to growth factor.” To test whether this codon bias is common among proteins with this GO annotation, we changed the background set from proteins in the MITNCAT dataset to all proteins that have the GO annotation “response to growth factor.” Even after making this change, the proteins exhibiting a delay in translation have a codon bias in nine different amino acids (Figures S6D and S6G) compared with six in the most extreme outlier set drawn from proteins annotated as “response to growth factor” (Figures S6F–S6G). This analysis suggests codon bias is unique to these proteins exhibiting delayed translation and may provide a potential mechanism to explain the temporal discrepancy between ribosome binding and protein synthesis.
If the delay in protein synthesis is indeed due to increased codon bias in these particular transcripts, then ribosomes would be expected to wait longer for a charged tRNA at these codons, and therefore these codons would occupy the A-site of the ribosome with a higher frequency than other codons. To investigate this possibility, we analyzed the frequency of ribosome A-site occupancy for each codon across 500 subsets of 100 randomly selected transcripts from our dataset. When codons were stratified based on whether they were enriched in the 17 proteins with delayed synthesis (Figure 6B, upper right quadrant), we found that these enriched codons occupied the A-site with a greater frequency than other codons across all genes (Figure 6E). This suggests that these particular codons may take longer to get translated, and therefore transcripts enriched for these codons may undergo slower translation, resulting in a delay between ribosome binding and protein synthesis.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Cellular response to perturbation often leads to a change in cell state, accompanied by dynamic alterations in protein synthesis and degradation that ultimately result in changes in protein expression levels. Measuring changes in mRNA abundance is commonly used to estimate changes in protein expression; however, relative mRNA abundance has been shown to be an incomplete predictor of protein synthesis and abundance because translation is a highly regulated process that can be modulated by signaling pathways, RNA structural elements, and tRNA isoacceptor availability.
Ribosome footprint (RFP) analysis, the identification of mRNA transcript fragments that are shielded by ribosomes, presumes that ribosome-bound transcripts are being translated into proteins and is considered the gold-standard RNA-based approach to estimate translation rates. RFP analysis involves the isolation and sequencing of ∼30 nucleotide mRNA fragments shielded by the ribosome from nuclease degradation. Since increased RFP abundance could result from increased ribosome density or increased transcript expression with constant ribosome density, normalizing RFP with transcript expression (typically measured by mRNA sequencing [mRNA-seq]) provides a metric known as translational efficiency (TE), effectively reading out the ribosome occupancy per transcript. Although RFP and TE provide a fairly accurate estimate of potential protein synthesis rates, these measurements do not account for stalled ribosomes and have been shown to be less representative of protein synthesis rates during cell stress response.
Proteomics approaches quantify the protein product rather than the RNA precursors of protein synthesis. Two techniques, pulsed SILAC (pSILAC) and bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT), enable direct measurement of newly translated proteins. In pSILAC, heavy-isotope labeled amino acid analogs are added to cells in culture and are incorporated into newly synthesized proteins over a defined time period before mass spectrometry (MS)-based analysis. This approach allows for an estimation of protein turnover by comparing the abundance of the heavy, newly made peptides with the light, preexisting peptides and can be performed on up to two conditions simultaneously. Owing to dynamic range and sensitivity limitations, it can be difficult to detect pSILAC-labeled, newly translated proteins against the large background of pre-existing proteins in the cell. These challenges effectively limit minimum incorporation time and make it difficult to monitor low-abundance proteins. However, targeted MS approaches such as multiple reaction monitoring have been used with pSILAC to quantify synthesis rates for selected proteins. In BONCAT, azidohomoalanine (Aha), an azide-modified methionine analog used naturally by the native methionyl tRNA synthetase (MetRS), is added to cells and incorporated into newly synthesized proteins. The azide functional group on Aha enables selective enrichment through click chemistry-mediated solid-phase capture of Aha-labeled proteins. Combining BONCAT with pSILAC (e.g., BONLAC /QuanCAT and HILAQ) improves the sensitivity and coverage of pSILAC and provides a quantitative comparison of protein synthesis rates across two conditions. Using multiple MS analysis, this combined approach has been used for temporal analysis of newly synthesized proteins following macrophage activation. However, prolonged overlapping metabolic labeling periods prevented analysis of rapid changes in protein synthesis, and the use of pSILAC limited the number of time points assayed.
With the goal of developing a method that would allow for high sensitivity analysis of newly translated proteins at multiple time points with high temporal resolution, we developed MITNCAT (multiplex isobaric tagging/non-canonical amino acid tagging), combining BONCAT with pSILAC and using multiplexed isobaric tandem mass tagging (TMT) to quantitatively compare translation rates for thousands of proteins across ten different conditions in a single MS experiment. Here the combination of BONCAT and pSILAC enables enrichment for newly translated proteins and post hoc removal of non-specifically retained proteins from BONCAT enrichment, since newly translated proteins should all have pSILAC labels. Multiplex isobaric tagging generates quantification of newly synthesized proteins for discrete time bins within a single experiment. Previous studies have combined pSILAC and TMT to monitor protein turnover, whereas here we combine BONCAT, TMT, and pSILAC to describe the temporal dynamics of protein synthesis rates at discrete time points following stimulation. Application of MITNCAT to the unfolded protein response enabled the temporal analysis of thousands of protein synthesis rates and highlighted the differential translation regulation of a large number of metabolic and translational regulatory proteins.
We also applied MITNCAT to quantify protein synthesis rates following epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation of HeLa cells, a system whose dynamic response has been well characterized across miRNA, transcript, protein expression, and protein post-translational modification. Although the temporal dynamics at each of these levels has been shown to affect the cellular response to EGF, the effect on dynamic protein synthesis rates has yet to be characterized. Here we applied MITNCAT with discretely timed pulses of Aha and pSILAC to quantify the temporal dynamics of protein synthesis rates for thousands of proteins at multiple time points following EGF stimulation. These data document the temporal control of protein synthesis, including increased synthesis rates of dozens of proteins within the first 15 min, previously unprecedented temporal resolution. Comparison of proteomic synthesis rate data to mRNA-seq and RFP data at each time point established the transcriptional versus translational efficiency-based control of protein synthesis. Furthermore, we compared the temporal dynamics of protein synthesis and RFP, uncovering a potential role of codon bias in regulating temporal delays in protein synthesis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data and Software Availability
All methods can be found in the accompanying Transparent Methods supplemental file. The accession number for the ribosome footprint and transcript sequencing data reported in this paper is NCBI BioProject: PRJNA478455. The accession number for the proteomics data reported in this paper is ProteomeXchange Consortium (PRIDE): PXD009592.
Supplemental Information
Supplemental Information includes Transparent Methods, six figures, and six tables and can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2018.11.004.