PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Top-down proteomics; Data-independent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: None

ABSTRACT:
Perturbed DNA replication can result in genomic regions that remain incompletely replicated at the point that cells enter mitosis. Transmission of replication-mediated DNA lesions into mitosis may prevent proper chromosomes segregation, and cells therefore require mechanisms to resolve these lesions during mitosis. CIP2A in conjunction with TOPBP1 has been described to function as a molecular tether to connect broken DNA molecules during mitosis, but a role for CIP2A in processing of incompletely replicated DNA has remained unclear. We find that the CIP2A-TOPBP1 complex forms large filamentous structures at sites of at sites of mitotic DNA synthesis during mitosis. Using endogenous IP we aimed to identify CIP2A-interactions induced by irradiation or replication inhibition, and find that CIP2A recruits members the SMX tri-nuclease complex, including SLX4, MUS81 and ERCC1/XPF.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
CIP2A mediates mitotic recruitment of SLX4/MUS81/XPF to replication stress-induced DNA lesions to maintain genome integrity

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For IP in irradiated RPE1 TP53-/- and RPE1 TP53-/- CIP2A-/- cl#1 cells, cells were treated with 62.5 ng/mL nocodazole for 16 hours prior to mitotic shake off to harvest mitotic cells. Mitotic cells were either left untreated (control) or treated with 5 Gy irradiation and recovered for 1 hour before adding ice-cold MPER lysis buffer (Thermofisher), complemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermofisher) and 5 units/mL benzonase (Santa Cruz) (‘complete lysis buffer’). For IP in APH-treated cells, cells were either left untreated (control) or treated with 200 nM APH for 16 hours prior to adding 5 uM RO-3306 for 4 hours. APH treated cells were subsequently pre-treated 30 minutes before release with 5 mM hydroxyurea (HU). Synchronized cells were released from RO-3306 by washing once with pre-heated PBS, followed by RO-3306 wash-out using complete medium including 62.5 ng/mL nocodazole (control) or 62.5 ng/mL nocodazole and 5 mM HU (APH treated cells) to accumulate the cells in mitosis. Mitotic shake off was performed at 1 hour after release and cells were lysed with ice-cold complete lysis buffer. Both APH and IR samples were tumbled end-over-end for 30 minutes at 4 degrees Celsius after addition of complete lysis buffer, and subsequently centrifuged for 15 minutes at 12,000 rpm to clear the whole cell lysates. The protein concentration of the supernatant was quantified using PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermofisher). 1 ug of CIP2A antibody was added to the pre-cleared whole cell lysates for 1 hours and tumbled end-over-end at 4 degrees Celsius. Subsequently, magnetic DynabeadsTM Protein G beads for immunoprecipitation were added to the lysates and incubated for another hour at 4 degrees Celsius. Beads were precipitated using a magnet and were washed 3 times with low salt buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 M NaCl in dH2O), and a final wash with high salt buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 496 M NaCl in dH2O). Protein samples for Western blot were eluted from the beads after this final high salt wash step by boiling the beads in 2x SDS-sample buffer with beta-mercaptoethanol, whereas samples for mass spectrometry were dissolved in denaturing buffer (8M Urea 100 mM Tris pH8,0) and snap frozen. For on-bead digestion of immunoprecipitated proteins, bead mixtures were subjected to cysteine reduction (1.5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 min at 30°C), followed by alkylation (7.5 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min at RT). Bead mixture was diluted to 2M Urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 100 ng trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. After bead removal, peptides were acidified with 0.1% formic acid, extracted by solid phase extraction with C18 cartridges (Gracepure SPE C18-Aq), and dried by SpeedVac (Thermofischer). Lastly, extracted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid discovery mass spectrometric analyses were performed on a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed by liquid chromatography (LC) on a Evosep system (Evosep One, Evosep) using a nano-LC column (EV1137 Performance column 15 cm x 150 µm, 1.5 µm, Evosep; buffer A: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in milliQ-H2O, buffer B: 0.1% v/v formic acid, dissolved in acetonitrile). Twenty microliter of the diluted digests were injected in triplicate and separated using the 30SPD workflow (Evosep). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and data-independent acquisition mode (DIA) using isolation windows of 16 m/z with a precursor mass range of 400-1000, switching the FAIMS between CV-45V and -60V with three scheduled MS1 scans during each screening of the precursor mass range.

DATA PROCESSING:
Acquired spectra were analyzed using Spectronaut v18.1.230626 (Biognosys) with the standard settings of the directDIA workflow except that quantification was performed on MS1 with a human SwissProt database (www.uniprot.org, UP000005640 release 2023_1, 20422 entries). For the quantification, the Q-value filtering was set to the classic setting with global normalization and no imputation.   
Normalizes intensity values were processed using Perseus v1.6.15 (MaxQuant). Data was log2 transformed, after which the three technical replicate measurements per sample were grouped and filtered to keep each protein with three valid values in at least one group. Lastly, missing data was imputed with random values obtained from a gaussian distribution with a downshift of 1.8x standard deviation of each sample and a width of 0.3x the standard deviation. Experimental differences and statistical analyses were obtained in Perseus using the Vulcano plot function, which uses a Significance Analysis of Microarrays test (two-sided t-test, 250 randomizations, FDR=0.05 and S0=0.1). 