PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Stem cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human; Lc-msms; Extracellular vesicle; Mesenchymal stem cell; Engineered extracellular vesicle

ABSTRACT:
Extracellular vesicles reflect the contents and characteristics of their donor cells. When donor cells were engineered to express specific protein, their characteristic may change, potentially altering the composition of EVs. This study aims to evaluate the degree of similarity in protein contents between engineered EVs and naïve EVs to investigate the impact of cellular engineering on EV composition.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Engineered MSC-derived extracellular vesicles maintain proteomic characteristics comparable with naïve MSC-derived extracellular vesicles

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Two kinds of MSC-derived EVs (SIRP-EV and control-EV) were prepared following developed large-scale 3D reactor-based process. To lyse samples, four volumes of chilled acetone were added to EVs, following incubated at -80 ℃ for 90 min. The reacted samples were centrifuged, removed supernatant, and dried. The dried samples were resuspended in 8 M urea in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and subjected to sonication for 5 min to lyse the precipitated samples. After centrifugation at 16,000 rpm for 5 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube, and the protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay kit to adjust the same amount of protein to be analyzed.  Reduction and alkylation of proteins were performed by adding dithiothreitol (DTT) to the EV lysates at a final concentration of 10 mM, and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C with shaking at 450 rpm for 30 min to reduce the proteins. After reduction, IAA (iodoacetamide) was added at a final concentration of 25 mM, and the mixture was incubated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min for alkylation.  For protein digestion, the alkylated protein samples were diluted with 100 mM ABC (ammonium bicarbonate) to decrease the urea concentration to below 1 M. Trypsin digestion was performed at an enzyme:protein ration of 1:25, allowing the reaction proceed for 16 h at 37 °C. The reaction was quenched by adding TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) to a final concentration of 1 % TFA. The peptide samples were desalted and vacuum-dried, vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 100mM TEAB solution. The concentration of samples was measured using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer.  The prepared samples were Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeled. The labeling reaction was proceeded at room temperature for 5 minutes and terminated by adding 5% hydroxylamine. The TMT-labeled samples were desalted again and subsequently vacuum-dried. For fractionation, the dried samples were reconstituted in 10 mM ABC solution and 100 ug of each sample was fractionated into 12 fractions. The fractions were analyzed using a Nano LC-MS/MS system (Thermo Dionex Ultimate 3000 coupled with Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480).

DATA PROCESSING:
DDA (Data Dependent Analysis) was performed using SAGE software to match mass spectrometry spectra with human protein sequence information provided by the UniProt database. Database search parameters were restricted to semi-tryptic peptides with length of 7 to 50 amino acids. Missed cleavage was allowed up to one and cysteine alkylation and methionine oxidation were included in peptide modifications. FDR (False Discovery Rate) was applied under 1% at the spectrum, peptide, and protein levels and precursor isolation purity were 0.7 or higher.