PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Skin; Dendritic cell; Dendritic cell
diseases: Skin melanoma
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification; Dimethyl Labeling
keywords: Human; Dendritic cells; Throncat; Secretome; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Dendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen presenting cells endowed with the capacity to initiate strong antitumor immune responses. This function is critical for effective DC-based immunotherapies, but is often hampered by tumor-derived immunosuppressive factors, as is observed for CD14+CD163+ tumor-induced DC3s (ti-DC3s). ti-DC3s are increased in cancer patients where they display an immunosuppressive phenotype, accompanied by weak antigen-specific CD8 T cell activating capacities. While tumor-derived IL-6, M-CSF, and PGE2 have been identified as factors inducing the transition from DC2s to ti-DC3s, a comprehensive unbiased profiling of the resulting changes in secretome and proteome has not been reported. Here, using LC-MS/MS-based techniques, we characterize the proteomic changes in cDC2s during their transition into CD14+ ti-DC3s in vitro, using conditioned-medium from the melanoma cell line BLM. This revealed 157 differentially expressed proteins, including upregulated IDO1 and legumain, which we confirmed to be functionally active. Next, we demonstrate the feasibility of THRONCAT-mediated identification of the newly synthesized secretome in primary human DCs. We detected 17 differentially secreted proteins between DC2 and ti-DC3s, including six cathepsins and the tumor-associated TGFβI. Cathepsin activity was validated in peripheral blood and tumor tissue of melanoma patients, which demonstrated the highest cathepsin activity in ti-DC3s, surpassing DC2s and tumor-associated macrophages. Together, our findings represent the first characterization of the proteome and secretome of primary human melanoma-induced DC3s reported to date, revealing several protein-driven pro-tumor-mechanisms active in ti-DC3s with reduced immunostimulatory abilities.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome and secretome profiling of type 3 dendritic cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteomics sample preparation  - To prepare WCE, cell pellets were incubated with SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 mM Tris­HCl pH 7.5 in ultrapure H2O) for 5 min at 95 °C. Samples were sonicated until homogeneous using alternating cycles of 30 s on/30 s off on high intensity and spun down at 16 000 g for 5 min, after which the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using a Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher). Afterwards, final DTT concentration was corrected to 10 mM. Per sample, 50 µg of total protein was taken for acetone precipitation by adding 10 volumes of ice-cold acetone and incubating for 10’ at -20 °C, followed by spinning for 10’ at 4 °C at max speed. The pellet was washed with 100 µL ice-cold acetone and spinning was repeated. The resulting pellet was resolubilized in 100 µL of 8M urea (pH 8.0 at RT) and the DTT concentration was adjusted to 10 mM. After 10’ incubation at RT, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by 10’ incubation at RT in the dark. Per sample, 0.25 µg Lys-C protease was added and samples were incubated for 2 h at RT, after which 3 volumes of 50 mM ammonium-bicarbonate and 0.1 µg trypsin were added, followed by overnight digestion. Next, samples were acidified with 10-20 µL Trifluoroacetic acid and concentrated on StageTips. Secretomic sample preparation - Cleared supernatant samples were thawed and concentrated to 250 μL using 3 kDa centrifugal filters (Amicon) and 1× complete protease inhibitors (CPIs, Roche) were added. The CuAAC reaction to enrich for βES-labeled proteins was set up following the Click-iT Protein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen, C10416) manufacturer’s instructions. Instead of the beads supplied with the Click-iT Protein Enrichment Kit, azide-functionalized agarose beads (Sigma Aldrich, 900957) were used to enrich alkyne-labeled NSPs. Bound proteins were digested through resuspension in 200 μL of freshly prepared digestion buffer (2 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM DTT) with 0.5 μg of mass spec-grade trypsin (Promega) and O/N incubation at RT while shaking. The digest was desalted and concentrated on C18 StageTips without acidification. Peptide labeling was done by dimethyl labeling, and StageTips were stored at 4 °C until measurement by LC-MS/MS.  Digested peptide samples were eluted from StageTips with elution buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ultrapure H2O), reduced to 10% of the original volume by vacuum concentration and diluted in 0.1% FA to ∼12 μL. The sample (5 μL) was injected and peptides were separated on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (ThermoScientific)

DATA PROCESSING:
Data-dependent measurements of the peptides were performed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Protein identification and quantification was done in MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 with default settings, with match between-runs, iBAQ and label-free quantification enabled. Carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed cysteine modification, and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and threonine-to-βES (+9.984 Da) were set as variable modifications. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database including reverse peptide sequences for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation (downloaded June 2017). Mass tolerance was set at 4.5 and 20 ppm for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively. FDR was set at 0.01 for both peptide and protein levels. A minimum of two ratio counts were required for protein quantification. Bound proteins were digested through resuspension in 200 μL of freshly prepared digestion buffer (2 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 100 mM DTT) with 0.5 μg of mass spec-grade trypsin (Promega) and O/N incubation at RT while shaking. The digest was desalted and concentrated on C18 StageTips without acidification. Peptide labeling was done by dimethyl labeling62, and StageTips were stored at 4 °C until measurement by LC-MS/MS.