PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Hela cell
diseases: Breast cancer; Cervix carcinoma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Affinity proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free; TMT
keywords: Natural products; Cancer; Proteomics; Antitumor agents; Biological activity

ABSTRACT:
Neocarzilin (NCA) is a natural product exhibiting potent anti-migratory as well as anti-proliferative effects. While the vesicle amide transport protein 1 (VAT-1) was previously shown to inhibit migration upon NCA binding, the molecular mechanisms responsible for impaired proliferation remained elusive. We here introduce a chemical probe closely resembling the structural and stereochemical features of NCA and unravel bone marrow stromal antigen 2 (BST-2) as a second major target in cancer cells. The antiproliferative mechanism of NCA was confirmed in corresponding BST-2 knockout (KO) cells which were less sensitive to compound treatment. Vice versa, overexpression of the target in the KO reduced proliferation comparable to wild type (wt) cells. Whole proteome mass-spectrometric (MS) analysis of NCA treated wt and KO cancer cells unraveled affected pathways linked to EGFR signaling and demonstrated reduced levels of BST-2 upon NCA treatment. In-depth analysis of BST-2 levels in response to proteasome and lysosome inhibitors, confirmed a lysosomal degradation path upon NCA treatment. As BST-2 is mediating the release of EGFR from lipid rafts to turn on proliferation signaling pathways, reduced BST-2 levels led to attenuated phosphorylation of EGFR and downstream targets. Furthermore, fluorescence microscopy confirmed colocalization of BST-2 and lipid rafts in presence of NCA. Overall, NCA represents a versatile anti-cancer natural product with a unique dual mode of action and unconventional inhibition of proliferation via BST-2 degradation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Neocarzilin inhibits cancer cell proliferation via BST-2 degradation resulting in lipid raft trapped EGFR

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
In situ preparative labeling label-free quantification For preparative labelling cells were incubated with 25 µM NCA or DMSO for 1 h and subsequently with 250 nM NC-4 or DMSO for 1 h. Whole cell lysate was used. Protein amount after lysis was determined by BCA assay (Roti Quant, Roth) and adjusted to a final concentration of 1 μg in 1 ml. Click chemistry were performed with 0.20 mM Biotin-PEG3-N3 (10 mM stock in DMSO, final conc. 0.2 mM, Jena Bioscience), TCEP (52 mM stock in ddH2O, final conc. 0.52 mM), TBTA ligand (1.67 mM stock in DMSO/tBuOH = 1/4, final conc. 0.05 mM) and CuSO4 (50 mM stock in ddH2O, final conc. 0.5 mM). Click reaction was performed for 1 h at room temperature and MS sample preparation was performed as described before.1 Proteins were precipitated with 10 ml MS-grade acetone at -80 °C. The precipitate was centrifuged down and washed with 500 µl MS-grade Methanol twice. Enrichment was performed on 50 μl Pierce™ avidin agarose beads (Thermo Scientific) in 0.2% SDS in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were washed three times with 0.2% SDS in PBS and three times with PBS. The beads were resuspended in 200 µl in denaturation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5). Reduction and alkylation of the samples was performed at room temperature with DTT (1 mM) for 45 min, IAA (5.5 mM) for 30 min and DTT (4 mM) for 30 min. The samples were digested with 1 μl Lys-C (0.5 mg/mL, Fujifilm) 2 h at room temperature, 600 μl 50 mM TEAB buffer added and digested with 1.5 μL Trypsin (0.5 mg/mL, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. 8 µl LC/MS-grade formic acid (FA) was added to stop the digest and the samples were desalted with Sep-Pak® C18 1 cc Vac cartridges (Waters Corp.). The columns were washed with MS-grade acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were loaded on the cartridges and washed with 0.1% TFA in MS-grade water, 0.5% FA in MS grade water and eluted with elution buffer (20% H2O, 0.5% FA in acetonitrile). Samples were lyophilized and reconstituted in 30 μl 1% FA for MS/MS measurements. Whole proteome analysis Cells for whole proteome analysis were seeded in 15 cm dishes and were treated at 90% confluence with the natural product (NCA stock solution in DMSO, 0.1% end concentration of DMSO in Medium) for different time periods (24 h and 48 h) at different concentrations (2.5 µM and 5 µM). The medium was removed, and the cells rinsed with cold PBS (10 ml). PBS was added to the cells, and they were scraped off and pelletized for 10 min at 600 rpm, 4 °C. The supernatant was aspirated. Cell lysis was performed using lysis buffer (1%(v/v) NP40 and 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate in PBS, 1 ml) at 4 °C for 15 min. Soluble and insoluble fractions have not been separated. The samples were adjusted after BCA to 200 µl, 0.5 mg/ml protein and proteins were precipitated by the addition of MS-grade acetone (1 ml, -80 °C). The precipitate was centrifuged down and washed with 500 µl MS-grade Methanol twice. The proteins were resuspended in 200 µl in denaturation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5). Reduction and alkylation of the samples was performed with TCEP (5 mM) for 1 h at 37 °C and with IAA (10 mM) for 30 min and DTT (10 mM) for 30 min at room temperature. The samples were digested with 1 μl Lys-C (0.5 mg/mL, Fujifilm) 4 h at room temperature, 600 μl 50 mM TEAB buffer added and digested with 2 μL Trypsin (0.5 mg/mL, Promega) overnight at 37 °C. The digest was stopped by the addition of 10 µl LC/MS-grade formic acid (FA) and the samples were desalted with Sep-Pak® C18 1 cc Vac cartridges (Waters Corp.). The cartridges were washed with MS-grade acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in MS-grade water. Samples were loaded on the cartridges and washed with 0.1% TFA, 0.5% FA in MS grade water and eluted with elution buffer (20% H2O, 0.5% FA in acetonitrile). Samples were lyophilized and reconstituted in 30 μl 1% FA for MS/MS measurements.

DATA PROCESSING:
ABPP & Fullproteome Processing of MS raw data was done with the software MaxQuant version 1.6.2.10. For identification of peptides, MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot database for Homo sapiens (taxon identifier: 9606, downloaded on 30.09.2020, canonical). For MaxQuant mostly default settings were used (trypsin/P as digest enzyme, max. 2 missed cleavages, oxidation (M) and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, min. peptide length 7). The main search was conducted with 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance. Protein identification was conducted with the following settings: PSM FDR 0.01, Protein FDR 0.01, min. razor + unique peptides: 2, razor protein FDR enabled, second peptides enabled. The “match between run” option (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time windows) was enabled. Label free quantification (LFQ) was used for all samples. The built-in LFQ algorithm in MaxQuant software (MaxLFQ) was used with a minimal ratio count of 1. The statistical analysis of the resulting data was done with the Perseus software (version 1.6.5.0). Normalized LFQ intensities from the proteinGroups.txt table were used for further analysis. First the data was filtered by “filtering by categorical columns”, namely the columns “identified by site”, “reverse” and “contaminants”. Log2 transformation and categorical annotation of treated samples and control were performed. The data was filtered against 70% of valid values in at least one group. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8, for the total matrix). Two-sample Student’s t-tests including Permutation based false discovery rate correction (FDR = 0.05) were performed. Vulcano plots were generated by plotting student’s t-test difference (treated/control) against t-test p-value (treated/control). Proteins with a p-value of < 0.05 and an enrichment factor of 2 (log2(x) = 1) for whole proteome measurements or an enrichment factor of 4 (log2(x) = 2) for ABPP experiments were considered as significantly enriched. Phosphoproteom Full proteome and phospho TMT peptide identification and quantification was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.3), with MS3 standard settings unless otherwise described.2 Isotope impurities of the TMT lot were specified to allow the automated correction of TMT intensities. Raw files were searched against the human reference proteome (UP000005640, 75,777 entries, download 01/2021) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine were allowed as variable modification specifically for the phospho-enriched samples. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Results were adjusted to 1% site, peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. MaxQuant output tables were filtered for contaminants, reversed sequences, and proteins, which were only identified based on modified peptides. Protein abundance estimation was based on corrected TMT reporter intensities. For data analysis, the 6-hour and 48-hour TMT set were total sum normalized, followed by a row-wise normalization based on one of the shared common TMT channels to remove batch effects between the two TMT set. Unless otherwise stated, displayed protein abundances were log2 transformed.