PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Colon endothelium
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Phosphoproteomics; Relapse; Colorectal cancer; Proteomics; Cavin1; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Colorectal cancer molecular signatures derived from omics data can be employed to stratify CRC patients and aid decisions about therapies or evaluate prognostic outcome. However, molecular biomarkers for identification of patients at increased risk of disease relapse are currently lacking. Here, we present a comprehensive multi-omics analysis of a Danish colorectal cancer tumor cohort composed of 412 biopsies from tumors of 371 patients diagnosed at TNM stage II or III. From mass spectrometry-based patient proteome profiles, we classified the tumors into four molecular subtypes, including a mesenchymal-like subtype. As the mesenchymal-rich tumors are known to represent the most invasive and metastatic phenotype, we focused on the protein signature defining this subtype to evaluate their potential as relapse risk markers. Among signature-specific proteins, we followed-up Caveolae-Associated Protein-1 (CAVIN1) and demonstrated its role in tumor progression in a 3D in vitro model of colorectal cancer. Compared to previous omics analyses of CRC, our multi-omics classification provided deeper insights into EMT in cancer cells with stronger correlations with risk of relapse.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomics of colorectal tumors identifies the role of CAVIN1 in tumor relapse

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The automated PAC workflow is prepared by mixing sample, magnetic beads and acetonitrile in wells of a 96-well sample plate (Eppendorf twin.tec® PCR Plate 96 LoBind®, cat# 0030129512). The protein was diluted into 70% ACN together with Magnetic beads (MagReSyn hydroxyl beads, cat# MR-HYX2L, ReSyn Biosciences, Ltd, South Africa) (ratio of 1:2) to a final volume of 1 mL. Following this protein was digested on beads overnight using a mixture of Trypsin with a ratio of 1:250) (Cat# T6567, Sigma Aldrich) and LysC in a ratio of 1:500 ((Cat# 129-02541, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Richmond, VA)) in 100ul of Ammonium bicarbonate (50mM). Digestion was stopped by adding 10% Trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Following this peptides were loaded into evotips for subsequent M One rounds of phospho-enrichment was performed in the King-fisher robot using 10 µLof MagReSyn® Zr-IMAC HP beads (20mg/ml). Enriched phosphopeptides  eluted from Sep-Pak (C18 Classic Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA) were acidified with 10% TFA until pH <3. Following this the phosphopeptides were loaded directly into Evotips for subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS RAW-files were analyzed using Spectronaut and v19 (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland) with directDIA+ using default search settings against a FASTA file containing the human proteome (SwissProt, 20,431 sequences) and the sequences of the two proteolytic enzymes.  Phosphoproteomics data additionally was searched using Phosphorylation (STY) as a variable modification in the PTM tab, with a localization probability cutoff of 0.75.