PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture; Stem cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Lncrna; lncrna-protein interaction; hematopoiesis; mass spectrometry; proteomics; hybridization capturelncrna; lncrna-protein interaction; hematopoiesis; mass spectrometry; proteomics; hybridization capture

ABSTRACT:
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) exert regulatory functions in a wide spectrum of biological contexts, and certain regulatory functions involve the formation of RNA-protein complexes. Discovering the structure/function of these complexes may unveil important functional insights. The DDX41 gene encoding the DEAD-box RNA helicase 41 protein (DDX41) is subject to extensive germline genetic variation, and certain variants create a predisposition to develop myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. While the importance of DDX41 for the control of hematopoiesis is established, many questions remain regarding the mechanisms of how DDX41 functions in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Previously, we identified a DDX41-regulated lncRNA, growth arrest-specific 5 (Gas5). As Gas5 function in hematopoiesis is unknown, we analyzed protein interactors of Gas5 lncRNA using HyPR-MS (Hybridization Purification of RNA-Protein complexes followed by Mass Spectrometry). 303 proteins were identified as Gas5 lncRNA interactors, five of which were experimentally validated as Gas5 lncRNA interactors by RNA Immunoprecipitation qPCR (RIP-qPCR) analysis. The identification of protein interactors with a DDX41-regulated lncRNA establishes a foundation to guide future mechanistic and biological studies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identifying lncRNA-protein interactions in hematopoietic progenitor cells by hybridization capture and mass spectrometry

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Crosslinking, Cell Lysis, Hybridization, Capture and Release:
For formaldehyde crosslinking, cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then incubated in 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature (RT). The formaldehyde was quenched by incubation with 250 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) for 10 min at RT. Cells were rinsed with ice-cold PBS twice, pelleted by centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 5 min, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C. Cells were lysed and sonicated. Capture oligonucleotides (COs) targeting Gas5 lncRNA were added to the cell lysates with negative control scrambled sequence oligonucleotides (SOs). The scrambled oligonucleotide was designed to have the same number of nucleotides and comparable Tm as the capture oligonucleotide but lacking significant complementarity to the target transcript or any other transcript in the cells. The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 3 hours with gentle nutation. SeraMag streptavidin-coated magnetic speed beads (Fisher Scientific) were washed twice at RT and added to the lysate. The samples were rocked for one hour before bead collection and lysate removal. Beads were washed and resuspended in a release buffer with release oligonucleotides (ROs). The beads were gently rocked at RT for 30 min to release RNA-protein complexes, and the supernatant was isolated and storced at 4 °C. The release process was accomplished with Gas5 lncRNA target RO, followed by scrambled RO. The supernatants from each release were transferred separately to new tubes, and each was divided into aliquots for RT-qPCR and mass spectrometric protein analysis.

RNA Extraction, Reverse Transcription, and qPCR Analysis:
A small fraction (2%) of each released sample was incubated overnight at 37 °C with 1 mg/mL Proteinase K (Sigma), 4 mM CaCl2, and 0.2% LiDS to remove proteins. The RNA was extracted from each sample using TRI Reagent (Sigma) and precipitated in 75% ethanol with 2 μL of GlycoBlue coprecipitant (ThermoFisher Scientific) at −20 °C overnight (at least 10 hours). RNA was pelleted by centrifuging at max speed (20,800g; 4 °C; 15 min), washed with 75% ethanol, centrifuged at max speed (20,800g) (20 °C; 15 min), and resuspended in 15 μL of nuclease-free water (Invitrogen). Purified RNA (10 μL) was used for reverse transcription (High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit, Applied Biosystems) per the manufacturer’s protocol. The reverse transcription product (20 μL) was diluted with 60 μL of nuclease-free water (Invitrogen) and analyzed using sequence-specific qPCR primers and probes (Integrated DNA Technologies) and Light Cycler 480 Probes Master Mix (Roche) for relative quantitation of RNA on a CFX96 Touch real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad).

Protein Purification and Digestion:
Each release sample was brought to 0.1% deoxycholic acid (DCA) and 8 M urea, passed through the filter, and the eluant was discarded. Exchange buffer (8 M urea, 0.1% deoxycholic acid (DCA) was added to the filter, and the tube was centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 10 min. This was repeated three times. Reduction was performed by adding 200 µL of Reducing Buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)), followed by incubation at 37°C for 30 min. The buffer was then removed by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min. Alkylation was carried out by adding 200 µL of Alkylation Buffer (8 M urea, 50mM iodoacetamide, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Excess alkylating reagent was removed via centrifugation, and the filters were rinsed multiple times with Exchange Buffer to eliminate residual reagents. Filters were transferred to clean, passivated collection tubes, and 100 µL of Digestion Buffer (1 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.1%DCA) containing 0.3 µg of trypsin was added per sample. The tube closure was wrapped with parafilm to prevent evaporation, and digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C without agitation.

Following incubation, the parafilm was removed, and the sample was centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 10 min. to collect the flow-through. To enhance peptide recovery, 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the filter, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 10 min. This step was repeated once more.  All filtrates were collected in the same tube, and the resulting filtrate was transferred to a new low-bind tube with a secure seal. To facilitate detergent removal, 200 µL of ethyl acetate containing trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added, ensuring thorough mixing before addition. Specifically, 21 µL of 10% TFA was used to give a concentration of 0.5%, based on a total solution volume of 400 µL. The mixture was shaken for 1 min using a vortex mixer, followed by centrifugation at 15,700 × g for 2 min. The top organic layer (ethyl acetate) was carefully removed. This extraction step was repeated twice, each time adding 200 µL of ethyl acetate without additional TFA. Finally, the peptide sample was dried to completion using a SpeedVac concentrator for approximately 2.5 hours and then the sample was reconstituted in 150 μL 0.1% TFA.

To remove salts from the sample, an OMIX C18 solid-phase extraction pipet tip (Agilent) was conditioned with 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA, and then equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. The peptide sample was loaded onto the C18 solid phase by repeated passing of the 150 μL sample over the cartridge. The OMIX pipet tip was then rinsed with 0.1% TFA 10 times followed by peptide elution in 150 μL of 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The samples were dried using a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 10 μL of 95:5 H2O/ACN, 0.2% formic acid and analyzed.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectral files were analyzed with the free and open-source search software program MetaMorpheus and the reviewed Swiss-Prot mouse XML (canonical) database using default settings. A 1% FDR for both peptides and proteins was applied. Up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed for protein identification and quantitation. To determine the differential protein interactomes of the target lncRNA, Gas5, pairwise comparisons were made between protein abundances from target lncRNA, compared to protein abundances from the scrambled control using a Student’s t test in Perseus software. For each protein, the intensities across all capture samples and scrambled samples were normalized by the median intensity values of each file. Proteins that met a Student’s t test statistic in the pairwise comparisons were evaluated for Gene Ontology(GO) enrichment analysis using the publicly available GO analysis tool (http://www.geneontology.org/) and protein−protein interactors analysis using STRING. RBPmap (http://rbpmap.technion.ac.il/), which is a web server designed for predicting protein interactors of target RNA and mapping binding sites of RNA-binding proteins, was used for further analysis. The results from RBPmap were compared with our enrichment list of 303 proteins.