PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Platelet
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; formylated residue; dihydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; 2x(13)C,6x(2)H labeled dimethylated L-arginine
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Human; Platelet; Dimethyl labeled; Par1; Par4

ABSTRACT:
LC-MS/MS analysis of Control, PAR1-stimulated and PAR4-stimulated platelet lysate digests.  Control lysate digest peptides were labeled with "light", PAR1 lysate digest peptides were labeled with  "intermediate" and PAR4 lysate digest peptides were labeled with "high" dimethyl labeled. Labeled digests  were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio, separated by SCX and the resulting (phosphopeptide-enriched) peptide fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Stimulated Human Platelet Lysate: control, PAR1 and PAR4 stimulated

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Not available

DATA PROCESSING:
Not available

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Aims</h4>Platelets are a natural source of growth factors, cytokines and chemokines, that regulate angiogenesis and inflammation. It has been suggested that differential release of pro- and anti-angiogenic growth factors from platelet α-granules by protease-activated receptors (PAR) 1 and 4 may be important for the regulation of angiogenesis. We aimed to compare the releasates of unstimulated platelets with PAR-1- and PAR-4-stimulated platelets.<h4>Methods and results</h4>The release of β-thromboglobulin, platelet factor (PF)-4, thrombospondin, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-A/B, regulated and normal T-cell expressed and secreted (RANTES/CCL5), endostatin, CXCL12, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was measured with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative proteomics identified 93 proteins from platelets stimulated with PAR-1 and PAR-4. A strong correlation between the factors released after either stimulus was observed (Spearman's r 0.94, P < 0.001). Analysis with ELISA showed that stimulation with PAR-1 or PAR-4 lead to non-differential release of β-thromboglobulin, PF-4, thrombospondin, PDGF-A/B, RANTES/CCL5, endostatin, CXCL12, and VEGF. Release of thrombospondin was slightly lower after PAR-1 stimulation (7.2 μg/mL), compared with PAR-4 induced release (9.8 μg/mL; P < 0.05).<h4>Conclusions</h4>Both ELISA on established α-granule proteins and MS-based quantitative proteomics showed that the most abundant α-granule proteins are released in similar quantities from platelets after stimulation with either PAR-1 or PAR-4. Our findings provide evidence against the hypothesis that PAR-1 and PAR-4 stimulation of platelets trigger differential release of alpha-granule, but further studies are needed to draw conclusions for physiological conditions.