PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Skin; Endothelial cell
diseases: Melanoma
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: phosphorylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Human; Phosphoproteomics; Endothelial cells; Brafi; Vemurafenib

ABSTRACT:
Targeted therapies against mutant BRAF are effectively used in combination with MEK inhibitors (MEKi) to treat advanced melanoma. However, treatment success is affected by resistance and adverse events (AEs). Approved BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) show high levels of target promiscuity, which can contribute to these effects. Blood vessels are in direct contact with high plasma concentrations of BRAFi, but effects of the inhibitors in this cell type are unknown. Hence, we aimed to characterize responses to clinically relevant BRAF kinase inhibitors in the vascular endothelium. A mass spectrometry-based analysis of the phosphoproteome of dermal microvascular endothelial cells revealed distinct sets of off-targets of the used BRAFi. Meanwhile, there were only negligible changes to the proteome after 1 h of treatment. Together with our published functional data, these findings provide insights on the surprisingly distinct side effects of BRAFi on endothelial signaling and functionality.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Phosphoproteomics of BRAFi-treated endothelial cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
DMEC from three donors (i1, i26, i29) were treated with Vemurafenib (10 or 100 µM), Dabrafenib, Encorafenib, or PLX8394 (all 10 µM), or vehicle control for 1 h. After washing with ice-cold PBS, cells were lysed on ice with 1% SDS and protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Lysates were homogenized by sonication. Lysates were incubated with Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide for another 30 min. Proteins were purified by precipitation with ethanol-acetone, and protein pellets were resolubilized in 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer, pH 8. For each sample, 150 µg proteins were brought to final volume of 95 µl (in SDC-TEAB buffer) and digested, firstly with Lysyl-endopeptidase (0.01 AU, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemicals Corp., Osaka, Japan) for 2 h at 37°C and subsequently with trypsin (7.5 µg per sample) for 4 h at 37°C. Peptides in each sample were labeled with one of the tags of TMTpro 18-plex labeling kit (A52045, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. All 18 samples were then pooled in equal amounts. Pooled samples were acidified (pH < 2) with formic acid to precipitate SDC and the collected supernatant was lyophilized. Phosphopeptides were isolated using TiO2 affinity chromatography. Briefly, dried peptides were dissolved in TiO2 loading buffer (80% acetonitrile (ACN), 5% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 1 M glycolic acid, all from Sigma) and incubated with 0.6 mg TiO2 beads (Titansphere, GL Sciences, Torrance, CA, USA) per 100 µg peptide solution for 30 min at RT on a shaker. The beads were spun down and supernatant was transferred to a new tube with 0.3 mg beads per 100 µg peptide. After 15 min shaking at RT, beads were spun down again, and supernatant was collected in a separate tube. TiO2 beads from both incubations were subsequently washed with 80% ACN/1% TFA and 10% ACN/0.1% TFA. The unbound peptides in the supernatants from incubation and wash steps were combined and stored as “unmodified peptides” (further details in supplementary methods).  The TiO2 beads with bound phosphopeptides were resuspended in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.5 and incubated with PNGase F (1,000 U, New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) and Sialidase A (5 mU, Prozyme/Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) overnight at 37°C. The phosphorylated peptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads by incubation with 1.5% ammonium hydroxide solution, pH 11.3, for 10 min at RT with vigorous shaking. The beads were spun down and the supernatant was passed through a C8 membrane (3 M Empore™, Sigma-Aldrich), to remove any residual beads. The membrane was then washed with 100 µl of 50% ACN to obtain any retained peptide, before the samples were dried. To reduce sample complexity, high-pH reversed-phase fractionation was applied (Boll et al, 2020). Phosphopeptides were dissolved in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 9.3, and loaded on an Acquity UPLC®-Class CSHTM C18 column (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Fractionation was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and a total number of 20 concatenated fractions was collected. The analysis was performed on an Easy-nLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using buffer A (0.1% formic acid, FA) and buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA) and an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All fractions were redissolved in buffer A (0.1% FA) and loaded into the in-house made fused silica capillary column setup (18 cm pulled emitter analytical column with 75 μm inner diameter, packed with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany)). The peptides were eluted with gradient elution from 2% to 95% buffer B, with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Ionization was performed by nano-electrospray. Phosphopeptides were analyzed by data-dependent acquisition in positive ion mode mass spectrometry. The m/z scan range for full MS scan was 350 – 1500 Da, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 full width half maximum (FWHM), a normalized Automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 250%, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. From each full scan, the top 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%. The MS2 was performed with the following parameters: orbitrap resolution of 45,000 FWHM, normalized AGC target value of 300%, isolation window of 1.2 m/z, dynamic exclusion window of 3 s and a maximum injection time in automatic mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.0.305, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The search was performed against the UniProtKB/Swissprot database (homo sapiens, release-2022_04/) using an in-house Mascot server (v2.8.2, Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) and the built-in Sequest HT search engine. Fixed modifications in the search included TMT-Pro_K (K), TMT-Pro_N term (N-term) and Carbamidomethyl (C), whereas Deamidated (N) and Phosphorylation (S, T, Y) were set as dynamic modifications for the phosphopeptide dataset. Further parameters of the search included a fragment mass tolerance of 0.03 Da, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and maximum of two missed cleavages. Data filtering was performed using a percolator, with ≤ 1% false discovery rate (FDR).