PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Small intestine epithelium; Intestinal epithelial cell maturation
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Absolute quantification
keywords: Differentiation; Lc-msms; Organoid; Intestinal epithelium; Epithelial cell

ABSTRACT:
Enteroid-derived intestinal epithelial cell monolayers were grown to capture immature progenitor-cell-promoting conditions for 7 days and maturation towards an enterocyte fate for 4 days. 3D enteroids in organoids growth media (OGM) included as control for a stem-cell rich phenotype.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Maturation of Human Intestinal Epithelial Cell Layers Fortifies the Apical Surface against Salmonella Attack

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
3D enteroids and enteroid-derived intestinal epithelial cell monolayers were grown as described above in either i) organoid growth medium (OGM),  ii) medium deprived of Wnt3a, but still containing EGF, Noggin, and R-spondin (ENR), or iii) commercial equivalent of ENR (StemCell Organoid Differentiation Medium, “cENR”). Three biological replicates of each sample type were used for global proteomics analysis. Samples were collected, lysed (50 mM DTT, 2 %(w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.8) and MED-FASP was performed using Trypsin and Lys-C enzymes. C18 stage tips were used to desalt the peptide mixture and samples were stored at −20°C until analysis. Protein and peptide content were determined by the tryptophan fluorescence assay. The global proteomics analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a nano–liquid chromatography (nLC). An EASY-spray C18-column (50cm long, 75μm inner diameter) was used to separate peptides on an acetonitrile/water gradient with 0.1% formic acid over 150min. MS was set to data dependent acquisition with a Top-N method (full MS followed by ddMS2 scans).

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteins were identified using the MaxQuant software (version 2.1.0.0) with the human proteome reference from UniProtKB (April, 2022). The total protein approach was used as protein quantification method.