PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Peripheral blood mononuclear cell; Peripheral blood mononuclear cell
diseases: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; timsTOF Pro
modifications: monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition; Immunopeptidomics
keywords: Human; Leukemia; Vaccine; Cll; Warehouse; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Cancer peptide vaccination represents a promising therapeutic approach, but has been hampered by lack of suitable antigens and restricted applicability due to different HLA backgrounds of individual patients. We here introduce a novel warehouse-based concept for composition of personalized peptide vaccines and report on its successful application in a Phase II clinical trial in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) after first-line therapy. 26 CLL patients in at least partial remission (PR) after 6 months of immuno-chemotherapy were vaccinated with a personalized vaccine compiled from a premanufactured peptide warehouse comprising immunopeptidome-defined CLL-associated peptides. Primary objective was evaluation of immunogenicity, secondary objectives were safety and minimal residual disease (MRD) response. Immunopeptidome-guided vaccine composition was throughout successful, proving the feasibility of warehouse-based vaccine design. Vaccination was well tolerated, with local injection site reactions being the most common adverse event. Only few patients showed vaccine-induced T cell responses, attributable to their inability to mount strong immune responses due to immunechemotherapy and lack of potent adjuvant formulations. Both issues are addressed within a follow-up trial (NCT04688385), combining the immunopeptidome-guided warehouse-based vaccine design reported here with a potent novel adjuvant evaluating personalized multi- peptide vaccination in CLL patients under T cell supportive BTK inhibitor therapies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Warehouse-based, immunopeptidome-guided design of personalised peptide vaccines shows feasibility in clinical trial evaluation in CLL patients

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Blood samples Patient PBMCs were isolated by density gradient centrifugation and stored at −80°C as short-term storage for subsequent HLA peptide isolation and T cell assays.  HLA peptide isolation HLA class I and HLA class II molecules of study patients‘ PBMC samples fulfilling the threshold cell count of ≥ 1x109 cells were isolated by standard immunoaffinity purification using the pan-HLA class I-specific monoclonal antibody (mAb) W6/32, the pan-HLA class II-specific mAb Tü-39, and the HLA-DR-specific mAb L243 (all produced in-house) to extract isolate HLA presented peptides. Analysis of HLA Ligands by Liquid Chromatography-Coupled Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Peptide samples were measured in triplicates with shares of 20% by separating samples by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nanoUHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) and subsequent analysis in an online coupled Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Peptide separation was performed at 50 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min on a 50 µm × 25 cm separation column (PepMap C18, Thermo Fisher) applying a gradient ranging from 2.4% to 32.0% of acetonitrile (ACN) over the course of 90 min. Eluting peptides were ionized by nanospray ionization and analyzed in the mass spectrometer. Remeasurements after end of study were performed in triplicates (spare cell pellets were used for a repetition of completely new HLA peptide isolation if available) or duplicates (remaining 40% shares of previously mentioned immunopeptidome analysis for peptide cocktail design). Peptide separation was performed on Bruker Daltonic’s nanoElute LC system using an acclaim TM PepMap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and a 75 µm x 25 cm Aurora Series emitter column (IonOpticks, Fitzroy, Australia). Peptides were separated along a gradient ranging from 0% to 95% Solvent B (AcN with 0.01% FA) over the course of 60 min with consecutive ramps from 0% to 32% (30 min) and 32% to 40% (15 min), followed by two 5 min ramps to 60% and 95%, respectively, and were subsequently analyzed in the online coupled trapped ion mobility spectrometry and time-of-flight mass spectrometer timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, USA) equipped with a CaptiveSpray ion source using a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA).

DATA PROCESSING:
The Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Fisher) was used for integration of search results from the SequestHT search engine (University of Washington) against the human proteome (Swiss-Prot database, 20,279 reviewed protein sequences, September 27, 2013). 5% false-discovery rate (FDR) for HLA class I and 1% FDR for HLA class II-restricted peptides were used. HLA class I binder prediction was performed using SYFPEITHI 1.0 and NetMHCpan 4.1. Data processing for timsTOF data was performed using the computational platform Fragpipe (v21.1) including MS Fragger (v4.0), Philosopher and MSBooster and a 1%  FDR for both, HLA class I- and HLA class II-restricted peptides.