PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Adult respiratory distress syndrome
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: iTRAQ8plex-116 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; L-cysteine methyl disulfide
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: iTRAQ
keywords: Bal; Galaxyp; Itraq; Ards; Biomarkers; 2dlc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) continues to have a high mortality.  The objective of this study is to understand the differences in disease biology between survivors and non-survivors by characterizing BALF protein expression profiles in individual ARDS subjects.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Prediction of Mortality In Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
BALF containing at least 8 mg of protein was processed for LC-MS/MS from individual patient.  The BALF was concentrated and desalted using Amicon 3-MWCO filters, depleted of high abundance proteins with appropriate buffer exchanges for labeling with isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification followed by two dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (iTRAQ 2DLC-MS/MS).  The enriched medium and low abundance protein fractions from BALF was digested with trypsin-gold, dried and suspended in 0.1- 0.2% formic acid (pH < 3) and MCX cation exchange (Oasis MCX Cartridge, Waters, Milford, MA, Cat no 186000254) performed to remove SDS. Peptides were eluted and adequacy of the trypsin digestion was confirmed with analysis of 3µg of the tryptic-digested peptides with linear trap quadropole MS (LTQ-MS). The remaining 37 µg of the peptide mixture was labeled with eight-plex iTRAQ reagent per manufacturer.  To compare the protein abundance across different LC-MS/MS experiment, we used the same-pooled mastermix as a global internal standard as a reference for determination of relative protein abundance. In each LC-MS/MS experiment, two iTRAQ reporter ion channels contained the mastermix to assure accuracy of fold changes measurement while the remaining six channels contained individual study samples. To characterize thirty-six ARDS cases in the study, we performed 6 separate iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. The labeling strategy for the 36 BALF samples was randomized. To prevent reporter ion signal (channel) bias the mastermix, ARDS survivors and ARDS non-survivors samples were randomly placed in different iTRAQ reporter ion channels in each experiments.   iTRAQ-labeled peptide mixture, was purified with an MCX Oasis cartridge before off-line peptide separation in the first dimension and if needed C18 stage tipping. Peptides were separated offline into 15 separate peptide-containing fractions collected in 2-minute intervals on a C18 Gemini column at pH 10. Peptide fractions were concentrated, purified by the stage tip procedure with Empore SDB-RPS extraction disks [mixed mode strong cation exchange and reversed phase], and separated in the 2nd dimension by C18 reversed phase capillary LC with a nano LC system online with MS. Data-dependent acquisition  was performed on an Orbitrap Velos system with HCD (higher energy collision induced dissociation) activation for peptide tandem MS. LC and MS experimental details were previously reported, with the exception that the activation time was 20 msec

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files obtained directly from the Orbitrap Velos XL Mass Spectrometer were imported into GalaxyP for further processing. Within GalaxyP, all raw files together (using a multifile format that has been recently changed to dataset collection) were converted to mzml format using msconvert and then into a ProteinPilot compatible Mascot Generic Format (MGF) files with preselected iTRAQ reporter ions. The MGF files were searched against the target-decoy version of Human UniProt database along with contaminant protein sequences (88,304 sequences in total; Date Aug 1, 2014) using ProteinPilot version 4.5 and the following search parameters: Sample Type: iTRAQ 8-plex (peptide labeled); Cys-alkylation: MMTS; Instrument: Orbi MS, Orbi MS/MS; run quant; bias correction on; search focus on biological modifications and amino-acid substitutions; thorough search and with a detected protein threshold (Unused Protscore (Conf)): 10%. The ProteinPilot searches and subsequent generation of Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) - FDR reports and protein and peptide-level summaries were generated within Galaxy-P as previously described.   The results of multiple iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were aligned to compare protein-level using Protein Alignment Template vs. 2.00p (AB Sciex). .  For this alignment, we created a ‘reference master list’ by performing a database search using .RAW files from all six iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. To ensure that the proteins in this list are high ID quality, a local FDR ≤ 5% was used as a threshold for the reference master list. As per the recommendation of the Protein Alignment Template, for creation of feature table with quantitative values, the threshold of ≤ 5% global FDR was used for individual sets for the six-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments.

METHODS:
Methods
Study Population
Eligible subjects consisted of individuals with ARDS as defined by American-European Consensus Conference (AECC) criteria treated at the University of Minnesota Medical Center between May 2009 and September 2012. This study included 36 subjects who underwent a clinically indicated bronchoscopy within seven days of their ARDS diagnosis and for whom excess BALF was available. The study was designed before the publication of the criteria established by the ARDS Definition Task Force (Berlin definition). Pooled BALF from 27 subjects who participated in our previous study was used as the control to determine the relative protein abundance and as global internal standards for comparison across the different iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. A standard protocol for bronchoscopy was used for BALF collection.
ARDS subjects were divided into two groups: those who survived until hospital discharge (survivors) and those who died prior to discharge (non-survivors). Subjects with a history of HIV or viral hepatitis were excluded from the study.
Sample processing for protein profiling
After collection, all BALF samples were immediately placed on ice and centrifuged at 500 g at 4 °C for 10 minutes within 60 minutes of collection. Cell and debris free supernatant were stored at −80 °C and did not undergo any thaw-freeze cycles until sample processing.
We employed label-based semi-quantitative proteomics using eightplex iTRAQ reagent for our study. iTRAQ multiplexed sets of reagents for quantitative protein analysis place isobaric mass labels at the N-termini and lysine side chains of peptides. All resulting peptides are isobaric and chromatographically indistinguishable, but yield signature of reporter ions following collision induced dissociation that can be used to identify and quantify peptides in a digest mixture.
To compare protein abundance across different LC-MS/MS experiments and as a reference for determining relative protein abundance, we used the global internal standard. In each LC-MS/MS experiment, two iTRAQ reporter ion channels contained the global internal standard. The remaining six channels contained individual study samples (i.e., we performed 6 separate iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments to characterize the 36 ARDS cases in the study). The labeling strategy for the 36 BALF samples studied is outlined in Supplemental Table S4. To prevent reporter ion signal (channel) bias, survivor and non-survivor samples were randomly placed in different iTRAQ reporter ion channels in each experiment.
BALF containing at least 8 mg of protein (Bradford reagent, Bio-Rad cat#500-0006) was processed separately employing a protocol previously published with minor modifications. BALF was concentrated and desalted using Amicon 3-MWCO filters (Millipore Ireland Ltd, Cork, Ireland), depleted of high abundance proteins (Seppro IgY 14 spin column, Sigma-Aldrich, cat # SEP010) with appropriate buffer exchanges for trypsin digestion and labeling with iTRAQ followed by two-dimensional (2D) LC-MS/MS. The adequacy of the trypsin digestion was confirmed by analysis of 3 µg of the digested peptides with linear trap quadrupole MS (LTQ-MS). Equal amounts of the remaining peptide mixtures within each experiment were labeled with eightplex iTRAQ reagent per the manufacturer’s (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) instructions. 2D LC-MS/MS of the iTRAQ-labeled peptides was conducted as previously described. Data-dependent MS acquisition was performed on a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap Velos system with higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) activation for peptide tandem MS. LC and MS experimental details were the same as previously reported.
Database search for protein identification and quantification
RAW files generated directly from the mass spectrometer were imported into Galaxy-P platform for protein identification and quantification. Galaxy-P has also been used for proteogenomics analysis and metaproteomics studies. The MGF files were searched against the target-decoy version of Human UniProt database along with the contaminant sequences from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) (88,304 sequences in total; Date Aug 1, 2014) using ProteinPilot version 4.5. PSPEP-FDR reports and protein and peptide-level summaries were generated within Galaxy-P as previously described. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD002672.
In each eightplex iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiment, we used the global internal standard as a reference to determine the relative abundance and labeled two iTRAQ reporter ion channels in order to provide guidance regarding the FDR of quantitative differences (within each experiment). Specifically, the relative abundance of all proteins identified in each experiment when compared using the two reporter ion channels labeled with the global internal standard should be equal to 1; proteins that show a statistically significant difference thus indicate false positives. In our six iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments, the number of proteins that had a statistically significant difference and therefore false positive were 8, 15, 53, 11, 25 and 8, respectively, suggesting an adequate quantitative assessment.
The results of multiple iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments were aligned to compare protein-levels using Protein Alignment Template vs. 2.00p (AB Sciex). For this alignment, we created a ‘reference master list’ by performing a database search using RAW files from all six iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. To ensure that the proteins in this list were of high ID quality, a local FDR ≤5% was used as a threshold for protein identification in the reference master list as per the recommendation of the Protein Alignment Template. For the creation of feature tables with quantitative values, the threshold of ≤5% global FDR was used for individual sets for the six-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. Protein Alignment Template resulted in aligning the ratios (fold change), p-values and error factors for the proteins across replicate experiments by using accession numbers of isoforms within the protein summary and UniProt database. However, these included misidentified proteins (e.g., bovine albumin, pig trypsin, bovine casein), matches to reverse (decoy) protein sequences, the contaminant protein sequences from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, and the proteins that were not completely removed by the IgY 14 depletion column or their protein fractions such as immunoglobulin chains. These proteins were manually removed from the final protein list (Supplemental Table S2, removed proteins tab).
To further investigate the difference in the BALF inflammatory proteins in ARDS survivors, we performed Olink proseek proximity extension assay (PEA). The inflammatory panel of the Olink PEA was performed on 29 un-depleted BALF samples (non-survivors = 14, survivors = 15). BALF was concentrated and desalted using a 3KD MW Amicon centrifugal filter (Millipore, Cork, IRL). Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, USA) determined the protein concentration of samples diluted with Dulbecco’s PBS to 0.5ug/uL and an equal amount (0.5 ug) of proteins per the manufacturer’s instructions.
Statistics
Identification of differentially expressed proteins between ARDS survivors and non-survivors involved several steps that were similar to our prior studies with minor modifications. We controlled for multiple comparisons by FDR corrected q-value ≤ 0.05. Log-transformed fold changes for all proteins that were identified in at least two-iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments for which error factors were available were compared between ARDS survivors and non-survivors using weighted two-sample t-tests with weights being the inverse variance of the log-transformed fold changes. The Storey method was used to control the FDR. This analysis was carried out using the lower reporter ion channel (113–117) and the higher reporter ion channel (117–121) in Statistical Analysis Software (version 9.3, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).
To gain insight into the biological significance of differentially expressed proteins, we performed functional analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA® QIAGEN, Redwood City www.quiagen.com/ingenuty Build 321510 M, Version 21249400). This analysis was performed on proteins with a q-value of ≤ 0.05 as the cutoff for differential expression. IPA core analysis was performed using the difference of the weighted log fold change between survivors and non-survivors. Thus, the proteins that were higher in survivors had a positive value and the proteins that were lower had a negative value. We focused on canonical pathways that met a Benjamini and Hochberg (B–H)–corrected p-value (obtained using the right-tailed Fisher exact test) of ≤0.05 (equivalent to −log [B–H p-value] ≥ 1.3). Additionally, IPA uses the z-score algorithm that informs the activation states of canonical pathways with ability to predict activation, inhibition, no change or inability to predict the activation state. In our study, a positive score predicts activation in ARDS survivors. Several of the pathways in our dataset did not have a z-score assigned to them to predict their activation state.
Study Approval
The University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board (IRB) Human Subjects Committee approved this study (IRB # 0812M5623) and all methods were performed according to the relevant guidelines. Because we utilized excess BALF from clinically indicated bronchoscopies in this study, and as there was minimal risk to study participants, the IRB approved a waiver of consent for this study.

RESULTS:
Results
Characteristics of Study Subjects
In this study, we characterized ARDS BALF samples from 20 subjects who survived and 16 subjects that died during their hospital stay. Five patients (3 survivors and 2 non-survivors) had indirect lung injury from either sepsis (n = 4) or pancreatitis (n = 1), whereas 31 cases had direct lung injury such as pneumonia or aspiration pneumonia (17 survivors and 14 non-survivors). Table 1 outlines the risk factors for ARDS and previous pulmonary history for the study subjects. The median time to death after bronchoscopy in the non-survivors was seven days (IQR = 16.5 days). The median time from ARDS onset (defined as the day of intubation) to bronchoscopy was 2 days. The length of intensive care unit (ICU) stay was not significantly different between the two groups; although the length of hospital stay was lower in non-survivors, this did not reach statistical significance (Table 2).  
Survivors were younger than non-survivors (mean age 42 vs. 59 years, p = 0.01), but there were no statistically significant differences between the two groups in the time from ARDS onset to BALF collection (ARDS day) or in BALF leukocyte, neutrophil or lymphocyte counts (Table 2). The global internal standard consisted of BALF from 27 subjects who had respiratory failure from various etiologies, including pleural disease, mediastinal mass, myopathy/polyneuropathy, interstitial lung disease without exacerbation, radiation pneumonitis, infectious pneumonia, congestive heart failure and ARDS (one patient).
Proteins Identified by Database Search
The Protein-Pilot Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline Software (PSPEP) false discovery rate (FDR) summary showing the number of spectra, peptides and the proteins identified at 1% global FDR for the six iTRAQ experiments is shown in Table 3. Six iTRAQ liquid chromatography tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) runs identified 850, 606, 1055, 865, 976, and 879 proteins per run, respectively (Supplemental Table S1). The database search using the combined RAW files from all six LC-MS/MS experiments resulted in the identification of 1189 proteins at a local FDR ≤ 5% (Supplemental Table S2, master protein list tab). After manually removing misidentified proteins, reverse matches, contaminants, and proteins that were not completely removed by the high abundance protein depletion column, we retained 1115 unique proteins for further analysis. The fold change for these proteins can be found in Supplemental Table S2. 
Differentially Expressed Proteins between ARDS Survivors and Non-survivors
For each iTRAQ eightplex, the fold changes for proteins identified were available with low (113–117) and high (118–121) reporter ion channels as the reference. Thus, we performed this analysis using the lower reporter ion channel and the higher reporter ion channel as a reference to calculate the relative abundance for all six iTRAQ LC-MS/MS experiments. Controlling for a q-value of ≤ 0.05 and using two internal standard reporter ion channels, we identified 181 and 166 proteins to be differentially expressed when we used the low or high reporter ion channel as the reference for calculation of fold change, respectively (Supplemental Table S3), with 142 proteins common between the two comparisons (Supplemental Table S3).
Proteins with the highest differential expression that were more abundant in survivors included galectin-10 (Q05315, log fold = −0.21 ± 0.12 vs 2.20 ± 0.17), cystatin-SA (P09228, log fold = 0.04 ± 0.02 vs 2.45 ± 0.26), glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 2 (P21980, log fold = 0.28 ± 0.09 vs 1.82 ± 0.24), prosaposin (C9JIZ6, log fold = 0.01 ± 0.07 vs 1.51 ± 0.21), and cathepsin D (P07339, log fold = 0.50 ± 0.11 vs 1.99 ± 0.19). Proteins with the highest differential expression with higher abundance in non-survivors included alpha-amylase 1 (P04745, log-fold 1.14 ± 0.20 vs −0.74± 0.04), club-cell secretory protein (P11684, log fold 2.03 ± 0.11 vs. 0.43 ±0.11), BPI fold-containing family B member 2 (Q8N4F0, log fold = 1.20 ± 0.19 vs 0.31 ± 0.09), metallothionein-2 (P02795, log fold = 2.31±vs 0.87± 0.15), and myoglobin (P02144, log fold 1.15 ±I 0.14 vs 0.13± 0.10).
Among the proteins that were more abundant in survivors were different isoforms of aldehyde dehydrogenase, alcohol dehydrogenase, and aldo-keto reductases (Table 4). Specifically, we observed significantly higher levels of isoform 2 of alcohol dehydrogenase 2, aldo-keto reductase family 1 C1, glutathione peroxidase 3, aldehyde dehydrogenase mitochondrial. There also was a statistical trend towards a higher abundance of glutathione-s-transferase A2 (q-value = 0.08). 
Biological Relevance of the Differentially Expressed Proteins
We performed IPA core analysis to identify the canonical pathways which map to the differentially expressed proteins that met a threshold q-value of ≤0.05. The pathways that met the statistical threshold described in the methods (−log [B-H p-value] ≥ 1.3) and the proteins assigned to each canonical pathway are listed in Table 5. Figure 1 shows the degree of enrichment and the number of proteins with increased or decreased abundance for each pathway in survivors compared with non-survivors. The z-score was available for Complement System (1.667), Acute Phase Response Signaling (2.238), LXR/RXR Activation (3.162), Intrinsic Prothrombin Activation Pathway (1.00) and Coagulation System (0.447). Of the pathways listed in Table 5, only pathways that participate in fibrosis (Hepatic Fibrosis/Hepatic Stellate Cell Activation) were represented in an independent core analysis done on proteins that were more abundant in non-survivors than in survivors. Certain pathways such as Complement Activation, Fatty acid alpha oxidation, Histamine Degradation, Oxidative Ethanol degradation were mapped by separate IPA core analysis by the proteins that were high in survivors and also by some proteins that were high in non-survivors (although with limited coverage of the pathway). The remaining canonical pathways were mapped by proteins more abundant in survivors.  
We also identified proteins with differential expression that are assigned to pathways that participate in fibrosis (Table 4) such as collagen alpha-1(V), insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4, vascular cell adhesion protein 1, fibronectin, and collagen alpha-1(XVIII). Additionally, there were several other proteins that participate in the pathophysiology of fibrosis, although they were not differentially expressed in survivors versus non-survivors. These included monocyte differentiation antigen CD14, angiotensinogen, insulin-like growth factor II, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3, metalloproteinase inhibitor 1 and 2, 72 kDa type IV collagenase, matrix metalloproteinase-9, and collagens alpha-1(I), alpha-2(I), alpha-1(III), alpha-1(V), and alpha-3 (VI).
Proximity Extension Assay for Proteins Participating in Inflammation
As a validation of our iTRAQ findings, we selected five proteins identified in the iTRAQ experiments that were also present in the Olink PEA panel. These proteins were growth-regulated alpha protein (P09341-CXCLI), macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 (P09603), monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (P13500), Protein S100-A12 (P80511), and Interleukin-18 (Q14116). The Olink results were consistent with those of the MS experiments in finding no difference in the protein level between survivors and non-survivors for growth-regulated alpha protein or S100 A-12. Additionally, the Olink analysis found no statistically significant difference in macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 or monocyte chemotactic protein 1 by study group. This comparison was not possible with MS because high-quality quantitative information was not available; monocyte chemotactic protein 1 was only present in one of the six iTRAQ experiments, and error factor was not available for macrophage colony-stimulating factor 1 in two of the three iTRAQ MS/MS experiments. By MS, Interleukin-18 was identified in the BALF of only 12 ARDS subjects (6 survivors and 6 non-survivors), and although the levels were higher in non-survivors, the difference did not achieve statistical significance (q-value = 0.22). However, with Olink, Interleukin-18 was identified in all ARDS cases studied except one non-survivor and higher levels were seen in non-survivor compared to survivors (5.8 ± 0.88 vs. 4.9 ± 1.1, p = 0.04).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) occurs as a response to infectious or inflammatory triggers and is characterized by acute tachypnea, refractory hypoxia, and loss of lung compliance. Although a variety of conditions are triggers for ARDS, common risk factors include pneumonia (59%), extrapulmonary sepsis (16%), and aspiration (14.2%). Despite widespread adoption of lung protective ventilation, early use of muscle relaxants, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and prone ventilation, case fatality rates remain at 30–40%.
Regardless of the cause of ARDS, there is an unmet need to develop tools to reliably assess the mortality risk of patients early in ARDS evolution in order to design interventions to improve survival rates. The current definition of ARDS is based on physiological derangement and does not identify causal mechanisms. However, there is heterogeneity in disease susceptibility and manifestations. Only 50% of cases classified as ARDS have diffuse alveolar damage on biopsy. Other lung-specific responses differ with respect to the degree of hypoxia, ventilator driving pressure, lung stiffness, and collagen deposition. A greater understanding of the differences in the disease biology that accounts for the variability in ARDS manifestations is critical to improve outcomes for ARDS patients. Sophisticated modeling using latent class analysis of the ARDS Network cohort has identified subphenotypes in ARDS. The subphenotypes with higher plasma concentrations of inflammatory markers are associated with an increased prevalence of sepsis requiring vasopressors and an inadequate response to therapeutic interventions such as fluid restrictive therapy. Understanding differences in the underlying biologic processes that influence survival of ARDS patients early in the course of the illness could promote precision-medicine and exploration of new or existing therapeutic agents to improve survival.
We have previously reported early differences in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) between ARDS survivors and non-survivors, although the study was conducted on pooled BALF and with only a single mass-spectrometry (MS) experiment. Here, we sought to identify biological processes and canonical pathways that differ in ARDS survivors and non-survivors by characterizing individual BALF samples using state-of-the-art label-based semi-quantitative protein expression profiling using iTRAQ (isobaric tagging for relative and absolute quantification) labeling in combination with fixed-gene set enrichment analysis. This study represents a critical first step in our effort to identify proteomic molecular endotypes in ARDS and identify potential signaling pathway targets to reduce ARDS-related mortality.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Electronic supplementary material
 Supplementary information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-07791-8 
 Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.