PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: immunoprecipitation
keywords: Colorectal cancer; tmod2; proteomics; lfq; protein-protein interactions; Cancer metastasis

ABSTRACT:
Tropomodulin-2 (TMOD2) was previously identified as upregulated in the nuclear compartment of highly metastatic KM12SM colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Here, we aimed to investigate its role using multiple CRC cell lines and patient-derived samples through functional proteomics, bioinformatics, and in vitro and in vivo analyses. TMOD2 expression was significantly elevated in highly metastatic CRC cells at both mRNA and protein levels, correlating TMOD2 high protein expression in CRC patients’ samples with advanced disease stages and poorer patient survival. To analyze TMOD2 role in CRC progression and metastasis, stable overexpression and transient depletion of TMOD2 was investigated in CRC isogenic cells with different metastatic properties. TMOD2 stable overexpression enhanced tumorigenic properties, including adhesion, anchorage-independent growth, and migration in CRC cells, whereas transient silencing of TMOD2 resulted in decreased adhesion and invasion capabilities, highlighting a role of TMOD2 in promoting metastasis. In vivo experiments confirmed the role of TMOD2 in enhancing tumor growth and liver metastasis, with TMOD2-overexpressing cells forming larger subcutaneous tumors and inducing poorly metastatic KM12C CRC cells to colonize the liver efficiently. DIA-LFQ proteomics and IP-LC-MS/MS analyses revealed significant dysregulation of proteins involved in cytoskeletal dynamics, secretion, and focal adhesion upon TMOD2 overexpression. Validation studies confirmed the specific involvement of key proteins, including STAG1 and MARCKS, in TMOD2-modulated pathways. Collectively, the results presented here suggest that TMOD2 plays a pivotal role in CRC progression by modulating cytoskeletal dynamics, enhancing cell adhesion, and promoting metastatic behavior, establishing TMOD2 as a potential therapeutic target in CRC.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Deciphering the central role of TMOD2 in colorectal cancer progression and metastasis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
TMOD2-stably overexpressing KM12C and SW480 CRC cells used for immunoprecipitation (IP). Cells were incubated at 95% confluence in DMEM free FBS for 48 hours prior to cell collection and protein extraction. First, 50 µL of Protein G agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were washed 3 times with 10x beads volume of RIPA buffer and re-suspended in 1x beads volume of RIPA. Prior to the IP, sample precleaning was performed by incubating three mg of each protein extract with 1:2 of equilibrated beads to remove unspecific proteins for 4 hours at 4°C. After precleaning, supernatants were transferred to a new tube and incubated with anti-TMOD2 antibody (Table S3) O/N and at 4°C, in a relation of 3 µg of antibody per 10 mg of protein extract. Next day, samples were incubated with 1:2 of equilibrated beads for 3 h at 4°C and in rotation, washed 4 times with 1x beads volume of RIPA, and interacting proteins were eluted twice in 50 µL of elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, 0.1% SDS, 1.5% -mercaptoethanol) after 5 min incubation at 95°C. In addition, proteins non-specifically attached to the beads used during the precleaning step were also eluted and used as negative controls of the IP. Finally, for the identification of TMOD2 interacting proteins, 50 µL of eluted proteins were analyzed by LC-MS/MS, whereas 10 µL were used for 10% SDS-PAGE and silver staining to confirm the presence of interacting proteins prior to LC-MS/MS. All incubations were performed in rotation and all supernatants discarded or recovered by centrifugation at 1000 g and 4°C for 2 min. For LC-MS/MS, 50 µL of eluted proteins were trypsin digested by the SP3 method. Protein samples were reduced and alkylated as previously described. After protein anchoring to MBs, MBs were incubated with 0.2 μg of porcine trypsin O/N at 37°C and 600 rpm in 100 μL of 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 for digestion. Finally, peptide samples were desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum centrifugation, and re-suspended in 5 μL of 0.1% FA, 2% ACN prior to analysis by nano LC-MS/MS in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a Q Exactive in the Proteomics and Genomics Facility of the Center for Biological Research (CIB-CSIC).  Peptide separation was carried out on an Easy-nLC 1000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the analysis, samples were loaded into a precolumn Acclaim PepMap 100 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted in a RSLC PepMap C18 of 50 cm long, with an inner diameter of 75 µm, and a particle size of 2 µm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase flow rate was 300 nL/min using 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in 100% ACN (solvent B). The gradient profile was set as follows: 5%–35% solvent B for 90 min, 35%–100% solvent B for 4 min, and 100% solvent B for 8 min. 4 µL of each sample were injected per run. For ionization, 1900 V of liquid junction voltage and a capillary temperature of 300°C were used. The full-scan method employed a m/z 400–1500 mass selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 70000 (at m/z 200), an AGC of 3x106, and maximum IT of 100 ms. After the survey scan, the 15 most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. Fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision energy of 27, and MS/MS scans were acquired with a starting mass of m/z 200, an AGC target of 3x105, a resolution of 17 500 (at m/z 200), an intensity threshold of 8x103, an isolation window of 2.0 m/z units, and a maximum IT of 100 ms. Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned, singly charged, and equal or more than seven protonated ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using standardized workflows. Mass spectra *.raw files were searched against the SwissProt_2021_01.fasta, Homo sapiens (human) database (20397 sequence protein entries) using the Mascot search engine (version 2.6, Matrix Science, United Kingdom). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively, allowing two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation. acetylation of the N-terminal, and serine, threonine, tyrosine phosphorylation,  as a variable modification. The identified peptides were filtered using a Percolator algorithm with a q value threshold of 0.01. Proteins identified in the negative controls and as TMOD2 interactors were discarded for the analysis. Additionally, potential TMOD2 interactors identified from the IP were first analyzed using the CRAPome data base (contaminant repository for affinity purification MS data) to discard false positive interacting proteins (33). Proteins appearing in more than 15% of the IP experiments reported in this database were discarded for further analysis.