PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell suspension culture; Jurkat cell
diseases: Acute leukemia
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Lc-msms; T-all; Cell line

ABSTRACT:
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) is a haematological malignancy commonly driven by NOTCH1 activating mutations. A concomitant feature associated with NOTCH1 mutations is heightened oxidative metabolism enabling the exponential proliferation of T-ALL blasts. As such, targeting mitochondrial metabolism in T-ALL is an attractive therapeutic avenue. Canagliflozin (cana) is an FDA-approved sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor with known off-target effects on complex I and glutamate dehydrogenase. To date, the effects of cana on T-ALL are not known. Here, we show that cana possesses potent anti-leukaemic effects underpinned by proliferative defects, cell cycle disruption and apoptosis. These anti-leukaemic effects, driven by cana, are attributed to a perturbed tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and mitochondrial metabolism and elevated mitochondrial ROS. Proteomic analysis revealed that cana treatment resulted in a compensatory increase in the expression of ATF4 targets, including upregulation of serine biosynthesis pathway and one-carbon metabolism enzymes. As such, restriction of serine and glycine synergized with cana treatment, further enhancing anti-leukaemic effects. Collectively, our study reveals cana creates a metabolic vulnerability that can be further exploited via dietary manipulation to treat T-ALL

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Canagliflozin synergises with serine synthesis pathway inhibition mediating anti-leukaemic effects in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) is a haematological malignancy commonly driven by NOTCH1 activating mutations. A concomitant feature associated with NOTCH1 mutations is heightened oxidative metabolism enabling the exponential proliferation of T-ALL blasts. As such, targeting mitochondrial metabolism in T-ALL is an attractive therapeutic avenue. Canagliflozin (cana) is an FDA-approved sodium glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor with known off-target effects on complex I and glutamate dehydrogenase. To date, the effects of cana on T-ALL are not known. Here, we show that cana possesses potent anti-leukaemic effects underpinned by proliferative defects, cell cycle disruption and apoptosis. These anti-leukaemic effects, driven by cana, are attributed to a perturbed tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and mitochondrial metabolism and elevated mitochondrial ROS. Proteomic analysis revealed that cana treatment resulted in a compensatory increase in the expression of ATF4 targets, including upregulation of serine biosynthesis pathway and one-carbon metabolism enzymes. As such, restriction of serine and glycine synergized with cana treatment, further enhancing anti-leukaemic effects. Collectively, our study reveals cana creates a metabolic vulnerability that can be further exploited via dietary manipulation to treat T-ALL

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Human database (downloaded January 2022: 178486 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMTpro mass tag (+304.207) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. For the Phospho-proteome analysis, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966) was also included as a variable modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%.