PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Skin
diseases: Melanoma
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Cancer; Proteomics; Erap1; A375 cells

ABSTRACT:
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1) metabolizes peptides inside the ER and shapes the peptide repertoire available for binding to Major Histocompatibility Complex Class I molecules (MHC-I). Moreover, it may have additional effects on cellular homeostasis, which have not been explored. To address these questions, we used both genetic silencing of ERAP1 expression as well as treatment with a selective allosteric ERAP1 inhibitor to probe changes in the immunopeptidome and proteome of the A375 melanoma cancer cell line. We observed significant immunopeptidome shifts with both methods of functional ERAP1 disruption, which were distinct for each method. Both methods of inhibition led to an enhancement, albeit slight, in tumor cell killing by stimulated human PBMCs and in significant proteomic alterations in pathways related to metabolism and cellular stress. Similar proteomic changes were also observed in the leukemia cell line THP-1. Biochemical analyses suggested that ERAP1 inhibition affected sensitivity to ER stress, reactive oxygen species production and mitochondrial metabolism. Although the proteomics shifts were significant, their potential in shaping immunopeptidome shifts was limited since only 9.6% of differentially presented peptides belonged to proteins with altered expression and only 4.0% of proteins with altered expression were represented in the immunopeptidome shifts. Taken together, our findings suggest that modulation of ERAP1 activity can generate unique immunopeptidomes, mainly due to altered peptide processing in the ER, but also induce changes in the cellular proteome and metabolic state which may have further effects on tumor cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ERAP1 activity modulates the immunopeptidome but also affects the proteome, metabolism and stress responses in cancer cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteomics analysis included four biological replicates for A375 per experimental condition (i.e. wild-type, inhibitor-treated & ERAP1 KO cells).  Cell pellets were mixed with 150 μl of solution containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M dithiothreitol and incubated at 95◦C for 3 minutes. DNA was sheared by sonication to reduce the viscosity of the sample and then lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 5 minutes. The protein extracts were treated with 200 mM iodoacetamide to alkylate reduced cysteine residues and processed according to the Sp3 protocol protocol38. 20 μg of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag carboxylate-modified beads; GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. Protein clean-up was performed on a magnetic rack. The beads were washed twice with 80% ethanol followed by one wash with 100% ACN. The beads-captured proteins were digested overnight at 37 ℃ with 0.5 μg trypsin mix in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate under vigorous shaking (1200 rpm, Eppendorf Thermomixer). The supernatants were collected and the peptides were purified by a modified Sp3 clean-up protocol and finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water), and sonicated. Peptide concentration was determined through absorbance measurement at 280 nm using a nanodrop instrument. Samples were run on a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC online with a Thermo Q Exactive™ HF-X Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on a 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75  µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient  of 7% Buffer B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and max IT of 60ms, followed by data independent analysis using 8 Th windows (39 loop counts) with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105, max IT of 22ms and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.9.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks)40 against the reviewed human UniProt protein database (20699 proteins, retrieved 24-11-2023) - Search parameters were set to allow up to two possible trypsin enzyme missed cleavages. A spectra library was generated from the DIA runs and used to reanalyze them. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations were set as variable modifications. The match between runs (MBR) feature was used for all the analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR. The protein inference was performed at the gene level using only proteotypic peptides. The double pass mode of the neural network classifier was also activated.