PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell
diseases: Sarcoma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; ubiquitinylated lysine; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Kaposi’s  sarcoma herpesvirus; Proteome; Ubiquitin

ABSTRACT:
Kaposi’s Sarcoma Herpesvirus (KSHV) is the causative agent of Kaposi’s Sarcoma (KS) and isassociated with primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), multicentric Castleman’s disease (MCD) and two inflammatory diseases. KSHV-associated cancers are primarily associated with genes expressed during latency, while other pathologies are associated with lytic gene expression. The major lytic switch of the virus, RTA, interacts with cellular machinery to co-opt the host ubiquitin proteasome system to evade the immune response as well as activate the program of lytic replication. Through SILAC labeling, ubiquitin remnant enrichment and mass spectrometry, we have analyzed the RTA dependent ubiquitin-modified proteome. We identified RTA dependent changes in the populations of polyubiquitin chains, as well as changes in ubiquitinated proteins in both cells expressing RTA and naturally infected cells following lytic reactivation. We observed an enrichment of proteins that are also reported to be SUMOylated, suggesting that RTA, a SUMO targeting ubiquitin ligase, may function to alleviate a SUMO dependent block to lytic reactivation. RTA targeted substrates directly through a ubiquitin ligase domain dependent mechanism as well as indirectly through cellular ubiquitin ligases, including RAUL. Our ubiquitome analysis revealed an RTA dependent mechanism of immune evasion. We provide evidence of inhibition of TAP dependent peptide transport, resulting in decreased HLA complex stability. The results of this analysis increase our understanding of mechanisms governing the latent to lytic transition in addition to the identification of a novel RTA dependent mechanism of immune evasion.Kaposi’s Sarcoma Herpesvirus (KSHV) is the causative agent of Kaposi’s Sarcoma (KS) and is associated with primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), multicentric Castleman’s disease (MCD) and two inflammatory diseases. KSHV-associated cancers are primarily associated with genes expressed during latency, while other pathologies are associated with lytic gene expression. The major lytic switch of the virus, RTA, interacts with cellular machinery to co-opt the host ubiquitin proteasome system to evade the immune response as well as activate the program of lytic replication. Through SILAC labeling, ubiquitin remnant enrichment and mass spectrometry, we have analyzed the RTA dependent ubiquitin-modified proteome. We identified RTA dependent changes in the populations of polyubiquitin chains, as well as changes in ubiquitinated proteins in both cells expressing RTA and naturally infected cells following lytic reactivation. We observed an enrichment of proteins that are also reported to be SUMOylated, suggesting that RTA, a SUMO targeting ubiquitin ligase, may function to alleviate a SUMO dependent block to lytic reactivation. RTA targeted substrates directly through a ubiquitin ligase domain dependent mechanism as well as indirectly through cellular ubiquitin ligases, including RAUL. Our ubiquitome analysis revealed an RTA dependent mechanism of immune evasion. We provide evidence of inhibition of TAP dependent peptide transport, resulting in decreased HLA complex stability. The results of this analysis increase our understanding of mechanisms governing the latent to lytic transition in addition to the identification of a novel RTA dependent mechanism of immune evasion.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Analysis of the ubiquitin-modified proteome identifies novel host determinants of Kaposi’s sarcoma herpesvirus lytic reactivation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteomics experiments were conducted in collaboration with the Smoler Proteomics Center at the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology. Experiments were carried out using doxycycline inducible TREx BCBL1 RTA cells and 293T cells transfected with RTA or pcDNA control vector. Cells were maintained as described above. Prior to ubiquitin remnant motif K-e-Gly-Gly (KGG) purification, cells were acclimated in SILAC media (lysine and arginine deficient media supplemented with stable isotope containing lysine and arginine (“heavy” media contained 13C6 15N4 Arg and 13C6 15N2 Lys)) for 7 days and evaluated for efficient SILAC labeling (23). RTA expression was induced in TREx BCBL1 RTA cells via addition of doxycycline (1µg/ml) to cells for 24 and/or 48h as indicated. 293T cells were transfected with RTA or empty vector pcDNA 3.1 and harvested following 48h incubation. Cells were treated with 10µM MG132 6 h prior to harvesting. Cell pellets were washed with PBS and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cells were lysed in 8M urea 400mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8, sonicated and cleared of cell debris by centrifugation. 2mg protein was processed for peptide purification by reducing with DTT (30min at 60°C, 3mM final concentration), cysteines were alkylated with 10mM idoacetamide, followed by trypsin digest (0.1µg/5ug protein) overnight. Following desalting by reverse phase chromatography on SepPac disposable cartridges (Waters), peptides containing the ubiquitin remnant motif – K-e-Gly-Gly were enriched via incubation with anti-K-e-Gly-Gly antibody-bound agarose beads. Peptides were eluted with 0.2% TFA. Eluted peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips and dried prior to analysis via LC-MS/MS. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 180-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 180 minutes gradient of 5 to 28% 15 minutes gradient of 28 to 95% and 25 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q Executive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (HCD) of the 30 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw data was processed using MaxQuant software followed by identification of proteins using the Andromeda peptide search engine to search against the HHV8 and human UniProt databases (Uniprot-proteome 27.7.18 (73101 entries), Uniprot-proteome HHV8) (24, 25). Data merging and statistical analysis was done using the Perseus(26). Functional enrichment analysis was performed using DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/) and STRING (https://string-db.org/). Final data set was curated by matching the data from the TREx BCBL1 RTA dataset with the data from the 293T cell dataset to identify the RTA dependent ubiquitin-modified proteome.