PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics
quantification: Label free
keywords: Taf2; Transcription; Intrinsically disordered regions; Nuclear speckles; Biomolecular condensates; Tfiid; Splicing; Srrm2; Nuclear bodies

ABSTRACT:
TFIID is an essential basal transcription factor, crucial for RNA polymerase II (pol II) promoter recognition and transcription initiation. The TFIID complex consists of the TATA-binding protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associated factors (TAFs) that contain intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) with currently unknown functions. Here, we show that a conserved IDR drives TAF2 condensation in nuclear speckles, independently of other TFIID subunits. Quantitative mass spectrometry analyses reveal that TAF2 exhibits close proximities to RNA-binding proteins, but that the TAF2 IDR specifically interacts with the splicing factor SRRM2. Modulation of TAF2 protein levels elicits alternative splicing (AS) events in RNAs coding for proteins involved in transcription and transmembrane transport, some of which overlap with SRRM2-regulated AS events. This study identifies an IDR of the basal transcription machinery as a molecular guide for protein partitioning into nuclear compartments, controlling protein complex composition and pre-mRNA splicing.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
TAF2 condensation in nuclear speckles links basal transcription factor TFIID to RNA splicing – data-independent acquisition MS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For LC-MS/MS analysis of the GFP-TAF2-IDR pulldown samples, an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system was online coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The peptide mixture was washed and pre-concentrated on a PepMap C18 trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 30 µL/min and peptides were separated on a μPAC™ C18 pillar array column (200 cm bed length, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a binary buffer system consisting of A (0.1% formic acid) and B (86% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were eluted applying a linear gradient from 6% to 10% B in 5 min at a flow rate of 0.75 µL/min, 10 to 45% B in 100 min and 45 to 99% in 8 min at a flow rate of 0.5 µL/min. For electrospray ionization of peptides, a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a liquid junction PST-HV-NFU (MS Wil, The Netherlands) and a fused silica emitter (20 µm inner diameter, 360 µm outer diameter, MicroOmics Technologies LLC) applying a source voltage of +1,800 V and an ion transfer tube temperature of 250 °C was used. Cycles of data-independent acquisition (DIA) consisted of: one overview spectrum (RF lens of 50%, normalized AGC target of 3e6, maximum injection time of 60 ms, m/z range of 385 to 1,050, resolution of 70,000 at 200m/z, profile mode) followed by MS2 fragment spectra (RF lens of 50%, normalized AGC target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 60 ms) generated sequentially by higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) at a normalized energy of 26% in a precursor m/z range from 400 to 1,000 in 50 windows of 12.5 m/z isolation width overlapping by 0.25 m/z and recorded at a resolution of 35,000 in profile mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometric raw data were converted to mzML format using the ProteoWizard software, version 3.0.21229. For protein and peptide identification and quantification a library free search was performed using Dia-NN version 1.81 against the reviewed sequences of the human reference proteome from the Uniprot database (release 2024_02, 20419 entries) complemented with the sequences of the GFP-TAF2 constructs. Trypsin was set as protease with 2 allowed missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, N-terminal excision of methionine, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications with a maximum number of 2. For precursor ion generation peptides ranging from 7 to 35 amino acids, precursor charge from 2 to 4, precursor m/z range from 350 to 1,100 and fragment ion m/z range from 200 to 1,200 were used. Further parameters were match between runs, unrelated runs, search in double-pass mode, deactivated heuristic protein inference, robust LC quantification with RT-dependent cross-run normalisation. The protein group quantities output file from DiaNN was used and all proteins with non-zero LFQ intensities in all replicates were selected for further analysis. For statistical analysis, log10 transformed LFQ intensities were subjected to linear modeling implemented in the R package limma, with correction of P values for multiple testing by Benjamini and Hochberg’s method.