PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Malignant cell; Thyroid gland
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method; Relative quantification
keywords: Anaplastic thyroid cancer; Vandetanib; Extracellular vesicles; Dose-dependent transcriptomics and proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Background: Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is an aggressive and rare disease. Rapid metastasis and limited promising treatments call for additional therapeutic options, including drug repurposing. The early spreading of ATC highlights the importance of rapid therapy success assessment, which could be achieved by measurement of extracellular vesicle (EV)-associated cell-free RNA in liquid biopsy samples. Recent studies have discovered the potential of the receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor vandetanib for ATC treatment in vitro and in vivo. Given the rarity of ATC patients receiving off-label vandetanib treatment, acquiring patient samples for clinical studies is a prolonged process, and pre-clinical investigations are needed to elucidate the effects of vandetanib on ATC cells.  Objective: Here, we present an in vitro study addressing the holistic transcriptional and proteomic changes induced in the ATC cell line Cal62 by three doses of vandetanib and quantified by high-throughput methods. Methods: By comparing the transcriptional and proteomic data sets and applying dimensional reduction models such as sparse partial least-squares discriminant analysis, we refined a set of 21 biomarker candidates.  Results: Out of these, we report a final signature of eight transcriptional biomarkers, validated in the cellular and cell-free RNA by RT-qPCR and verified for their biological significance and discriminatory power by pathway over-representation analysis and partial least-squares regression. This transcriptional biomarker signature can distinguish vandetanib treatment from the control in cell-free RNA isolated from Cal62 EVs and can be measured reliably, easily, and quickly using RT-qPCR.  Conclusions: Our findings may serve as a basis for future clinical trials with liquid biopsy samples from ATC patients undergoing off-label vandetanib treatment.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Extracellular vesicle-associated transcriptomic and proteomic biomarkers show in vitro potential for vandetanib treatment monitoring in anaplastic thyroid cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells were lysed directly in the flasks using 1 ml 1x RIPA buffer (Abcam ab156034) with 1x ProteaseArrest protease inhibitor cocktail (G-Biosciences 786-711). A total of 5E8 EVs per sample were prepared in the same buffer. Samples were boiled at 70 °C for 10 minutes, sonicated at 4 °C for 5 minutes, and then centrifuged at 10,000 g at 4 °C for 30 minutes. Protein concentration was determined using a Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific A55864). Subsequently, 14 µg of EV proteins and 25 µg of cellular proteins were prepared in 4x Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad 1610747) containing 2-mercaptoethanol (Merck 805740) in a final volume of 30 µl. Proteomics sample preparation was performed by in-gel trypsin digestion as described previously.  Proteomics measurements were carried out on a VanquishTM Neo UHPLC (microflow configuration; Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Peptides were applied onto a commercially available Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 column (2 μm particle size, 1 mm ID × 150 mm, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and separated on a stepped gradient from 3% to 31% solvent B (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in ACN) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 3% DMSO in HPLC grade water) over 60 min. A flow rate of 50 μl/min was applied. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA and positive ionization mode. MS1 full scans (360 – 1300 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000, a normalized automatic gain control target value of 100%, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Peptide precursor selection for fragmentation was carried out using a cycle time of 1.2 seconds. Only precursors with charge states from two to six were selected, and dynamic exclusion of 30 s was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision-induced dissociation and a normalized collision energy of 28%. The precursor isolation window width of the quadrupole was set to 1.1 m/z. MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000, a fixed first mass of 100 m/z, a normalized automatic gain control target value of 100%, and a maximum injection time of 40 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide identification and quantification were performed using the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4), with its built-in search engine Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against the human protein database from UniProt (UP000005640, downloaded on May 4th, 2020), supplemented with common contaminants (using the built-in option). Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, and carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation at the protein N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The results were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels using a target-decoy approach with reversed protein sequences. LFQ intensities were further analyzed using Perseus (version 2.0.9.0). Perseus’s built-in filter functions were used to remove reverse hits, proteins identified only by site, and contaminants. Only proteins with a peptide count greater than 1 and detected in at least 50% of the samples in at least one group were retained. All proteins detected in the culture medium samples were removed from the EV samples. For protein quantification, LFQ intensities were log10-transformed. Missing values were imputed using a normal distribution with default settings (width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8). The imputed dataset was normalized by quantile normalization before statistical testing. Paired t-tests were conducted on the imputed/normalized datasets, followed by Benjamini-Hochberg correction (FDR = 0.05). Enrichment analysis of significant proteins was performed against terms from the GO, KEGG, GSEA, and Reactome databases using Fisher’s exact test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction and a threshold value of 0.01.