PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane; Ap-ms; Mitochondria; Protein import; Quantitative mass spectrometry; Hek293t cells

ABSTRACT:
The mitochondrial proteome arises from dual genetic origin. Nuclear-encoded proteins need to be transported across or inserted into two distinguished membranes, and the TOM complex represents the main translocase in the outer mitochondrial membrane. Its composition and regulations have been extensively investigated within yeast cells. However, we have little knowledge of the TOM complex composition within human cells. Here, we have defined the TOM interactome in a comprehensive manner using biochemical approaches to isolate the TOM complex in combination with quantitative mass spectrometry analyses. Within these studies, we defined the pleiotropic nature of the human TOM complex, including new interactors, such as TRABD. Our studies provide a framework to understand the various biogenesis pathways that merge at the TOM complex within human cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Definition of the human mitochondrial TOM interactome reveals TRABD as new interacting protein (MAPL IP data)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
SILAC labeling of cells: HEK293 Flp-In T-Rex control cells and cells expressing FLAG-tagged MAPL were cultured in SILAC-DMEM high glucose medium (AC-LM-0065, Anprotec) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate and 50 µg/ml uridine and either heavy or light versions of L-arginine (100 mg/l) and L-lysine (140 mg/l). Mitochondrial isolation: Cells were harvested with PBS, pelleted at 1,250 rpm (5 min, 4°C) and resuspended in TH Buffer (300 mM Trehalose, 10 mM KCl, 10 mM HEPES; pH7.4) containing 0.1 mg/ml BSA and homogenized with a Potter S Dounce Homogenizer (Sartorius). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation first at 400 g (4°C, 10 min). Homogenization and centrifugation were repeated once, and to further remove remaining cell debris, supernatants were centrifugated at 800 g (4°C, 5 min). Mitochondria were pelleted at 10,000 g (4°C, 10 min). The pellets were washed once with BSA-free TH buffer, pelleted as described above, and resuspended in BSA-free TH buffer.  Affinity purification: Isolated mitochondria were resuspended in solubilization buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 1% digitonin, 2 mM PMSF, 1X complete protease inhibitor cocktail from Roche). The final concentration was 1-2 mg/ml. Samples were incubated shaking at 1,000 rpm (4°C, 30 min). To remove non-solubilized material, lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g (4°C, 10 min) and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C under mild agitation with anti-FLAG M2 agarose beads. Beads were washed 8 times with washing buffer containing digitonin and protease inhibitor (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.3% digitonin, 1 mM PMSF) and twice with digitonin- and protease-free washing buffer under agitation (1,000 rpm, 4°C, 30 min). Quantitative mass spectrometry: Proteins affinity-purified from mitochondrial fractions generated from differentially “heavy” (Arg10/Lys8) or “light” (Arg0/Lys0) SILAC labeled HEK293 wildtype cells (control) or from cells that expressed the FLAG-tagged MAPL were combined, separated by SDS-PAGE and processed for LC-MS analysis including reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues and tryptic in-gel digestion as described before (Dewar et al. 2022, J Biol Cell 298; Peikert et al. 2017, Nat Commun 8). Peptide mixtures were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Experiments were performed in three biological replicates including a SILAC label switch.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MaxQuant/Andromeda software package was used for protein identification and SILAC-based relative protein quantification (version 1.6.10.43) applying MaxQuant default parameters and setting Arg10/Lys8 as heavy labels; the option "requantify" was enabled. Tandem MS data were searched against the UniProt human reference proteome, including isoforms. The mean of log10-transformed protein abundance ratios (bait/control) was determined, and p-values were calculated using a one-sided one-sample Student's t-test.