PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Iprg2023; Benchmark; Crosslinking

ABSTRACT:
The three proteomics research groups, Proteomics (PRG), Proteome Informatics (iPRG) and Proteomics Standards (sPRG), have all held interesting studies over the years. This year (2023) the iPRG group has put together a crosslinking study. The goal is to teach people how to analyze crosslinked samples with existing software and provide them with data sets that they can practice on. It is then hoped that more core labs will offer crosslinking analysis as a service to customers and collaborators. This particular submission provides the Kojak results in COMPLETE dataset format supporting mzIdentML 1.2.0 and it is used as a gold-standard for the new PRIDE Archive resource https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/crosslinking

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ABRF iPRG 2023 crosslinking study - Kojak COMPLETE results

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The study consists of recombinant proteins that were purified from an E. coli expression system. The expressed proteins form complexes under optimal conditions. The preparations were crosslinked with Disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO), ultracentrifuged and separated by SDS-PAGE. Bands were excised before reduction and alkylation with iodoacetamide and digestion with trypsin. The digests were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos using both the low resolution ion trap and high resolution orbitrap acquisition methods. DSSO cross-linked complexes were separated by SDS-PAGE (12% Bis-Tris) and stained with Coomassie blue. The bands of interest were manually excised, individually reduced in situ with TCEP and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide prior to treatment with trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Each digest was analyzed by capillary HPLC-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. On-line HPLC separation was accomplished with an RSLC NANO HPLC system (Thermo Scientific/Dionex): column, PicoFrit (New Objective; 75 μm i.d.) packed to 15 cm with C18 adsorbent (Vydac; 218MS 5 μm, 300 Å). Precursor ions were acquired in the orbitrap in centroid mode at 120,000 resolution (m/z 200); data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) spectra were acquired in the orbitrap using 30% normalized collision energy and 15,000 resolution. Other MS scan parameters included: mass window for precursor ion selection, 0.7; charge states, 2 – 5; dynamic exclusion, 15 sec (± 10 ppm); intensity to trigger MS2, 50,000.

DATA PROCESSING:
Dataset was analyzed using kojak software version 2.1.0. MzIdentML 1.2.0 was exported and validated for the corsslinking resource in PRIDE database.