PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Primordial germ cells; mcm8; r-loop; genome stability; fertility

ABSTRACT:
MCM8 has emerged as a core gene in reproductive aging and is crucial for meiotic homologous recombination repair. It also safeguards genome stability by coordinating the replication stress response during mitosis, but its function in mitotic germ cells remains elusive. Here we found that the number of primordial germ cells (PGCs) decreased dramatically after MCM8 deficiency due to proliferation defects. We further demonstrated that MCM8 interacted with two known helicases DDX5 and DHX9 in PGCs, and loss of MCM8 led to R-loop accumulation by reducing the retention of these helicases at R-loops, thus inducing genome instability. Cells expressing premature ovarian insufficiency-causative mutants of MCM8 with decreased interaction with DDX5 displayed increased R-loop levels. These results suggest that MCM8 interacts with R-loop-resolving factors to prevent DNA damage in PGCs, thus maintaining PGC proliferation and establishing the reproductive reserve. Our findings thus reveal a novel role for MCM8 in PGC development and improve our understanding of reproductive aging caused by genome instability in mitotic germ cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
MCM8 interacts with DDX5 to promote R-loop resolution in primordial germ cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells cultured in 10 cm dishes were washed with PBS twice and incubated with ice-cold Pierce IP lysis buffer (Invitrogen) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails at 4 ℃ for 30 min on a shaker. After sonication, the cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 12000  g for 10 min, and the supernatants were retained as the cell extracts. The cell extract was mixed with the primary antibody and rotated at 4℃ overnight. The mixture was then incubated with protein A/G beads and rotated at 4℃ for 2 h. Protein-bound beads were subsequently collected using a magnetic frame and washed three times with IP lysis buffer. After the final wash, the supernatants were removed and 1 SDS sample buffer was added. The samples were boiled at 100℃ for 10 min, and the supernatants were collected as immunoprecipitated proteins for mass spectrometry (MS).  For MS, immunoprecipitated proteins from the IgG and MCM8 groups were separated by 8% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue (Beyotime Biotechnology). After washing overnight, protein gel slices were cut off for acquiring all the potential interactors of MCM8. And then in-gel digestion was performed. The gel slices were washed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/100% acetonitrile (volume ratio 1:1) and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile for 5 min. The proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56°C for 1 h. The gel slices were then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile before being incubated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. After being washed and dehydrated again, the gel slices were incubated with 10 ng/μl trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate on ice for 1 h, followed by digestion with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted and dried and finally dissolved in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for MS.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system with a reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm length, 75 μm pore size) with a gradient of 0.55 µl/min with 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile (solvent B): 0–22 min, from 6% to 35% B; 22–26 min, from 35% to 80% B; 26–30 min, hold at 80% B. The separated peptides were subjected to NSI Ion Source followed by tandem mass spectrometry in Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific). MS scans were acquired on the Orbitrap using an m/z window from 350 to 1800 and a resolution of 70,000. The 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for the detection of MS/MS spectra in the ion trap using collision-induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 28%, and the fragments were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. The automatic gain control was set at 5E4. The MS/MS data files were processed for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.4, and tandem mass spectra were searched against the Mus musculus database. The enzyme digestion method was set as Trypsin/P. Carbamydomethylation of cysteines was defined as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionines was specified as a variable modification. The mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment matching. The peptide confidence was high, and the score of peptide ion was greater than 20.