PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brown adipose tissue; Liver
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Cold exposure; brown adipose tissue; liver; untargeted proteomics; regulatory networks; tissue crosstalk

ABSTRACT:
oActivationf brown adipose tissue (BAT) has gained central attention due to its known ability to dissipate energy and counteract cardiometabolic diseases (CMDs). The cold exposure on BAT activation and the induction of thermogenesis have been extensively studied, but reports on the effects at the proteomic level in metabolic tissues of animal models mimicking CMD in humans are lacking.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification of regulatory networks and crosstalk factors in brown adipose tissue and liver of a cold-exposed cardiometabolic mouse model

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
BAT and liver from LdlrKO mice housed at either 22°C or 5°C (n = 6/group) were homogenized in 8 M urea, Tris-HCl 0.1 M pH 8.5, supplemented with protease inhibitors at a ratio of 1:100 (# 5872S; Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA). The liver digestion and sample homogenization were processed as reported elsewhere (14). For the BAT in each sample, in 20 μg of total proteins, the corresponding volume of Ammonium bicarbonate solution 50 mM were added (final pH = 8.5, final volume 60 μL). The proteins were reduced then by incubation with 3 μl DTT 100 mM, for 30 min at 55 °C. For the protein alkylation 6 μl of iodoacetamide 150 mM were added and incubated for 20 min in the dark, at room temprature. Trypsin digestion (Merck, enzyme to protein ratio 1:20), was performed overnight at 37 °C and stopped by acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (final percentage 1%). The LC-MS/MS analysis were carried in An Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data acquisition was operating in the data-dependent mode, cycle time 3 s between master scans. MS/MS spectra were collected in centroid mode. HCD was performed with collision energy set at 35 eV. The MS raw data files were converted to mzML format (centroid mode) using the MSconvert tool of the software ProteoWizard (version 3.0.1957). Converted mzML files were then analyzed using DDASSQ pipeline (PXD025097), an open-source, multiple peptide sequencing pipeline for label free quantification (LFQ) based on OpenMS. Briefly, Uniprot FASTA database for the mouse (niport-mus+musculus.fasta, downloaded at www.uniprot.org, Jan 2022, 17.527 entries), and a common contaminant proteins database were used. The spectral library required by the SpectraST search engine was downloaded from the website www.peptideatlas.org (file NIST_mouse_IT_2012-04-21_7AA.splib). Peptide sequences were indexed through the OpenMS PeptideIndexer node, setting leucine/isoleucine equivalence. Except for SpectraST, all search engines set cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. The tolerance for fragment mass was set at 0.02 Da, and the tolerance for precursor mass was set at 5.0 ppm. The number of missed cleavages permitted in the X!Tandem and MS-GF+ adapters was set to 1. Protein inference was then carried out using the Protein Inference Analysis (PIA) algorithm (50). Protein abundance estimates were calculated with prior generation of spectral feature by the node FeatureFinderMultiplex followed by PIA-assisted FDR-multiple scores estimation and filtering (combined FDR score<0.01), their ID mapping and combination with peptide IDs, their subsequent alignment, grouping and normalization with MapAlignerIdentification, FeatureUnlabeledQT, and ConsensusmapNormalizer nodes. Protein and peptide label-free quantification (LFQ) was then computed with the OpenMS ProteinQuantifier node based on intensities of the n = 3 most abundant identified peptides. The corresponding output files were read as tables of the CSVreader node output and exported into Microsoft Office Excel 2016 for further formatting and statistical elaboration.