PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast
diseases: Cardiovascular system disease
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Hypoxia; Transforming growth factor-beta; Cardiac fibrosis; Hypoxia-inducible factors; Myocardial infarction

ABSTRACT:
Myocardial infarctions cause hypoxic injury to downstream tissue and a consequent fibrotic remodeling process to replace injured tissue with a scar. Scar formation occurs through phases of wound healing in which stimuli such as transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) drive cardiac fibroblasts to activate into a myofibroblast phenotype and deposit matrix molecules that form a scar. While this is necessary to repair injured tissue, excessive fibrosis commonly occurs which is correlated with heart failure. Therefore, defining cardiac fibroblast phenotypes under hypoxic stimuli and TGF-β is essential for understanding and treating pathological fibrosis. We robustly characterized fibroblast phenotype through immunofluorescence, quantitative RT-PCR, and proteomic analysis, after either TGF-β treatment or hypoxia durations that mimic acute hypoxic injury post-infarction. We find that hypoxic fibroblasts respond to low oxygen with increased hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) but not HIF-2 activity by 4h. This is accompanied by increased gene and protein levels of VEGFA and LOX, respectively, which are both targets of HIF-1. Both TGF-β1 and hypoxia inhibit proliferation by 24h. While TGF-β1 treatment upregulated various fibrotic pathways, hypoxia causes a global reduction in protein synthesis, including collagen biosynthesis. This study discerns overlapping from distinctive outcomes of TGF-β1 and hypoxia treatment, which is important for elucidating their roles in fibrotic remodeling post-MI.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Distinct phenotypes induced by acute hypoxia and TGF-β1 in human adult cardiac fibroblasts

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Primary human adult cardiac fibroblasts were purchased from Cell Applications, Inc., and initially obtained from the normal ventricle of a 32-year-old female. Cells were initially cultured in low glucose DMEM (1 g/L glucose) supplemented with 10% v/v fetal bovine serum and 1% v/v penicillin/streptomycin. Cells at passages four through eight were subsequently seeded on 22 mm x 22 mm polydimethylsiloxane-coated glass coverslips pre-coated with fibronectin. The following day, they were serum arrested using low glucose DMEM supplemented with 0.1% v/v fetal bovine serum and 1% v/v penicillin-streptomyocin for 48h. At this point, a media change was performed with fresh 0.1% fetal bovine serum media and samples were placed in a hypoxia chamber filled with 0% O2 (5% CO2, bal N2) for 4 or 24h, or treated with TGF-B1 (10 ng/mL) for 48h prior to lysis in TRIzol. TRIzol-chloroform phase separation was used to isolate the organic phase containing protein, and protein pellets were precipitated with isopropanol, washed with methanol, and then resuspended in a buffer containing 8M UREA/5% SDS. Proteins were then digested with trypsin using the ProtiFi S-TRAP column capture and digestion system.

DATA PROCESSING:
DIA results were analyzed using the DIANN library free data analysis