PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Keratinocyte; Hacat cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Tattoo; Skin toxicity; Nanolc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Pigment particles used in tattooing may exert long terms effect by releasing diffusible degradation products. In the present work, aqueous suspensions of the organic orange pigment Po13 were aged by exposure to simulated sunlight at 40°C. The morphology and the surface charge of Po13 particles were barely modified upon aging, but their size was reduced. Soluble photoproducts were detected in the liquid fractions. One of this photoproduct (DCBP) was produced in large amount in suspension in isopropanol and purified. The toxicological profiles of aged suspensions, their soluble fractions and DCBP were then determined on the keratinocyte cell line HaCaT. Impact of suspensions of Po13 on viability was hardly affected by aging. In contrast, the soluble fractions were more toxic after aging. Suspensions and filtrates induced neither release of reactive oxygen species nor formation of DNA strand breaks. The samples exhibited only limited effects on the proteome of HaCaT cells. Conversely, DCBP was cytotoxic and induced the production of ROS, but was not genotoxic. DCBP was found to activate CYP450 monooxygenases known to be involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics. Altogether, our results show that aging of Po13 lead to the release of toxic soluble compounds.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Accelerated aging modulates the toxicological properties of the diazo tattoo pigment Po13

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
See publication for details HaCaT cells (an immortalized keratinocytic cell line) were treated by different conditions (photo aged Po13 suspensions, filtrates or temperature controls at different concentrations and water as vehicle control). After cell lysis, the samples were transformed into gel plugs using a polylmerization reaction. Gel plugs were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The generated peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a nanoACQUITY Ultra-Performance-LC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

DATA PROCESSING:
In order to identify proteins, MS/MS data were submitted to Mascot database searches (version 2.6.2) (Matrix Science, London, UK) against a database containing all Homo sapiens entries from UniProtKB /SwissProt (version 2019_09, 20,410 sequences), to which common contaminants and decoys sequences were added. The database was generated using MSDA software [4]. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS data and 0.07 Da for MS/MS data. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing a maximum of one missed cleavage. Acetylation of protein n-termini, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and oxidation of methionine residues were set as variable modifications. Identification results generated by Mascot were validated with Proline software[1]  (version 2.2, http://proline.profiproteomics.fr). Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) with a pretty rank equal to 1 and a length of at least 7 amino acids were retained. False discovery rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using the Mascot adjusted E-value and below 1% at protein level using Mascot standard score. For label free quantification, peptide abundances were extracted with cross assignment between the conditions. The assignment of LC-MS series was performed using Loess regression. Cross-assignment was performed within groups. Protein abundances were calculated using the sum of the unique peptide abundances normalized at the peptide level using the median.  Differential analysis was then carried out using Prostar software [2]  (version 1.34.5) with a significance level of 0.05. Imputation of missing values was done using the approximation of the lower limit of quantification by the 2.5% lower quantile of each replicate intensity distribution (“det quantile”). A Limma moderated t-test was applied on the dataset to perform differential analysis. The adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied to adjust the p-values and False Discovery Rate. Identification of affected pathways was performed on the UniProtKB platform (https://www.uniprot.org/id-mapping). Study of the impacted cellular localization was performed with the STRING database version 12.0 (https://string-db.org/) using a Gene Ontology approach.

METHODS:
Methods
Chemicals
Pigment orange 13 was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, USA). The purity of the batch used was 91.2% with 1.1% moisture. The water used for the preparation of suspensions and of HPLC solvents was purified in a MilliQ direct 8 system (Millipore). Acetonitrile (Carlo Erba) used for HPLCmass spectrometry analyses was of LCMS grade. Ammonium formate and formic acid (Aldrich) used for the HPLC buffers were of the highest purity available.
Photoaging of PO13 suspensions
Suspensions of PO13 at 10 mg mL−1 were prepared in water. Pigment particles were dispersed by sonication for 15 min and an amplitude of 60% in a cuphorn instrument (BioBlock Scientific, France). The temperature was kept at 4 °C by a thermostated water circulation. Then, PO13 suspensions were transferred, together with a 0.7 cm magnetic bar, into 1 × 1 × 3.5 cm spectrophotometer quartz cuvettes sealed with a screw cap. The samples were placed, under constant magnetic stirring, in a QSUN XE-1 Xenon Test Chamber (LX-5080TM, Qlab, USA) for 96 h. The photo-aging conditions followed the ISO 4892-2guidelines for materials testing. The temperature within the sample was set at 40 °C. Simulated sunlight (both ultraviolet and the visible wavelengths) was applied at an intensity corresponding to an equatorial sun (1.44 W m−2 nm−1 measured at 420 nm). Two control samples were also prepared (i) a PO13 suspension incubated under agitation for 96 h at 40 °C in the dark, and (ii) a pristine suspension kept in the dark at 4 °C. Aliquot fractions (500 µL) of the suspensions were centrifuged (8000xg, 10 min) in filtering tubes bearing a 0.2 μm nylon membrane (VWR). Another aliquot fraction of suspension (100 µL) was centrifuged (8000xg, 10 min) and the liquid fraction was discarded. Hundred µL of octanol was added. The sample was vortexed and transferred to a 0.2 μm filtering tube. After centrifugation, the filtrate was transferred to HPLC vials.
Physicochemical characterization
Measurements of zeta potential and hydrodynamic diameter of PO13 particles were performed on a Litesizer 500 particle analyzer (Anton Paar GmbH, Graz, Austria) using electrophoretic and dynamic light scattering, respectively. For the former technique, samples were diluted in 1/1000 PBS. For DLS, samples were analyzed at different dilutions in water in order to perform reliable measurements. The UV-visible absorption spectra were recorded on a Cary 60 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Samples were solubilized in DMF.
High performance liquid chromatography associated with electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS)
Filtrate of the PO13 samples (20 µL) was injected in an HPLC system (ExionLC, SCIEX) equipped with a reversephase HPLC column (EC 100/2 Nucleodur C18 HTec, 100 × 2 mm ID, 1.8 μm particle size, MachereyNagel, Düren, Germany). The temperature of the column oven was set at 50 °C. The HPLC elution was performed at a flow rate of 0.35 mL min-1 in the gradient mode. The mobile phases were an aqueous solution of 2 mM ammonium formate containing 0.05% formic acid (A) and ACN with 0.05% formic acid (B). The initial composition of the gradient was pure A. The proportion of B was then increased to 10% in 12 min, set to 60% at 20 min and reached 100% at 22 min. The latter composition was maintained for 3 min. The outlet of the column was directed first to a UV diode array detector and then to the inlet of a 6500 + QTrap mass spectrometer (SCIEX) operated in the positive electrospray ionization. Single stage mass spectrometry analyses (MS1) were performed with the second analysis quadrupole used a linear ion trap. The mass range was 50 to 1000. Additional experiments were performed in the product ion scan mode (MS2) aimed at recording fragmentation mass spectra of compounds detected in MS1.
Production and purification of a photoproduct of PO13
PO13 was suspended in isopropanol (35 mL) at a concentration of 1 mg mL−1, and the sample was sonicated in a bath sonicator for 20 min. The suspension was transferred in a 75 mL quartz tube containing a 2 cm magnetic bar. It was placed under magnetic stirring in the beam of a XLS1600R3 solar simulator emitting the UV portion of sunlight. The intensity was 3.1 mW cm−2. The irradiated suspension was centrifuged and the supernatant was then filtered at 0.2 μm. The resulting solution was evaporated to dryness in a rotary evaporator. The residue was solubilized in 3 mL of ACN, filtered at 0.2 μm and injected by fractions of 600 µL onto a HPLC system equipped with a reversephase HPLC column (EC 100/2 C18 Nucleosil, 250 × 4 mm ID, 5 μm particle size, MachereyNagel, Düren, Germany). A gradient similar to that used for HPLC-MS/MS analyses was used, with the exception of the flow rate set at 1 mL min−1. The elution was monitored by a UV detector set at 230 nm. A compound eluting as a large peak at 17 min was collected. An aliquot fraction was dried and solubilized into dimethylformamide (DMF) for recording a UVvisible absorption spectrum. It was then compared to that of a 10 µM solution of PO13 in solution. Extensive characterization of the isolated photoproduct was performed by HPLCMS/MS and MS3. For the latter analyses, the solution of photoproduct was introduced with a syringe at a constant flow rate of 10 µl min−1 in the 6500 + QTrap mass spectrometer with the third quadrupole used as a linear ion trap. The collision energy for the pseudo molecular ion (m/z 423) in the collision cell was set at 35 eV and the amplitude of the resonant excitation field inducing fragmentation of the second precursor (m/z 330 or 237) in the ion trap was set at AF2 = 0.1.
Cell culture
HaCaT cells (CLS, Eppelheim, Germany), an immortalized keratinocytic cell line, were cultured in high glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium with Glutamine (DMEM + GlutaMAX™; 31966021, Gibco, Illkirch, France) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco), 100 UI/mL penicillin and 0.1 mg mL−1 streptomycin (Sigma), and maintained under an atmosphere of 5% CO2 at 37 °C.
Cell viability assay
On the day prior to the treatment, HaCaT cells were seeded into 96-well plates (2.5 × 104 cells/well) in culture medium. On the next day, 100 µL of suspensions containing different concentrations of PO13 (0.03–30 µg mL−1) was added for 24 h. At the end of the treatment, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)−2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT, Sigma) solution was added in order to reach a concentration of 0.45 mg mL−1 in each well. After 2 h at 37 °C, medium was discarded and formazan crystals were dissolved in 100 µL DMSO. Absorbance was measured at 550 nm (SpectraMax M2, Molecular Devices). Possible interferences of PO13 with the assay were taken into account by measuring the absorbance in exposure medium without adding MTT for each experimental condition. The obtained values were subtracted from those obtained in the presence of the probe.
Detection of reactive oxygen species by CMH2DCFDA
Production of intracellular ROS content was monitored using CMH2DCFDA (5(and-6)-chloromethyl-2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate, acetyl ester, Invitrogen, France) assay. On the day prior to the treatment, HaCaT cells were seeded into black 96-well plates (3.5 × 104 cells/well) in culture medium. On the next day, cells were rinsed with Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS, Gibco, Illkirch, France) and incubated for 1 h with a DPBS solution containing 5 µM CMH2DCFDA (Invitrogen) and 0.2% DMSO. As control, wells were only incubated with a DPBS solution containing 0.2% DMSO. At the end of the incubation, cells were rinsed with DPBS. High glucose DMEM without phenol red (31053028, Gibco, Illkirch, France) supplemented with 4 mM GlutaMax (35050061, Gibco), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (S8636, Sigma) and with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 UI/mL penicillin and 0.1 mg mL-1 streptomycin was added in wells, followed by a 45 min incubation. Then, medium was discarded and suspensions containing different concentrations of PO13 (0.003 to 0.3 mg mL-1) were added. As positive control, a solution with 250 µM tertButyl hydroperoxide (tBuOOH, Sigma) was added to wells. After a 4hour treatment, the fluorescence of fluorescein was measured at λexc/λem 488 nm/535 nm (SpectraMax M2). Potential interference of pigment particles were taken into account by measuring the fluorescence of cells exposed to PO13 or DCBP incubated with a solution containing 0.2% DMSO without CMH2DCFDA. The obtained values were subtracted from those obtained in the presence of the probe. Results were normalized by dividing the difference between the measured fluorescence intensity for a specific condition and the mean of that for the vehicle control by the difference between the mean for the positive control and the mean for the vehicle control. Values are expressed in percent.
Comet assay
On the day prior to the treatment, HaCaT cells were seeded into 12-well plates (3 × 105 cells/well) in culture medium. On the next day, suspensions containing different concentrations of PO13 (0.003, 0.03 and 0.3 µg mL−1) were added and the plates incubated for 24 h. As positive control for the assay, methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) at 30 µg mL−1, was used to induce DNA breaks. At the end of the exposure, medium of wells was discarded. The wells were rinsed with DPBS. Cells were recovered with trypsinEDTA and stored at −80 °C in a storage buffer. The comet assay was performed in its alkaline version. Briefly, microscope slides were coated with 1% normal melting point agarose (NMA) and allowed to dry. Fifty µL of cell suspensions were mixed with 450 µL of prewarmed 1% low melting point agarose (LMPA) and then, 70 µL of these mixture were deposited over the agarose layer, and the LMPA/cells mix was allowed to solidify on ice. After solidification of the gels, the slides were immersed for 1 h in cold lysis solution (2.5 M NaCl, 100 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris, 1% Triton X-100 with pH 10) in the dark. Slides were rinsed three times with PBS for 5 min. DNA was then allowed to unwind for 30 min in cold alkaline electrophoresis solution (300 mM NaOH, 1 mM EDTA). Electrophoresis was performed in a field of 1.2 V cm-1 and 300 mA current for 30 min in the same solution. Slides were rinsed twice with PBS for 10 min. Samples were stained with GelRed (Biotium, San Francisco, USA) for scoring. At last, 50 comets per slide were analyzed under a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss) equipped with a LED emitting light with 380–770 nm wavelength (XCite Xylis, Model No. XT720L, Excelitas Canada Inc., Kitchener, Canada) at ×20 magnification. Percentage of tail DNA was measured by using Comet IV software (Perceptive Instruments, Suffolk, UK).
Quantitative proteomics analysis
Cell treatment and lysis
HaCaT cells were seeded in 6well plates (7.5 × 10 5cells/well) in culture medium. The next day, a volume of 2 mL of the tested samples was added. Those were: (i) 7 replicates of the vehicle control (1% water in culture medium), 6 replicates of photoaged suspension (96 h, 0.03 µg mL-1) and 3 replicates of the corresponding temperature control; (ii) 5 replicates of filtrates of photoaged suspensions (96 h, 0.3 µg mL−1) and 5 replicates of the corresponding temperature control; and (iii) 5 replicates of 2 µM DCBP and 5 replicates of the solvent control (0.2% DMSO in culture medium). At the end of a 24 h exposure, the supernatant was removed and the wells were rinsed with 2 mL of DPBS containing CaCl2 and MgCl2 (Gibco). DPBS (2 mL) was added and the cells were then gently scraped from the bottom of the wells to be suspended and collected. The cell suspension was centrifuged (300xg, 5min). The supernatant was carefully removed and the pellet was suspended in 1 mL of standard DPBS. The resulting suspension was centrifuged (300xg, 10 min). The supernatant was gently removed and the cell pellet was resuspended in 100 µL lysis buffer (4 M urea, 2.5% hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride (SigmaAldrich), 150 µM methylene blue, 10% of a phosphate buffer at pH 3). After 30 min at room temperature, the lysed cell suspensions were centrifuged (15,000xg, 15 min). The supernatant was collected and stored at −20 °C.
Sample preparation for nanoLCMS/MS analysis
Solutions of iodoacetamide (IAA), dithiothreitol (DTT) and trypsin were prepared in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The protein content of the samples was quantified using the Bradford method in a 96-well plate. The samples were then transformed into gel plugs using a polymerization reaction. A sample containing 10 µg of protein was prepared in 0.5 mL conical tubes for a total volume of 16 µL. A polyacrylamide solution was prepared with 1 mL of a commercial acrylamide/bis-acrylamide 40% solution (Interchim, France), 100 µL of a saturated aqueous solution of diphenyliodonium chloride, 100 µL of a solution of 1 M toluene-4sulfinic acid (Fluka), mixed with 300 µL of water. In a subsequent step, 4 µL of this solution were added to the protein sample. Water-saturated butanol (100 µL) was then added to guarantee hydration of the gel. Polymerization was carried out by exposing the tubes for 2 h to a 1500 lm 2700 K LED lamp. The butanol was then aspirated and the gels transferred to a 96well plate intended for proteomic analysis. The gels were fixed for 1 h with 200 µL of a solution of 20% ethanol and 5% phosphoric acid (SigmaAldrich). The solution was then eliminated and 3 washes of 15 min with a 20% ethanol solution were carried out. The gels were stored at −20 °C. They were then destained using 4 washes of 5 min with 100 µL of a solution of 6.25 mM NH4 HCO3 and 75% ACN. ACN (60 µL) was added and the samples were left for 5 min for dehydration. A reduction of cysteine residues was carried out by adding 60 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol. Two 30 min incubations took place, a first at 60 °C then a second at room temperature. Reduced cysteine residues were then alkylated by adding 60 µL of 55 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark, at room temperature. After dehydrating the gels by adding 120 µL of ACN, the solution was eliminated and the gels were washed three times with a 25 mM NH4 HCO3 solution left for 5 min before addition of ACN. In the final step, the gels were dehydrated again with 50 µL of ACN left for 5 min, twice. The proteins were digested with 20 µL of modified porcine trypsin 10 ng µL-1 (Promega, Madison, United States) overnight, at 37 °C. The generated peptides were then extracted by incubating the samples with 40 µL of 60% ACN for 1 h, with stirring followed by a second extraction with ACN (15 µL) for 10 min. The solvent of peptide extracts were evaporated using a rotavapor and dried samples were solubilised in an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% ACN in order to obtain a final concentration of 150 ng µL-1.
nanoLCMS/MS analysis
Samples were analyzed by nanoLCMS/MS using a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformanceLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, USA) coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The nanochromatographic separation was carried out on a nanoEaseTM M/Z Peptide BEH C18 column (130Å, 250 mm x 75 μm, particle size = 1.7 μm, Waters Corporation, Milford, United States) preceded by a nanoEaseTM M/Z Symmetry C18 trapping column (100Å, 20 mm × 180 μm, particle size 5 μm, Waters Corporation, Milford, United States). The mobile phase was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in ACN (solvent B). A volume of 1.5 µL of peptide extract was injected into the precolumn for 3 min at 5 µL min-1 (solvent A 99%, solvent B 1%) for desalting and concentration. Elution of the peptides was carried out at a flow rate of 350 nL min-1 with a 6–35% linear gradient of solvent B in 58 min. The QExactive Plus operates in datadependent acquisition mode by automatically switching between full MS acquisitions and consecutive MS/MS acquisitions. Full scan MS spectra were collected from 300 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with an automatic gain control target fixed at 3 × 106 ions and a maximal injection time of 50 ms. The top 10 precursor ions with intensity greater than 2 × 105 ions and charge states ≥ 2 were selected from each MS spectrum for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation. MS/MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 17,500 at 200 m/z with a fixed first mass of 100 m/z, an automatic gain control target fixed at 1 × 105 ions, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. The normalized collision energy was fixed at 27 V. The complete system was fully controlled by Thermo Scientific™ Xcalibur ™ software. Raw data were converted to .mgf files using the MSConvert tool of ProteomeWizard (v3.0.6090).
Proteomics data processing
In order to identify proteins, MS/MS data were submitted to Mascot database searches (version 2.6.2) (Matrix Science, London, UK) against a database containing all Homo sapiensentries from UniProtKB /SwissProt (version 2019_09, 20,410 sequences), to which common contaminants and decoy sequences were added. The database was generated using MSDA software. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for MS data and 0.07 Da for MS/MS data. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Acetylation of protein ntermini, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and oxidation of methionine residues were set as variable modifications. Identification results generated by Mascot were validated with Proline software (version 2.2, http://proline.profiproteomics.fr). Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) with a pretty rank equal to 1 and a length of at least 7 amino acids were retained. False discovery rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using the Mascot adjusted Evalue and below 1% at protein level using Mascot standard score. For label free quantification, peptide abundances were extracted with cross assignment between the conditions. The assignment of LCMS series was performed using Loess regression. Crossassignment was performed within groups. Protein abundances were calculated using the sum of the unique peptide abundances normalized at the peptide level using the median. Differential analysis was then carried out using Prostar software (version 1.34.5) with a significance level of 0.05. Imputation of missing values was done using the approximation of the lower limit of quantification by the 2.5% lower quantile of each replicate intensity distribution (“det quantile”). A Limma moderated t-test was applied on the dataset to perform differential analysis. The adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied to adjust the p-values and False Discovery Rate (FDR). Identification of affected pathways was performed on the UniProtKB platform (https://www.uniprot.org/id-mapping). Study of the impacted cellular localization was performed with the STRING database version 12.0 (https://string-db.org/) using a Gene Ontology approach.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD056061 and 10.6019/PXD056061.
Statistics
GraphPad Prism 9 software (Boston, USA) was used for the statistical analyses of data obtained for cell viability, ROS production and Comet assay. KruskalWallis tests followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons were used to analyze data from dosecourse studies. KolmogorovSmirnov tests were applied to the comparison of results arising from different types of samples. Results were considered significant with p ≤ 0.05.

RESULTS:
Results
Characterization of physicochemical properties of PO13 particles by photoaging
The hydrodynamic diameter distribution and the zeta potential of PO13 particles were measured by dynamic light scattering and electrophoretic light scattering, respectively. Pristine pigment, photoaged pigment and temperature control suspensions (i.e. pigment suspension aged in the dark at 40 °C for 96 h) were analyzed. A larger proportion of small particles was detected in aged pigment suspension compared to the temperature control or pristine pigment (Fig. 1). Moreover, pristine pigment suspension contained larger particles than temperature control. The median size was 541, 307 and 174 nm for the pristine, temperature control and photoaged pigments, respectively. The size range for PO13 particles and agglomerates in the two latter types of samples was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (Supplementary information Fig. S1).
In the three samples, the surface potential of PO13 particles was unequivocally negative. It was − 29.2 ± 6.9 mV for the pristine pigment. A slight increase in the absolute value of zeta potential was observed between the temperature control (−39.8 ± 2.5 mV) and photoaged (−46.6 ± 3.6 mV) samples but it remained in the same range.
Characterization of the soluble fraction of photo-aged PO13 suspensions
HPLC-MS analysis of the aqueous fraction
Aqueous suspensions of PO13 were exposed to simulated sunlight and filtered at 0.2 μm. The filtering step had two purposes. The first was to isolate small particles and soluble products from the bulk of the pigment. The aim was to assess the toxicity of degradation products. The other point was more practical and was to prevent injection of particles that could clog the HPLC columns. The 0.2 μm threshold was found to be efficient since a colorless filtrate was obtained and the pigment remained on the filter. Filtrates were analyzed by HPLC-MS to monitor photodegradation of the pigment into photoproducts. Chromatograms indicated the formation of new products. A first run was performed in single stage mass spectrometry in order to identify the pseudomolecular ions of components of the mixture over a large range of m/z values (50–1000). Chromatograms generated upon analysis of photoaged suspensions were compared to those of the control temperatures, which allowed to identify potential photoproducts. A second analysis was then performed in the MS2 mode to collect fragmentation mass spectra of the pseudomolecular ions of the compounds of interest identified in the MS1 analysis. This provided information that could help us to propose structures of the putative photoproducts. In addition, integration of the peaks of interest on the MS2 chromatograms provided semiquantitative information of the timecourse formation of the compounds of interest. We thus identified photoproducts that were only transiently produced, while others, more interesting in terms of longterm toxicity of pigments, were accumulated upon photoaging (Supplementary Information Fig. S2).
HPLC-MS analysis of the octanol extracts
In addition to the filtrate of the aqueous suspension, we performed HPLC-MS/MS analysis of an octanol extract of the pellet of photo-aged suspension. Some products were detected in small amounts at different time points but one was in larger amounts than the other. It was produced in a time-dependent manner (Fig. 2a). Its long retention time (20.1 min) showed that it was highly hydrophobic, which could explain why it was not detected in aqueous fractions. The pseudo-molecular ion on the MS1 spectrum exhibited an isotopic distribution with a series of pseudo molecular ions centered at m/z = 424 with a typical isotopic distribution of a molecule bearing 2 chlorine atoms (one ion at m/z = 423 and one at m/z = 425 in 1.5:1 ratio) (Fig. 2b).
Isolation and characterization of a photoproduct (DCBP)
In order to prepare larger amounts of the photoproduct detected in the octanol extracts of photo-aged PO13 aqueous suspensions, we exposed a large volume of suspension (35 mL) in isopropanol, an organic solvent making possible a more stable suspension than in water. In addition, we used a UV solar simulator more powerful than the climate chamber. Last, the duration of exposure was longer than the 4 days used in photo-aging. Formation of soluble photoproducts was monitored by HPLC-MS and UV absorption. Several peaks were observed on the chromatograms during the first 48 h. The corresponding products either decomposed or reached a maximum yield at that time. Only one compound eluting at 20.1 min was detected in increasing amount, by both UV absorption and mass spectrometry, from the shortest to the longest exposure time (160 h). The retention time and the MS1 mass spectrum were identical to those of the photoproduct detected in octanol extract of PO13 photo-aged in water. Extensive mass spectrometry characterization strongly suggested that the isolated photoproduct was 4((3,3’dichloro-[1,1’biphenyl]−4yl)diazenyl)−5methyl-2phenyl-2,4dihydro-3Hpyrazol-3one (DCBP, Fig. 3a), which would arise from the cleavage of one of the diazo groups with loss of one of the 5-methyl-2phenyl-2,4-dihydro-3-H-pyrazol-3-one units of PO13 (Fig. 4). As explained above, the photoproduct exhibited a mass spectrum with a isotopic distribution typical of a molecule bearing 2 chlorine atoms (one ion at m/z = 423 and one at m/z = 425 in 1.5:1 ratio). The MS2 and MS3 mass spectra (Supplementary Information Fig. S5), were in agreement by the fragmentation of the photoproduct into of a triazolo-cinnoloin derivative upon loss of aniline and of dichloro-dibenzofuran after loss of the 5-methyl-2-phenyl-pyrazolone unit. It may be added that the UV-visible absorption spectrum of the photoproduct in DMSO exhibited a peak at 418 nm, while the starting PO13 had a maximal absorption at 478 nm. This blue shift is in agreement with the loss of conjugations in the photoproduct.
Toxicological profile of photo-aged PO13 in a keratinocyte model
Effect of photoaging of PO13 on cell viability
HaCaT cells were exposed to photoaged PO13 suspensions or temperature controls at different concentrations for 24 h. At the end of the treatment, cell viability was measured by a MTT assay (Fig. 4a). A significant decrease in HaCaT viability was detected for concentrations larger than 0.3 µg mL−1 for photoaged PO13 (p< 0.01) and 3 µg mL-1 for temperature controls (p < 0.001). A significant lower viability for photoaged PO13 compared to temperature control was only observed at 0.03 µg mL−1 (p < 0.001). It should yet be stressed that, at this concentration, the viabilities were not significantly different from that measured for the vehicle control (1% water in the medium).
HaCaT cells were also treated with the soluble fraction of aged suspensions obtained by 0.2 μm filtration. Cells were exposed for 24 h to increasing concentrations of filtrate corresponding to the various conditions used to test the toxicity of whole PO13 suspensions (Fig. 4b). A statistically significant decrease in cell viability compared to the control was measured for the filtrate of photoaged suspensions at 3 µg mL−1 and 30 µg mL−1, while no effect was observed for the temperature controls. More interestingly, the filtrate of photoaged PO13 suspensions induced a significantly larger loss of viability than the temperature control for the three concentrations larger than 0.3 µg mL-1.
Production of ROS and induction of DNA breaks by photoaged PO13
We did not observe induction of DNA strand breaks by the alkaline Comet assay (Supplementary Information Fig. S3a) upon exposure of HaCaT cells to either the control or photo-aged suspensions, or their filtrates. The potential of PO13 to induce ROS in HaCaT cells was also investigated by CM-H2DCFDA assay (Supplementary Information Fig. S3b). After 4 h treatment, it was not possible to detect an increase in DCF fluorescence intensity with the different tested PO13 concentrations regardless experimental conditions whereas the positive control was able to induce this cellular response.
Impact of aged PO13 on the proteome of HaCaT cells
The impact of photoaged PO13 on the keratinocyte proteome was investigated by global differential proteomics. Seven replicates were used for the vehicle control, 3 for the temperature control and 6 for the photo-aged suspension. Over the 2950 quantified proteins, 2502 proteins were present in at least 80% of the samples for a same condition and were kept for differential analysis. Because the impact of PO13 samples was limited, we did not use a very stringent value for the threshold of significant modulation. The p-value was set at 0.05, which led to a rather high FDR (76.8%). Under these conditions, 73 proteins were identified as modulated by PO13 exposed to simulated sunlight compared to vehicle control. Compared to temperature control, 149 proteins were identified as modulated by photoaged PO13. The dendrogram representing the relative expression of proteins in every sample was not able to cluster samples by experimental condition. The associated heatmap showed that the proteome was not strongly different between the different conditions (Fig. 5). A similar approach was applied to the identification of the putative effects of filtrates of photo-aged suspensions. Five replicates of filtrates-treated cells and 5 replicates of corresponding temperature controls were included. A total of 2481 proteins were quantified in the different samples. Like for the whole suspension, the heatmap did not reveal differences between the treated samples and their controls (Supplementary Information Fig. S4). Nevertheless the differential analysis between the aged samples and their temperature controls led to the identification of 62 differentially expressed proteins (p-value 0.05, FDR = 95.5%).
Among the 149 proteins modulated upon exposure to photo-aged suspensions, biological pathways common to several proteins were identified. Indeed, ASAH1, SPTC2, PGES2 and AGK are involved in lipid metabolism. UMPS, HRPT and APT have a role in pyrimidine and purine metabolism, respectively. They were all three overexpressed in HaCaT cells treated with aged PO13 compared to temperature control. CUL2 and UBR4 involved in protein ubiquitination are also overexpressed (Supplementary Information Table S1). The same pathways were found to be modulated when cells were exposed to the filtrates.
Toxicological profile of the PO13 photoproduct DCBP in a keratinocyte model
Toxicological properties of DCBP
HaCaT cells were treated for 24 h with different concentrations of the photoproduct and then, a MTT assay was performed. Compared to vehicle control, HaCaT viability was significantly reduced for concentrations larger than 2 µM (p < 0.01; Fig. 6). At these concentrations, DCBP was also found to significantly induce the production of ROS in HaCaT cells (Fig. 7a). In contrast, it did not induce DNA strand breaks at the tested concentration of 2 µM (Fig. 7b). Harsher conditions were not investigated because of the cytotoxicity must be limited to 20% in the Comet assay.
Modulation of protein expression by DCBP
The proteomics investigation was based on 6 replicates of cells exposed to the solvent control and 6 replicates treated with DCBP. These analyses led to the quantification of 2487 proteins. The heat map exhibited some level of clustering of the solvent controls and the DCBP-treated samples (Supplementary Information Fig. S6). Difference in protein expression was yet limited. Two hundred proteins were modulated by DCBP below the threshold of p < 0.05. Many were underexpressed (156) but with a low foldchange. Other proteins were overexpressed (44). Analysis of pathways for which at least two proteins were modulated showed that several cellular functions were affected by DCBP (Supplementary Information Table S2). In contrast to what was observed with PO13 suspensions, the trend was more at underexpression than overexpression. In addition to the metabolism of lipids, pyrimidines and proteins impacted by PO13, additional pathways were modulated by the photoproduct, namely gluconeogenesis and metabolic activities. An impact of DCBP on metabolism was shown by the modulation of the expression of CYP450 monooxygenases (Fig. 8). CP1A1, which was hardly detectable in controls, was heavily expressed in the presence of DCBP, leading to a fold change of more than 640. Similarly, CP1B1, exhibited a fold change of more than 130 in DCBP-treated HaCaT cells compared to the solvent control. The p value was below 10−8 for both proteins. We also analyzed the proteomics data in order to identify the most impacted cellular localizations (Table 1). A large number of proteins exhibiting modulated expression were found in mitochondria, either in the respiratory chain or the nucleoid.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Tattooing is a growing trend around the word, especially in industrialized countries. From one country to another, the prevalence is estimated to range from 11.7 to 31.5% in the overall population. Tattooing consists in the injection of inks containing pigments into the dermis, just below the epidermaldermal junction. The amount of pigment injected in the skin has been estimated to be between 0.60 and 9.42 mg cm[−2 . Pigments are insoluble particles that provide the persistent tints to the tattoo. The long lifetime of tattoo is explained by the internalization of pigments by dermal macrophages. This process, which lasts overtime by a release-recapture cycle at each macrophage death, allows the pigments to be permanently maintained in the dermis. Pigments may be black, white or colored depending on their chemical nature. Many mineral pigments based on heavy metals (e.g. cadmium) have been used in the past and are now banned because of toxicity issues. Colored pigments are now mostly organic compounds, such as polycyclic and azo pigments. The recent European Union legislation about tattoo pigments has banned, based on toxicological considerations, the sale of tattoo inks containing azo pigments and some organometallic ones like Pigment blue 15:3, a copper phthalocyanine. Yet, their use remains an issue; because of the persistence of tattoos made before the enforcement of the regulation and because of the use of unapproved inks in some tattooing studios.
Numerous studies have been devoted to the immediate deleterious effects of tattooing such as inflammation. In contrast, only few information are available on the longterm or permanent toxicity of organic pigments for the skin. This is yet mandatory for products aimed at remaining for years and decades in tissues. Several aspects have to be considered. Possible adverse reactions include allergy or phototoxicity. Indeed, clinical cases of allergic reaction in tattoos containing organic pigments have been reported several times. They can occur from immediately up to 7 years after tattooing, and some of these cutaneous reactions follow UV exposure. In a study on tattooed sunbathers, Hutton et al.noticed that 20% of them had suffered of sun-related symptoms in their tattooed skin. Other consequences of sun exposure of tattoos is the photosensitizing properties of some of their impurities, like benzo[g, h,i]perylene in black pigments. Another important consequence could also be cutaneous carcinogenesis. Today, there is no proven link between skin cancer and tattooed skin. However, some clinical cases of malignant melanoma and keratinocytic carcinoma, including squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and basal cell carcinoma (BCC), in tattooed people have been reported, although some authors consider them as coincidental regarding the weak occurrence of these cases in tattooed population. Nevertheless, Leijs et al. have published a case series of six tattooed patients with skin malignancies. They noticed that the patients were younger compared to typical clinical cases reported in epidemiological data.
The biochemical and molecular bases of potential toxicological effects of tattoo pigments are also poorly investigated. This is yet a major issue since pigments are internalized in macrophages and are only shortly free in the dermis during the macrophagic release-recapture process. One possible toxicological pathway could be the degradation of pristine pigments into smaller size particles or low molecular weight soluble compounds that could freely diffuse from the dermis and reach other sites in the body, such as the epidermis where keratinocytes are the predominant cell population. Such a process could be biologically relevant as some studies indicate that azo pigments could be cleaved by light into potential hazardous compounds. Moreover, Sepehri et al.have shown blood distribution of pigments in tattooed mice by demonstrating particles deposition in the liver, more precisely in the Kupffer cells. Experiments involving phthalocyanine pigments also led to the observation of release of toxic degradation products.
One possible degradation mechanism could be driven by the oxidative and acidic conditions encountered in the phagolysosomal environment of dermal macrophages. This has been observed for some inorganic pigments, for example by Devcic et al.who highlighted their degradation by cultured macrophages. Another mechanism could be the combined action of longterm chemical aging and photochemical processes triggered by solar visible and ultraviolet radiations. Indeed, light could alter azo pigments such as Pigment yellow 74 (PY74) and Pigment red 22 (PR22). Two studies have demonstrated that these pigments, when dissolved in organic solvents, could be degraded by simulated or natural solar light exposure. More interestingly, Engel et al.observed a significant decomposition of PR22 in tattooed SKH-1 mice after a 32 day exposure to simulated solar radiation. Evidence were also provided for the sunlight-induced decomposition of Acid Red 87.
In the present work, we explored the toxicological consequences of photoaging of the organic diazo pigment Pigment orange 13 (PO13, C.I. 21110, CAS. No. 3520–72 − 7). A study carried out by Hauri and Hohlhad previously revealed photodegradation of an ink containing PO13 after exposure to visible light for 7 days. Otherwise, no study was carried out to assay toxicity of PO13 after aging by solar light in a keratinocyte or any human cell models. Our first objective was thus to characterize the potential modifications of physicochemical properties of PO13 upon exposure to simulated sunlight. Then, the second objective aimed at investigating differences in the toxicological profile of PO13 after photo-aging in a well-characterized keratinocytes model, the HaCaT cell line. The third part focused on the characterization and the toxicological assessment in HaCaT cells of the major PO13 photoproduct. In the two latter parts, in vitro toxicological assays were combined with mass spectrometry-based differential proteomic analysis to gather wide information on the cellular responses.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD056061 and 10.6019/PXD056061. Other data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper and its Supplementary Information, or will be sent on request to the corresponding author.
Declarations
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material.