PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Alzheimer's disease
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Proline-rich region 2; Alzheimer’s disease; Tau missorting; Tau isoforms; Synaptic tau; Cdc42; Rab11

ABSTRACT:
Tau pathology is a major hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related diseases, called tauopathies. While Tau is normally enriched in axons, somatodendritic missorting of the microtubule-associated protein is a key event in early disease development. Tau missorting promotes synaptic loss and neuronal dysfunction but the mechanisms underlying both normal axonal sorting and pathological missorting remain unclear. Interestingly, the disease-associated Tau brain isoforms show different axodendritic distribution, but the distinct role of these isoforms in health and disease largely unknown. Here, we aimed to identify domains or motifs of Tau and cellular binding partners that are required for efficient axonal Tau sorting, and we studied the differences of the isoform-specific Tau interactome. By using human MAPT-KO induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived glutamatergic neurons, we analyzed the sorting behavior of more than 20 truncated or phosphorylation-mutant Tau constructs, and we used TurboID-based proximity labelling and proteomics to identify sorting- and isoform-specific Tau interactors. We found that efficient axonal Tau sorting was independent of the N-terminal tail, the C-terminal repeat domains, and the general microtubule affinity of Tau. In contrast, the presence of the proline-rich region 2 (PRR2) was necessary for successful sorting. Our interactome data revealed peroxisomal accumulation of the Tau N-terminal half, while axonal Tau interacted with the PP2A activator HSP110. When we compared the interactome of 0N3R- and 0N4R-Tau, we observed specific interactions of 0N4R-Tau with regulators of presynaptic exocytosis and postsynaptic plasticity, which are partially associated with AD pathogenesis, such as members of the CDC42 pathway and the RAB11 proteins, while 0N3R-Tau bound to MAP4 and other cytoskeletal elements. In sum, our study postulates that axonal Tau sorting relies on the PRR2 domain but not on microtubule affinity, and unravels a potential isoform-specific role in synaptic function and AD-related dysfunction.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Axonal Tau sorting depends on the PRR2 domain  and 0N4R-specific interactions hint at distinct roles of Tau isoforms in synaptic plasticity

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
All samples were analyzed by the CECAD proteomics facility on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: initial 3 % solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile), 3-5% B within 1.0 min, 5-30% solvent B within 65.0 min, 30-50% solvent B within 13.0 min, 50-95% solvent B within 1.0 min, followed by washing and column equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and 20 ms maximum injection time. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 10.0 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 2.2.0.0, Tyanova et al. NatProt) using default parameters against the Uniprot canonical human database (UP5640, downloaded 05.08.2020) with the match-between-runs option enabled between replicates. Follow-up analysis was done in Perseus 1.6.15 (Tyanova et al. NatMet). Protein groups were filtered for potential contaminants and insecure identifications. Remaining IDs were filtered for data completeness in at least one group and missing values imputed by sigma downshift (0.3 σ width, 1.8 σ downshift). Afterwards, FDR-controlled two-sided t-tests were performend.