PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Hela cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Man1; Ctdnep; Tgfbeta; Smad; Nuclear envelope

ABSTRACT:
Cytokines of the TGF-β superfamily control essential cell fate decisions via receptor regulated SMAD (R-SMAD) transcription factors. Ligand-induced R-SMAD phosphorylation in the cytosol triggers their activation and nuclear accumulation. We determined how R-SMADs are inactivated by dephosphorylation in the cell nucleus to counteract signaling by TGF-β superfamily ligands. We showed that R-SMAD dephosphorylation is mediated by an inner nuclear membrane associated complex containing the scaffold protein MAN1 and the CTDNEP1/NEP1R1 phosphatase. Structural prediction, domain mapping and mutagenesis revealed that MAN1 binds independently to the CTDNEP1/NEP1R1 phosphatase and R-SMADs to promote their inactivation by dephosphorylation. Disruption of this complex led to nuclear accumulation of R-SMADs and aberrant signaling, even in the absence of TGF-β ligands. These findings establish CTDNEP1/NEP1R1 as the elusive R-SMAD phosphatase and reveal the mechanistic basis for TGF-β signaling inactivation and how this process is disrupted by disease-associated MAN1 mutations.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Suppression of TGF-β/SMAD signaling by an inner nuclear membrane phosphatase complex

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and each sample was independently analysed on an Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quandrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides (1 µg) were injected on a PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (300 μm ID × 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray nanoLC C18 column (75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1. Solvent A was water containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. The gradient used for analysis of proteome samples was as follows: solvent B was maintained at 3% for 5 min, followed by an increase from 3 to 35% B in 60 min, 35-90% B in 1 min, maintained at 90% B for 4 min, followed by a decrease to 3% in 0.5 min and equilibration at 2% for 10 min. The Q Exactive HF was operated in positive-ion data-dependent mode. The precursor ion scan (full scan) was performed in the Orbitrap in the range of 400-1,500 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 106 and an ion injection time of 50 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired in high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) mode with a normalised collision energy of 25 and resolution 15,000 using a Top 20 method, with a target AGC of 2 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MS/MS triggering threshold was set at 5 × 103 and the dynamic exclusion of previously acquired precursor was enabled for 45 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
All spectra were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 69 and searched against a SwissProt homo sapiens fasta file (containing 42,371 database entries with isoforms, downloaded on 2021/02/24). Peak list generation was performed within MaxQuant and searches were performed using default parameters and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The enzyme specificity was set to consider fully tryptic peptides, and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was allowed as a fixed modification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with a minimum ratio count of two. A protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% was employed in MaxQuant and the minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids accepted.  
The search output files were further processed in R (version 4.4.0). First, all known contaminants, including bovine proteins from the cell medium, keratins from the researchers’ skin and dust, as well as trypsin from enzymatic digestion were removed from the protein list. Subsequently, proteins that were matched to the decoy database were removed from the list. Further, proteins identified by no unique peptide match and proteins that were only identified by a modified site were removed according to standard proteomics practices. A new protein groups column was generated from the Protein ID column that contained solely the protein name for simplified labelling in the visualization. The intensity values form the filtered protein search output were log2 transformed and median normalized. In Perseus (version 2.0.3.1), proteins with 65% valid values across replicates per group were used and missing values imputed with “replace missing values from normal distribution” for statistical testing. A two sided t-test was performed and the results plotted as volcano plot in R (significance cut-off: -1 and 1 log2 fold change, –log10 adj.p-value = 1.3). 