PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Top-abpp;npspyne;npssyne;dpdsyne

ABSTRACT:
We sought to identify exact modified cysteine sites by Se-probes using TOP-ABPP strategy and the acid cleavable azide-biotin tag was used to enrich and release the modified peptides for LC-MS/MS analys

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification of sulfhydryl-containing proteins and further evaluation of the selenium- tagged redox homeostasis-regulating proteins:Identification of cysteine sites using tandem orthogonal proteolysis strategy (TOP-ABPP).

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell lysates (1.5 mL, 2 mg/mL) were labeled with Se-probes (100 μM) and allowed to incubate at 25 °C for 1 hour. The proteomes were then treated with 200 μM DADPS-Biotin-Azide, 1 mM CuSO4, 100 μM TBTA ligand, and 1 mM TCEP for 1 h. After that, the proteomes were precipitated with methanol/chloroform, resuspended in 1.2% SDS/PBS, and diluted to 0.2% SDS/PBS. The samples were then subjected to streptavidin enrichment, and on-bead trypsin digestion according to the published TOP-ABPP protocol. The reducing reagents such as DTT or TCEP should not be used in the bead-mixtures. The trypsin digest was separated from the beads through 1400g centrifuge, and the beads were washed with 3 × 300 μL PBS, 3 × 300μL H2O. The Si-O bond cleavage was carried out by incubating the beads with 3 × 100 μL 5% formic acid for 1 h at room temperature with gentle rotation. The supernatant was collected and stored at -20 °C

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY nLC 1200 system. The peptides were separated using an increasing gradient of aqueous acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in H2O, and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. The flow rate was 3 μL/min for loading and 0.3 μL/min for eluting. Labeled peptide samples were loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ES900) packed with 15 cm × 3 μm C18 resin. Under the positive-ion mode, full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range from 350 to 2000 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with mass resolution of 70 000. MS/ MS fragmentation is performed in a data-dependent mode, in which the 20 most intense ions were selected from each full-scan mass spectrum for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 using the Orbitrap analyzer. Other important parameters: isolation window, 1.6 m/z units; default charge, 2+; normalized collision energy, 28%; maximum IT, 50 ms; dynamic exclusion, 20.0 s.