PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cerebrospinal fluid
diseases: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
instruments: FAIMS compensation voltage; Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Human; Lc-msms; Peptidomics; Als; Csf; Neurodegeneration; Biomarker

ABSTRACT:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease and novel biomarkers are needed. We applied mass-spectrometry-based peptidomic analysis in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples of ALS and non-neurodegenerative control patients (Con) from a discovery (n=48) and validation (n=109) cohort for biomarker discovery. We identified 33605 peptides in CSF samples from the discovery cohort. Systematic selection for the best candidates revealed a targeted method with eight peptides derived from seven proteins. In the validation cohort, NFL, MAP1B, MYL1, APOC1 peptides were up-regulated and peptides from CADM3, SCG1 and PENK down-regulated in ALS compared to Con. Combination of all peptides in a logistic regression model led to an area under the curve value of 98% for the discrimination of ALS from controls. Data of the NFL peptide strongly correlated with an established NFL immunoassay (Ella, r=0.97). The peptide biomarker candidates are derived from proteins with different function and their determination with our method provides the opportunity for simultaneous investigation of key processes in ALS and other neurodegenerative diseases.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Peptidomic analysis of CSF reveals new biomarker candidates for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
CSF samples were spiked with a solution containing TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate), TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride), CAA (2-chloroacetamide), and non-human standard peptides. Proteins and peptides were reduced and alkylated by incubating the sample for 10 minutes at 95°C and 400 rpm. Afterwards, peptides were separated from proteins using molecular weight cut off filter (MWCO). Isolated peptides were purified using STAGE Tips. The purified peptides were dried overnight in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 13.5 µL 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid.

DATA PROCESSING:
The PEAKS software (v. PEAKS Studio 10.6) was used for peptide identification and quantification. The parent and fragment mass error tolerances were set to 15.0 ppm and 0.02 Da. The settings for enzyme was “none”, the digestion mode was “unspecific” and we searched for peptides with a length up to 65 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. A maximum of five PTMs per peptide were allowed. The human reference proteome from UniProt was used for peptide identification with a peptide and protein FDR of 1%. In the quantitative analysis of screening data the mass error tolerance was set to 15.0 ppm and FDR to 1%.