PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Human a431 cells; Sac1; Auxin inducible degradation

ABSTRACT:
Sac1 is a conserved phosphoinositide phosphatase, whose loss-of-function compromises cell and organism viability. Here, we employed acute auxin-inducible Sac1 degradation to identify its immediate downstream effectors in human cells. Most of Sac1 was is degraded in ~1 h, paralleled by increased PI(4)P and decreased cholesterol in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) during the following hour, and superseded by Golgi fragmentation, impaired glycosylation, and selective degradation of TGN proteins by ~4 h. The TGN disintegration resulted from its acute deacidification caused by disassembly of the Golgi V-ATPase. Mechanistically, Sac1 mediated TGN membrane composition maintained an assembly-promoting conformation of the V0a2 subunit. Key phenotypes of acute Sac1 degradation were are recapitulated in human differentiated trophoblasts, causing processing defects of chorionic gonadotropin, in line with loss-of-function intolerance of the human SACML1 gene. Collectively, our findings reveal that the assembly of the Golgi V-ATPase is controlled by the TGN membrane via Sac1 fuelled lipid exchange.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Sac1 degron A431 cells 3h DMSO vs 3h IAA

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed at the Turku Proteomics Facility, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, supported by Biocenter Finland. Quantitative proteomic analysis of 3 h DMSO and 5 µM cvxIAA treated A431 Sac1-degron cells was performed using biological triplicates. Cell samples were lysed, and proteins were denatured with 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. Samples were reduced with 10 mM D,L-dithiothreitol and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were digested overnight with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). After digestion, peptides were desalted with a SepPak C18 96-well plate (Waters), evaporated to dryness and stored at -20°C. Digested peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and peptide concentration was determined with a NanoDrop device (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionization Tandem Mass Spectrometric (LC-ESI-MS/MS) analysis was performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Easy-nLC1200) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. 800 ng peptides samples were loaded and separated inline on a 25 cm C18 column (75 μm x 25 cm, ReproSil-Pur 1.9 μm 120 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) heated to 60°C. The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) or acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). A 170 min gradient was used to elute peptides (95 min from 5% to 21% solvent B followed by 75 min from 21% to 36% solvent B). Samples were analyzed by a data independent acquisition (DIA) method. MS data was acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 4.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In a FAIMS-DIA method a duty cycle contained two compensation voltages (-50V and -70V) with one full scan (400 -1000 m/z) and 30 DIA MS/MS scans covering the mass range 400 – 1000 with variable width isolation windows in each of the compensation voltages.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data analysis consisted of protein identifications and label free quantifications of protein abundances. Data was analyzed by Spectronaut software (Biognosys, version 15.6.2). DirectDIA approach was used to identify proteins and label-free quantifications were performed with MaxLFQ. Main data analysis parameters in Spectronaut: - Enzyme: Trypsin/P - Missed cleavages: 2 - Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (Peptides were alkylated with iodoacetamide) - Variable modifications: Acetyl (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) - Protein database: Swiss-Prot 2021_04 Homo sapiens - Precursor FDR Cutoff: 0.01 - Protein FDR Cutoff: 0.01 - Quantification MS level: MS2 - Quantification type: Area under the curve within integration boundaries for each targeted ion - Normalization: Local normalization (Based on RT dependent local regression model) - Differential abundance analysis: Unpaired Student’s t-test with combined MS1 + MS2 statistical model and multiple-testing correction of the p-values with Benjamini-Hochberg method (q-values).