PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brain
diseases: Disease
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Tmt-lc/lc-ms/ms; Ad; Mdk; Mouse; Detergent-insoluble

ABSTRACT:
Mass spectrometry analysis of insoluble proteome from 5xFAD/Mdk-KO mouse brain. This study examines the insoluble protein fraction, focusing on aggregation-prone proteins including Aβ and its associated proteins. The data reveals significant accumulation of Aβ-correlated proteins and microglial components in the absence of MDK, supporting its protective role against amyloid pathology in Alzheimer's disease.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Profiling of the detergent-insoluble proteome of the cortical brain tissues by TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mouse cortices were lysed in a low-salt buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4) containing 1× protease inhibitors and 1× PhosphoSTOP at a 10:1 (v/m) ratio. Lysates (100 μl) were mixed with 900 μl of 1.1× sarkosyl buffer (1x: 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2% sarkosyl, 10% glycerol, 1× protease inhibitors, 1× PhosphoSTOP), followed by sonication (10 s, 1 s on/1 s off, 20% power). Lysates were centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 min, and the supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 55,000 rpm for 1 h at 4°C. The insoluble pellet was collected for proteomics analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw MS data were searched against protein database by the JUMP software (v1.13.4)80, which utilizes both pattern matching and de novo tag scoring to improve the sensitivity and specificity.TMT report ion intensities were normalized and summarized for each protein.

METHODS:
Methods
All experiments performed in this study comply with all relevant ethical regulations. All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at St Jude Children’s Research Hospital.
Statistics and reproducibility.
Sample sizes were not predetermined using statistical methods; however, they closely resembled those reported in previous publications. While the assumption of normal data distribution was made, formal testing for normality was not analyzed. Variances were assessed using the F-test. An unpaired Student’s t-test was used for comparisons between two groups with equal variance, while an unpaired Welch’s t-test was used for groups with unequal variance. For proteomics data, p-values were calculated by moderated t-test in the limma package, followed by false discovery rate analysis by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Animals were utilized whenever available without randomization. Outliers were removed using the Dixon’s Q-test. The investigators were blinded to genotype information during the quantitation of immunostaining for plaque and microglia.
Human brain samples.
Human postmortem brain tissue samples (frontal gyrus) for Western blot analysis were provided by the Brain and Body Donation Program at Banner Sun Health Research Institute. Clinical and pathological diagnoses were based on the established criteria.
Mouse model.
All mice (C57BL/6J) were housed under a 12-h light: 12-h dark cycle at 22–25 °C and 40%−60% humidity. Mdk knockout mice were generated using CRISPR-Cas9 technology to partially delete coding region in the genome to cause frame shift mutation. Briefly, dual gRNAs were designed with in silico off-target analysis to determine highly unique spacer sequence with at least 3 bp of mismatch to any other site in the mouse genome. In addition, we also consider the targeted region covered among all isoforms, and select CAGE257.MDK.g2 (5’-UGCGGCAUGGGCUUCCGCGA- 3’) and g14 (5’-GCACCUUGCAAUGGACGCGC-3’). Precomplexed ribonucleic proteins (RNPs) consisting of 25 ng/μl of each sgRNA (Synthego) and 50 ng/ μl SpCas9 mRNA (Trilink) were injected into the cytoplasm of C57BL/6J fertilized zygotes and transferred to CD-1 pseudo-pregnant fosters. Resulting animals were genotyped by targeted next generation sequencing using primers CAGE257.F: 5’-GTGAGGCAGGCCGTGTGACCAAGTG-3’ and CAGE257.R:5’-TGCAGTCGGCTGATGGGAGAGTGGC-3’ and analyzed using CRIS.py. Founder animals with out-of-frame mutations were backcrossed to C57BL/6J mice for two generations. A founder carrying a 23 bp deletion in exon 3 was selected for the study. Genotyping of the knockout mice was carried out by PCR with primers specific for WT (F: 5’-CTTCCGCGAGGGTACCTG −3’, R: 5’-TATTCGCTGACCTTTGGTCTT −3’) and the Mdk knockout (F: 5’-GCACGCCATGTCCTTAACTTT-3’, R: 5’-TGGGTCTGGGCCCATG-3’). FAD mice (B6.Cg-Tg(APPSwFlLon,PSEN1*M146L*L286V)6799Vas/Mmjax) were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (MMRRC_034848-JAX) and underwent backcrossing with C57BL/6J for at least 10 generations. FAD/Mdk−/− (FAD/KO) mice were generated by crossing with FAD/Mdk+/− with Mdk+/− mice. In mouse experiments, similar numbers of male and female animals were utilized.
Western blotting.
Protein lysates underwent separation via 4–20% Tris-Glycine gel and transfer to 0.22 μm nitrocellulose membranes. Blots underwent a 1 h blocking with 3% BSA for MDK or 5% skim milk for other targets. The following primary antibodies were incubated overnight at 4°C: anti-mouse MDK (1:1000, sheep polyclonal, R&D, AF-7769), anti-Aβ (1:1000, mouse monoclonal, clone 82E1, IBL, 10323), and anti-β-tubulin (1:5000, rat monoclonal, clone YOL1/34, abcam, ab6161). After three 5-min washes, blots were exposed to secondary antibodies conjugated with HRP (1:40,000, Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 1 h at 21 °C, followed by another three 5-min washes. Chemiluminescence was developed by using either the SuperSignal West Pico PLUS or Femto substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and detected by ChemiDoc system (Bio-Rad).
Recombinant MDK expression and purification from E. coli.
The MDK construct (22–143 aa) was overexpressed in BL21 (DE3) Rosetta 2 cells. A single colony was used to cultivate a starter culture overnight. Subsequently, 10 ml of the starter culture was used to inoculate 1 L of 2XYT medium containing 50 μg/ml kanamycin and 35 μg/ml chloramphenicol. The inoculation took place at 37°C with agitation at 220 rpm until the cell density reached an OD600 of approximately 0.8.Protein overexpression was induced by adding 0.5 mM isopropyl β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), and the culture was further incubated at 18°C for 16 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, and the cell pellet was frozen at −80°C until use. The pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol) supplemented with an EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablet (Roche).
Cell disruption was performed using a cell disruptor (Constant Systems Ltd.) at 20.0 kPSI pressure in two rounds of lysis. The resulting lysate was cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C and subsequently applied to a gravity column following a 30-min incubation with pre-equilibrated Ni-NTA resin at 4°C. The column was washed with 10 column volumes (CV) of wash buffer A (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 12.5 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol), followed by 10 CV of wash buffer B (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol). The protein was eluted with buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol.
Eluted fractions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE using a 4–20% gel. Subsequently, the elution fractions were combined, and the His-tag was cleaved from the protein using tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease overnight at 4°C. The cleaved protein was further purified by size-exclusion chromatography using a Superdex 75 16/600 column (Cytiva) equilibrated with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, and 5% glycerol. Finally, the protein fractions were pooled, concentrated to the desired concentration, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C for subsequent experiments.
Recombinant MDK expression and purification from mammalian 293 cells.
The MDK gene with an Igκ secretion signal and followed by a His tag, was cloned into the pcDNA 3.4 vector. Recombinant protein was expressed in Expi293F cells (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A14527) through transient transfection using the ExpiFectamine™ 293 Transfection Kit. For the transfection, Expi293F cells at a density of 3 × 106 cells/ml were treated with 1 mg of DNA plasmid per liter of cells. The transfected cells were incubated at 37°C in an orbital shaker set to 140 rpm with 5% CO2 for ~24 h. Then the cells were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 15 mins, and the supernatant was collected. This supernatant was applied to pre-equilibrated Ni-NTA resin (Qiagen) and incubated for 1 h at 4°C. The incubated resin was then collected by centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 10 mins at 4°C and washed with 10 column volumes (CV) of wash buffer A (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 12.5 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol), followed by 10 CV of wash buffer B (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol). The protein was eluted using a solution of 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, and 5% glycerol. The eluted fractions were analyzed by loading onto a 4–20% SDS-PAGE gel. The MDK-containing fractions were pooled, and the His tag was cleaved from the protein overnight at 4°C using tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease. The cleaved protein was then further purified by size exclusion chromatography utilizing a Superdex 75 10/300 Increase column (Cytiva), which was pre-equilibrated with 20 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.2, 500 mM NaCl, and 5% glycerol. Finally, the protein fractions collected from the column were pooled, concentrated, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C for subsequent experiments.
MS analysis of recombinant MDK and Ub proteins.
Purified MDK (350 μg/mL, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) was alkylated with 2 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at RT in the dark to block any potential free thiols. The proteins were then desalted using C18 StageTips (Thermo Scientific) and dried before being re-dissolved in 5% FA for LC-MS analysis. Ubiquitin was prepared in 5% FA directly.
LC-MS acquisition was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to an Q Exactive HF Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were separated on a C18 column (75 μm × 20 cm) packed with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; Mobile phase B consisted of solvent A plus 65% ACN. The gradient program varied from 20 to 30 min for different proteins. MS data were acquired with a full MS scan with m/z range of 410–1200 or 410–2000 for different proteins, all at R = 240000 (m/z = 200). The resulting raw data were deconvoluted using the Thermo BioPharma Finder Software to obtain the isotopic mass of the intact protein.
For bottom-up analysis, the same samples were alkylated with 2 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at RT in dark. Subsequently, the proteins were digested in two rounds with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:10 (w/w) at 21 °C for at least 8 h. The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 Stage Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). LC-MS/MS acquisition was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were redissolved in 5% FA and loaded onto a C18 column (75 μm × 20 cm) packed with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.2% formic acid and 5% DMSO, while mobile phase B consisted of solvent A plus 65% ACN. LC separation was performed with a 5–50% buffer B gradient in 25 min. MS analysis was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a full MS scan between m/z 410–1200 at R = 60000 (m/z = 200), followed by 10 MS/MS scans at R = 60000 (m/z = 200) with an isolation width of 1.0 m/z. The AGC target for MS and MS/MS scan were set to 3 × 106 and 1 × 106, respectively, with maximum injection time of 50 ms and 110 ms. The precursors with charge states of 2 to 7 were selected for HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy set to 30%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 10 sec. All samples were analyzed in technical triplicates.
For the identification of disulfide bonds, the raw data were analyzed using pLink 2.0 software (version 2.3.11) with the following parameters: Cross-linker, SS; Database, FASTA file constructed based on the MDK sequence; Precursor tolerance, 10 ppm; Fragment tolerance, 10 ppm; Number of missed cleavages, 0; Peptide mass, [200, 6000]; Peptide length, [2, 60]; Fixed modification, carbamidomethylation for cysteines; Filter tolerance, ± 10 ppm; FDR, 1% at PSM level. Specifically, the identification of Cys17 and Cys25 containing cross-linked peptides were manually checked, as peptide sequence between Cys17 and Cys25 cannot be cleaved by trypsin. This may allow for the formation of two disulfide bonds among 3 peptides, such as the EGTC41GAQTQR–GGPGSEC17AEWAWGPC25TPSSK–C50R, which could not be identified by pLink2. Peptide quantification was performed using the peak area of precursors with the highest intensity. Data were further normalized using the intensity of one trypsin peptide “VATVSLPR”. The top-five most abundant disulfide bonds were shown in figures.
ThT fluorescence assay.
Aβ40 and Aβ42 (rPeptide, #A-1153–1, and #A-1163–2) with a purity of > 97%. Each peptide vial was suspended in 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP), incubated for an h to disperse any preexisting aggregates. Further, these samples were aliquoted and carefully dried in a nitrogen stream and stored in −80°C. Aliquots of purified Aβ species were dissolved in 10 mM NaOH to a concentration of 2 mg/ml followed by 10 min cooling and sonication in an ice water bath for 1 min. The concentration of the final monomeric sample was quantified by nanodrop at 280 nm. MDK protein purified from E. coli and 293 cells was dialyzed overnight in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5 and final concentration was determined by absorbance measurements at 280 nm. Further, the freshly dissolved Aβ peptides were diluted to 5 μM in absence and presence of different concentrations of purified MDK containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 buffer containing 20 μM Thioflavin. 100 μl of solution was added into 96-well half area, solid bottom, clear, sterile, microtiter plates and sealed with sealing tape to prevent evaporation. All kinetic experiments were performed at 37°C under quotient conditions at every 5 min in a Clariostar plate reader (BMG Labtech) using an excitation and emission wavelengths of 440 and 480 nm respectively. All these assays were performed in three replicates. The Aβ peptides were diluted to 5 μM at a final concentration in absence and presence of human Ub protein (5 and 10 μM, Bio-Techne R & D systems, U-100H-10M) to monitor aggregation kinetics as described above. Aggregation kinetics of MDK and Ub at different concentrations in the same buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl) with fixed ThT concentrations (20 μM) were also recorded.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy.
All CD spectra were recorded on a JASCO-1500 Spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 195 – 250 nm with a step size of 0.1 nm, 1 nm bandwidth, and a scan speed of 50 nm/min. Aβ40/42 samples with a final monomeric concentration of 10 μM were incubated in the absence and presence of MDK (1:2) in a similar buffer. The samples were incubated at 37 °C and studied in a time course (up to 24 h), where a stable plateau value was reached. A spectrum of buffer was recorded separately and subtracted from the spectra of Aβ40/42. Spectra of MDK protein were recorded separately and subtracted from the spectra of Aβ and MDK, and the CD signal was given as ellipticity. Aβ (10 μM) samples incubated in absence and presence of ubiquitin (1:2) were also recorded under identical conditions. Moreover, CD spectra of MDK and ubiquitin were independently recorded at different time intervals and subtracted from their respective buffers. For each sample, the average of five scans was recorded and subsequently smoothed using Savitzky-Golay smoothing method and reported.
Negative stain transmission electron microscopy.
Aβ species alone and reactions involving Aβ together with 10 μM of MDK samples from the kinetic experiments were collected at the endpoint of the ThT experiments. Additionally, Aβ samples, both in the absence and presence of 10 μM of ubiquitin, were collected at the endpoint of the ThT experiments. 400-mesh copper grids (CF400-Cu grids, Electron Microscopy Sciences) were plasma cleaned with an Ar/O2 gas mixture for 10s using Solarus plasma cleaner (Gatan), followed by 5 μl of sample. The samples were allowed to absorb for 1 min before blotting away the excess liquid, followed by rinsing with Milli Q water and subsequent staining using three successive applications of 2% uranyl acetate. The last round of stain application was allowed to sit for 1 min before blotting away the excess stain. The grids were air-dried prior to imaging using a 120 kV Talos L120C TEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a CETA detector (TFS).
Immunogold negative-stain electron microscopy.
Extraction of Aβ filaments was performed as in the previous report. Aβ filaments were deposited on glow-discharged 400 mesh formvar/carbon coated copper grids (EM Sciences CF400-Cu) for 40 s. Subsequently, the grids were blocked for 10 min with 1% BSA in PBS and incubated with anti-MDK (1:50, goat polyclonal, Bio-Techne, #AF-258-SP). After rinsing with blocking buffer, the grids were incubated with anti-goat IgG conjugated with 10 nm gold particle (1:20, Sigma), followed with wash and stained with 2% uranyl acetate for 1 min. Images were acquired at 11,000x with a Gatan Orius SC200B CCD detector on a Tecnai G2 Spirit at 120 kV.
NMR HSQC Spectroscopy.
The 15N-labeled Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides (rPeptide, #A-1101–2 and #A-1102–2) were dissolved in 10 mM NaOH to a concentration of 2 mg/ml, followed by 10 min of cooling and 1 min of sonication in an ice water bath. After aliquoting on ice, the samples were stored in a −80°C freezer. Subsequently, 10 μM of the 15N-labeled Aβ42 and Aβ40 peptides were incubated with 0, 5, and 10 μM MDK in low-binding tubes (Eppendorf, #0030108434) at 37°C for 24 and 48 h, respectively. In addition, for control experiments Aβ42 and Aβ40, samples were incubated independently in the absence and presence of ubiquitin (10 μM) at 37°C for 24 and 48 h, respectively. The NMR spectra of all these samples including 10 μM monomeric Aβ species, were acquired on Bruker Avance 600 MHz or 800 MHz at 278K. The spectrometers are equipped with a triple-resonance cryoprobe, and the data were processed in NMRPipe. and analyzed using NMRFAM-SPARKY. The backbone resonance assignment of Aβ40 was taken from BMRB (ID: 17795). Binding of MDK to the 15N-labeled Aβ40 and Aβ42 was investigated using two-dimensional (2D) [1H-15N] so fast HMQC spectrum recorded either with 32 scans or 128 scans with an interscan delay of 0.2 s. The intensity of the peaks from different spectra was quantified, normalized with respect to the highest peak and used in analyzing the data.
Preparation of Sarkosyl-soluble and -insoluble proteins from mouse brain.
The analysis procedure was adapted from a previously published method. Mouse cortices were lysed in a low-salt buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1× protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 10:1 (v/v) ratio), and then mixed with a Sarkosyl-containing buffer (10-fold dilution) for differential extraction. For ELISA analysis, a stringent buffer was used to enrich for Aβ fibrils (50 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1.0% Triton X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Sarkosyl, 10% glycerol, 1× protease inhibitors). For proteomics analysis, Sarkosyl was reduced to 0.2% to retain the proteins associated with Aβ fibrils. Lysates were centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 min to remove cell debris, and the supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 55,000 rpm for 1 h at 4°C. The final supernatant was collected as Sarkosyl-soluble fraction, and the pellet was collected and solubilized by a urea-containing buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea, and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate) as Sarkosyl-insoluble fraction.
ELISA analysis.
Aβ levels in the Sarkosyl-soluble and insoluble fractions of mouse brains were measured using human Aβ40 and Aβ42 ELISA kits (Invitrogen, KHB3481 and KHB3441). Briefly, the strips in a 96-well plate were pre-coated with a mouse monoclonal Ab specific to the N-terminus of human Aβ. Diluted protein samples (~200-fold Sarkosyl-soluble samples, and ~20,000-fold Sarkosyl-insoluble samples) were added into the plate and incubated overnight at 4°C together with another Ab specific to the C-terminus of human Aβ40 or Aβ42. The bound primary antibody was then detected using an HRP-conjugated secondary antibody, followed by a 1 h incubation at 21 °C. After washing, a chromogenic substrate solution was added and OD450 was measured using a microplate reader (Epoch, BioTek).
Immunohistochemistry.
The staining was modified from previously report. Brain tissue samples were fixed with 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin. 10 μm sagittal sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated and rinsed with water. Antigen retrieval was performed with 10 mM citric buffer (pH 6.0) with boiled water bath for 20 min and cooled down to 21 °C. Endogenous peroxidase activity is further blocked by 1% H2O2 in PBS buffer for 10 min. After rinsed by PBS, sections were then blocked with 5% donkey serum in PBS with 0.3% Triton X-100 (PBST) for 30 min at 21 °C followed with primary antibodies diluted with PBST plus 2% BSA and 0.2% skim milk for overnight at 4°C: anti-human MDK, (goat polyclonal, 1:200, R&D, AF-258-SP), anti-mouse MDK (1:200, sheep polyclonal, R&D, AF-7769), anti-Aβ (1:100, clone 82E1, IBL, 10323), anti-IBA1 (1:400, rabbit polyclonal, Fujifilm Wako, 019–19741). After washing with PBS, sections were then incubated with secondary antibodies (1:500, Jackson ImmunoResearch) for 1 h at 21 °C. For MDK, we used HRP polymer-conjugated secondary antibodies (Vector Laboratories, MP-7405), followed with signal amplification using TSA-Cy5 (1:200, Akoya Biosciences).
For fibrillar plaque staining, X34 dye was used due to its high specificity for binding to β-sheet structures. After antigen retrieval, slides were stained with 1 mM X34 dye for 10 min, followed by washes with 40% ethanol and PBS. For chromogenic immunodetection, biotin-conjugated secondary antibodies were used followed with ABC reaction by Vectastain ABC kit (Vector Laboratories, PK-4000) and developed by 3,3-diaminobenzidine solution (Vector Laboratories, SK-4100). Images were captured by Zeiss Axioscan.Z1 and Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscopy.
Quantitation of Aβ plaques and microglia.
Brain tissues were serially sectioned sagittally at 10 μm thickness. Three slides, each representing every 30th section, were utilized for immunohistochemistry followed with imaging captured with Zeiss Axioscan.Z1. QuPath, an open-source software was carried out for automatic quantitation of density and area of Aβ plaques and microglia in an investigator blinded manner.
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics.
We used an optimized protocol of TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS for deep proteome profiling. Protein samples were lysed by homogenization in the lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5, 8 M urea, and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate), and their concentrations were measured by the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #23227) and confirmed by Coomassie-stained short SDS gels. Quantified protein samples (~0.1 mg per TMT channel) were digested with Lys-C (1:100 w/w, Wako, distributor, #121–05063) for 2 h at 21 °C, followed by dilution to decrease urea to 2 M and trypsin digestion (1:50 w/w, Promega, #V5113) overnight at 21 °C. Cys residues were reduced and alkylated by iodoacetamide. The proteolysis was terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid to 1%. The resulting peptides were desalted with the Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters), TMT-labeled (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #A34808 and A44520), and pooled equally. The pooled peptides were resolved by basic pH reverse phase LC on an XBridge C18 column (3.5 μm beads, 4.6 mm × 25 cm, Waters; buffer A: 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0; buffer B: 95% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0, ~2 h gradient, 40-concatenated fractions collected). Each fraction was analyzed by acidic pH LC-MS/MS (75 μm × ~20 cm, 1.9 μm C18 resin from Dr. Maisch GmbH, buffer A: 0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO; buffer B: buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile, ~1.5 h gradient). The settings of Q Exactive HF Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) included the MS1 scan (~410–1600 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 1 × 106 AGC and 50 ms maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (fixed first mass of 120 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 1 × 105 AGC, ~110 ms maximal ion time, HCD, 32–35% normalized collision energy, ~1.0 m/z isolation window with 0.3 m/z offset, and ~15 s dynamic exclusion). The raw MS data were searched against protein database by the JUMP software (v1.13.4), which utilizes both pattern matching and de novo tag scoring to improve the sensitivity and specificity. A composite target/decoy database was used to evaluate FDR in peptide identification. The protein target database combined downloaded Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL, and UCSC databases (human: 83,955 entries; mouse: 59,423 entries). Search parameters included precursor/product ion mass tolerance (± 10 ppm), full trypticity, static mass shift (TMT tags of 229.16293 304.2071453 and Cys carbamidomethylation of 57.02146 on cysteine), dynamic mass shift (Met oxidation of 15.99492), two maximal miscleavage sites, and three maximal modification sites. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered by matching scores and mass accuracy to limit protein FDR below 1%.
Proteins were quantified from TMT reporter ions based on our published method. Briefly, TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted for each PSM, corrected by isotopic distribution of TMT reagents, filtered to remove poor PSMs (e.g., minimum intensity of 1,000), and adjusted to alleviate sample pooling bias. The relative protein intensities were averaged from all assigned PSMs after removing outliers (e.g., Dixon’s Q-test or generalized extreme Studentized deviate test). Finally, the absolute protein intensities were derived by multiplying the relative intensities by the grand mean of top three abundant PSMs.
Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis (WGCNA) analysis.
The network analysis was performed using WGCNA R package using differentially expressed proteins. First, a signed Pearson correlation matrix was computed based on the protein abundance data in all mouse samples, and transformed into an adjacency matrix by applying a soft-threshold power of 16, according to modified scale-free topology criterion. Hierarchical clustering was then performed using the dynamic tree-cutting algorithm to detect initial modules (clusters), which were subsequently merged at a threshold of 0.1 (indicating high similarity on a 0 to 1 scale). Proteins were ultimately assigned to the cluster with the highest correlation, with any ambiguities resolved through manual curation.
Pathway enrichment by Gene Ontology and KEGG databases.
Pathway enrichment analysis was carried out by the Cluster profiler (v4.10.0) to identify the biological functions of dysregulated genes/proteins in a given dataset. In the analysis, we evaluated whether certain biological processes or pathways were statistically overrepresented in the list of input proteins compared to the background set of mouse proteome. The “enrichment” refers to the increased occurrence of specific functional categories within the input list beyond what would be expected by chance. The analysis was performed using Fisher’s exact test against the Gene Ontology (GO) biological process, molecular function, and cellular component annotations, and KEGG pathway database, separately. The p values derived from Fisher’s exact test were further adjusted into FDR using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for multiple testing. Enriched pathways with FDR < 10% were considered statistically significant.
Quantitation and statistical analysis.
In small-scale analyses, two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test was used for two-sample comparisons (GraphPad Prism 7.0.5). Proteomics analysis for differentially expressed proteins primarily utilized the limma R package (v3.58.1) in several steps: (i) obtain the protein quantification data from MS as described above, (ii) perform a log transformation of the data, (iii) calculate the p values by moderated t-test, and FDR values by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, using limma R package, (iv) calculate the mean for each protein under different conditions and derive the log2(fold change), (v) fit the log2(fold change) data of all proteins to a Gaussian distribution to generate a ‘global’ standard deviation value. Statistically significant changes were typically determined using an FDR cutoff of 5% and a log2 (fold change) cutoff equivalent to two standard deviations.
Extended Data
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

RESULTS:
Results
MDK, a top Aβ-correlated protein in human brain, attenuates Aβ fibril assembly
Although MDK was identified within the senile plaques of AD patients by antibodies last century, its role in AD has not been well investigated. Recent unbiased mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic analyses have highlighted MDK as one of the top upregulated proteins highly correlated with Aβ. To verify these findings, we re-analyzed an AD proteomic dataset comprising 111 human cases, and performed Pearson correlation analyses of all identified proteins with Aβ and tau levels (Supplementary Data 1). Strikingly, among more than 8,400 identified proteins, MDK shows the best correlation with Aβ levels (R = 0.90) (Fig. 1a). In contrast, MDK displays a much weaker correlation with tau (R = 0.29), consistent with the observation that the levels of Aβ and tau do not strongly correlate in the human brain cases (R = 0.26). As a negative control, the abundant housekeeping protein ubiquitin (Ub) exhibits essentially no correlation with Aβ levels (R = 0.05). In the 5xFAD amyloidosis mouse model (referred to as FAD for simplicity), which overexpresses mutant human APP and PSEN1 genes, MDK accumulation was higher in FAD mice than in wild type (WT), as determined by western blotting of cortical brain lysates (Fig. 1b). Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining and immunofluorescent co-staining with Aβ confirmed the presence of MDK in plaque regions of both human brains (frontal cortex, Fig. 1c, d) and the FAD mice (cortex, Fig. 1e, f). These findings not only confirm the strong Aβ-MDK association in human but also suggest the FAD mice as a valuable model for studying the role of MDK in AD pathogenesis.
Given previous reports that MDK protein directly binds to Aβ peptides, we investigated its impact on Aβ fibrillization using recombinant human MDK in multiple biophysical assays. We purified and characterized MDK proteins expressed in mammalian 293 cells and E. coli. MDK is a secretory protein with its mature form containing five disulfide bonds (S-S, Extended Data Fig. 1a, b). The stained SDS gel indicated near homogeneity of recombinant MDK from either source after breaking S-S bonds (Fig. 2a). We then examined the formation of disulfide bonds in the proteins by both top-down and bottom-up mass spectrometry. As expected, the 293-expressed MDK proteins contain all five S-S bonds (Fig. 2b, c), whereas the bacteria-expressed version contains a mixture of three proteoforms with 5, 4, and 3 S-S bonds, with the 5 S-S bond form showing the highest abundance (Fig. 2d). The bottom-up analysis validated that all S-S bonds were formed with the anticipated Cys pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1b, c). We then evaluated the effect of recombinant MDK from both sources on the aggregation of synthetic Aβ40 and Aβ42 peptides. The fibrillization process was monitored by the fluorescence of thioflavin T (ThT), which increases upon binding to amyloid fibrils. Although E. coli-expressed MDK contains mixed disulfide-bonded forms, it effectively inhibited Aβ fibrillization, similar to 293-expressed MDK, albeit with slightly less efficiency (Fig. 2e, f, Extended Data Fig. 1d, e). Given its comparable inhibitory effect, E. coli-expressed MDK was used for subsequent biophysical and structural studies due to its higher yield.
We then fully characterized the aggregation propensity of Aβ peptides with recombinant MDK and the negative control protein Ub using thioflavin T assay, circular dichroism (CD) analysis, electron microscopy imaging, and Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. When incubating Aβ40 peptide (5 μM) alone or with titrated MDK at concentrations ranging from 1 μM to 10 μM (Fig. 3a), Aβ40 displayed a time-dependent increase in fibrillization with a lag phase, growth phase and a final plateau. However, the fibrillization process was retarded by MDK with increased lag time and decreased ThT fluorescence intensity in a dose-dependent manner. We further used the AmyloFit software to determine the effects of MDK on microscopic steps during Aβ aggregation. The best fit revealed that MDK negatively impacts Aβ40 secondary nucleation rate constant (k2) and elongation constant (k+), as both log2(k2) and log2(k+) values showed a linear decrease with increasing MDK concentrations (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 2a, b). At low MDK concentrations (0.03 μM and 0.1 μM), ThT kinetics of Aβ40 remained largely unchanged, whereas at higher concentrations (1 μM and 3 μM), we observed consistent inhibitory effect (Extended Data Fig. 2d).
ThT fluorescence measurements are supported by far-UV CD spectroscopy, which detects the characteristic β-sheet structure of amyloid fibrils formed by peptide self-assembly. Consistently, CD analysis after 24 h incubation confirmed the inhibitory effect of MDK on fibrillization (Fig. 3c). Aβ40 alone transitioned from an unstructured random coil (0 h) to a β-sheet structure with a characteristic minimum around 218 nm (Extended Data Fig. 2f). In contrast, with the addition of MDK, Aβ40 largely retained its unstructured conformation, showing a negative peak near 200 nm, similar to Aβ40 monomers in a time course analysis (Extended Data Fig. 2g). We repeated all ThT and CD analyses using Aβ42 peptide, yielding similar results (Fig. 3d, e, f, Extended Data Fig. 2c, e, h, i). Electron microscopy imaging was used to detect the morphology of amyloid fibrils in Aβ-MDK samples. Amyloid fibrils were observed as end-point aggregates in samples of Aβ40/Aβ42 peptide (5 μM) alone (Fig. 3g, h). In contrast, fibril formation was abolished in the presence of high concentrations of MDK (10 μM, 2:1 molar ratio).
In negative control experiments, we validated highly purified Ub by an SDS gel and MS analysis (Extended Data Fig. 3a, b, c, d) and then performed ThT, CD and imaging experiments under similar conditions. Unlike MDK, Ub did not exhibit a noticeable inhibitory effect on Aβ aggregation (Extended Data Fig. 3e, f, g, h, i, j). Moreover, it is important to note that neither MDK nor Ub alone fibrillated under the same conditions, as confirmed by ThT binding assay, far-UV CD, and negative EM staining (Extended Data Fig. 4a, b, c, d, e, f). Together, these results indicate that midkine effectively inhibits the formation of amyloid fibrils in vitro.
In spite of the inhibitory effect of MDK on Aβ aggregation, we observed that Aβ could still assemble as fibrils in the presence of lower MDK concentrations, such as a 1:1 molar ratio, and subsequently examined the presence of Aβ42 fibrils under this condition using negative stain (Extended Data Fig. 5a). As recombinant Aβ fibrils assemble differently from endogenous Aβ filaments found in human brains, we further investigated the presence of MDK in Aβ fibrils extracted from human AD brains. Immunogold negative stain EM with the MDK antibodies revealed that MDK molecules were clustered around the Aβ fibrils (Extended Data Fig. 5b). Moreover, we utilized the AlphaFold-multimer prediction tool to hypothesize possible Aβ-MDK interacting interfaces, suggesting that the N-terminus of Aβ (residues 1–12) might interact with the C-terminus of MDK (residues 74–80 and 84–89) (Extended Data Fig. 5c, d).
To further confirm the effect of MDK on Aβ fibrillization, we acquired 1H-15N HSQC NMR spectra of 15N-labeled monomeric Aβ40 (10 μM) with MDK titration (0, 5, and 10 μM, Fig. 4a). Reference spectra were acquired prior to incubation, with amide cross peaks assigned to specific residues. After 48 h, a notable disappearance of cross peaks suggested Aβ40 peptide fibrillization. Remarkably, with MDK co-incubation at varying concentrations, the cross peaks re-appeared although at reduced intensities. As the HSQC cross peak intensities correlate with monomeric Aβ concentration, we quantified the cross peak intensities for each residue (Fig. 4b), and calculated the averaged percentage relative to the pre-incubation reference of Aβ40. The MDK addition (5 μM and 10 μM) rescued the cross-peak intensities from 0.9±0.2% to 38.3±1.1% and 38.1±0.9%, respectively (Fig. 4c). We also observed a similar impact of MDK on Aβ42 fibrillization using a protocol of 24 h incubation (Fig. 4d). However, the same concentrations of MDK were less effective in recovering Aβ42 cross peaks compared to Aβ40 (Fig. 4e, f). For example, the MDK addition (5 μM and 10 μM) retrieved the cross-peak intensities from 4.8±0.5% to 12.8±0.8% and 21.8±0.8%, respectively. This aligns with our ThT, CD and negative stain EM data, supporting the notion that Aβ42 is more aggregation prone than Aβ40. In contrast, ubiquitin (10 μM) used as a control did not restore the Aβ40/42 signal under similar experimental conditions, supporting the specificity of MDK’s inhibitory effect (Extended Data 6a, b, c, d). In summary, our comprehensive biophysical characterization strongly supports that MDK can modulate Aβ fibrillization in vitro.
Genetic deletion of Mdk gene in FAD mice increases amyloid plaques and microglial activation.
To investigate the role of MDK in Aβ fibrillization in vivo, we generated a mouse model with an Mdk gene knockout by CRISPR-mediated deletion of 23 base pairs in exon 3 of the mouse genome (Fig. 5a). The deletion was confirmed through genome sequencing and PCR analysis (Fig. 5a), with the absence of MDK protein verified by western blot analysis (Fig. 5b) and mass spectrometry (Extended Data Fig. 7a, b). In WT mouse brain, Mdk gene is mainly expressed from astrocytes and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells based on published single-cell RNA sequencing analysis (Extended Data Fig. 7c). We crossbred this knockout line with the FAD mice to produce offspring that were FAD mice with or without the Mdk knockout. The Mdk knockout resulted in a marked increase in Aβ levels in the cortices of 12-month-old mice brains, as shown by western blot analysis (Fig. 5b). ELISA analysis also indicated elevated accumulation of Aβ40 and Aβ42 in both Sarkosyl-soluble and -insoluble fractions of mouse cortices in the FAD/KO mice (Fig. 5c, d), whereas the ratio of Aβ40/Aβ42 was not significant changed (Extended Data Fig. 7d). These biochemical findings indicate that Mdk gene knockout contributes to the increased accumulation of two major Aβ species in the FAD genetic background.
Next, we characterized the FAD/KO mice through immunostaining to evaluate the effects of Mdk deletion on plaque formation and microglial activation in the brain. Mdk knockout led to increased plaque density and area, as detected by X34 staining, a fluorescent dye that binds to β-sheet structures in amyloid plaques, in the cortices of 12-month-old mouse brains of both male and female mice (Fig. 5e, Extended Data Fig. 7e, f, g). This was accompanied by heightened microglial activation, evidenced by increased microglial density and area (Fig. 5f). In subsequent immunofluorescence staining studies, amyloid plaques detected by the Aβ antibody were found to highly colocalize with MDK protein in FAD mice, and the MDK staining was absent in the knockout mice (Fig. 5g). Additional co-staining with IBA1, a protein marker for microglia , revealed a significant accumulation of microglia around the plaque areas (Fig. 5g), in agreement with the observed increase in microglial density and area in the FAD/KO mice. These results indicate that Mdk gene knockout leads to enhanced plaque formation and microglial activation in the FAD mouse model.
To understand the impact of Mdk knockout in the FAD mice at the molecular level, we analyzed the cortical brain proteome across four genotypes: WT (n = 8), KO (n = 8), FAD (n = 15), and FAD/KO (n = 17) as shown in Fig. 6a, Employing a refined tandem-mass-tag coupled with two-dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS) platform, we identified 154,013 peptides, corresponding to 9,441 protein groups (9441 genes) across all these samples with protein false discovery rate (FDR) below 0.01 (Supplementary Data 2–3). After loading bias correction (Extended Data Fig. 8a), principal component analysis (PCA) and clustering analysis clearly separate distinct mouse groups, indicating the high quality of the proteomic data (Fig. 6b, Extended Data Fig. 8b). As a positive control, MDK protein levels were elevated in FAD mice compared to WT and reduced to noise levels in knockout mice (Fig. 6c). In FAD mice, Mdk deletion led to a significant increase of Aβ peptide levels (Fig. 6c), but did not affect the expression level of the full-length APP protein (Extended Data Fig. 8i, j).
To identify the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) among the four genotypes, we performed an ANOVA analysis using a previously reported method with two criteria: (i) an FDR value of less than 5%, and (ii) a log2 fold change (FC) greater than twice the standard deviation (2 SD) in any of the three pairwise comparisons: WT vs KO, FAD vs WT, or FAD/KO vs FAD (Extended Data Fig. 8c). Following this analysis, a total of 818 DEPs were accepted (Supplementary Data 4). We then classified these DEPs into four whole proteome clusters (WPCs) using the weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA), followed by pathway enrichment analysis (Fig. 6d, Supplementary Data 4–5). The WGCNA program identified clusters of highly correlated proteins based on the DEP data by calculating pairwise correlations to construct a network, and applying a thresholding approach to emphasize strong correlation patterns. In detail, WPC1 (n = 493) exhibits a gradual increasing trend across the four genotypes from WT, KO, FAD to FAD/KO. This cluster includes Aβ and Aβ-correlated proteins, such as Ntn1, Ptn, and Clu, as well as some marker proteins for microglia and astrocytes: Trem2, Ctss, Olfml3, Csf1r, Gfap, Aqp4, Pla2g7, and Gja1 (Extended Data Fig. 8d), and it is enriched in four representative pathways: APP metabolic process, microglia activation, astrocyte activation, heparin binding and lipid catabolic process (Fig. 6e, Supplementary Data 6). In contrast, WPC2 (n = 181) shows notable decrease along the four genotypes, related to the pathways of calcium ion transmembrane transport, vesicle-mediated transport in synapse, neurotransmitter secretion, cognition, and G protein-coupled glutamate receptor signaling. Interestingly, this cluster includes the AD risk gene/protein Bin1 that regulates calcium homeostasis and neuronal excitability.
In addition, both WPC3 (n = 72) and WPC4 (n = 72) display effects of Mdk knockout that are independent of the FAD genetic background. Proteins in WPC3 increase in Mdk KO mice and are enriched in six major pathways: small molecule catabolic process, lactone metabolic process, GTPase regulator activity, SCF ubiquitin ligase complex, retrograde axonal transport and regulation of Notch signaling pathway (Fig. 6e, Supplementary Data 6). For instance, Slc18a3 (the vesicular acetylcholine transporter) functions to transport acetylcholine into synaptic vesicles during cholinergic neurotransmission, regulating cognitive functions such as learning and memory, motor coordination, and synaptic plasticity. WPC4 primarily consists of proteins that are significantly downregulated due to Mdk knockout, enriched in the pathways of tetrapyrrole metabolic process, ribosome disassembly, neurotrophin binding, adherens junction, myeloid cell development and MLL1 complex. For example, Nbr1 is a selective autophagy receptor that recognizes ubiquitinated proteins and damaged organelles, promoting their degradation through the autophagy-lysosome pathway. Overall, the protein alterations found in WPC3 and WPC4 likely reflect the developmental function of midkine, implicating a pleiotropic impact of Mdk knockout. Nevertheless, within WPC1, we observed a distinct increase in Aβ and Aβ-correlated proteins, along with the activation of microglia and astrocytes, supporting that Mdk knockout exacerbates pathological severity.
Furthermore, we validated the enhanced pathology in FAD/KO mice by profiling the detergent-insoluble proteome, which is enriched in aggregated proteins, across the four mouse genotypes. A total of 169,864 peptides from 8,728 unique protein groups (8,728 genes, Fig. 6f, Supplementary Data 7) were identified. After performing quality control analyses, such as loading bias normalization and PCA (Extended Data Fig. 8e, f), we found that 314 DEPs were elevated in the insoluble proteome of FAD/KO mice compared to FAD mice (Extended Data Fig. 8g, Supplementary Data 7). Remarkably, the FAD/KO mice showed an accumulation of Aβ and other plaque-associated proteins in the insoluble proteome relative to FAD mice. A heatmap highlights some of these proteins, consistently detected in both the whole and insoluble proteomes, including Ntn1, Apoe, Ptn, Clu, Smoc1, Sfrp1, Sulf2, C4b and Scube1 (Fig. 6g, h, Extended Data Fig. 8h). It should be noted that the expression of full-length APP in these mouse lines was not affected by Mdk gene knockout in the whole proteome analysis (Extended Data Fig. 8i, j).
In summary, the knockout of Mdk gene within the FAD mice resulted in an increase in Aβ and Aβ-associated proteins, amyloid plaque formation, and microglial activation. This was substantiated through experiments of western blotting, ELISA, immunostaining of brain tissues, and extensive proteomic profiling of both the whole and detergent-insoluble proteomes in the brain.

INTRODUCTION:
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), an irreversible and progressive neurodegenerative disorder, is the primary cause of dementia. Genetic studies have revealed disease-specific genes (APP, PS1, PS2), high-risk genes (APOE4, TREM2, UNC5C), and a large number of risk loci associated with amyloid, tau, endocytosis, and immunity. The dysregulation in the AD proteome within the brain is characterized by the accumulation of Aβ amyloid plaques, tau neurofibrillary tangles, and other aggregated proteins, including TDP-43 and U1 snRNP. The recent FDA approval of lecanemab and donanemab, both being amyloid-targeting antibodies, lend support to the amyloid cascade hypothesis. However, the limited clinical benefits for AD patients suggest the presence of alternative disease mechanisms and imply that intervention at a late disease stage may be insufficient.
Complementary to the genetic search for AD disease genes, we and others have performed large-scale proteomic profiling, uncovering consistent protein alterations in postmortem AD brains across multiple large cohorts. This has highlighted the deregulation of numerous molecular pathways and protein co-expression modules. Remarkably, a subgroup of proteins is highly upregulated and show a strong correlation with Aβ levels since the early prodromal stage throughout disease progression, including midkine (MDK), pleiotrophin (PTN), netrin 1 (NTN1), netrin 3 (NTN3) and the HTRA1 serine protease. Interestingly, these protein changes occur independently of their mRNA transcript levels, indicating post-transcriptional regulation, such as protein turnover. Moreover, these Aβ-correlated proteins have been found in the detergent-insoluble, aggregated proteome, and within amyloid plaques in AD brains, as confirmed by mass spectrometry-based profiling and immunohistochemical analyses. However, the direct involvement of these Aβ-correlated proteins in plaque formation and AD pathogenesis remains to be elucidated.
The MDK/PTN family of cytokines, comprising only two members, are among the most closely Aβ-correlated proteins identified in proteomic analyses. They are multifunctional heparin-binding factors that promote growth, survival, and migration of various cell types, including neurons and immune cells. In 1993, MDK was reported to localize within the amyloid plaques associated with AD. Preliminary studies suggest that MDK might directly interact with Aβ, displaying high affinity and potentially mitigating Aβ’s toxic effects, but the study had not received attention in the AD research field. Recent proteomic findings support MDK as a top candidate for modulating AD pathogenesis, raising interest in fully exploring the role of MDK in AD pathogenesis.
In this study, we have thoroughly characterized the impact of MDK on Aβ assembly in various assays including Thioflavin T, circular dichroism, negative stain electron microscopy (EM), and NMR, demonstrating that MDK protein inhibits the formation of Aβ fibrils. Importantly, the Mdk gene knockout (KO) in the background of 5xFAD mice leads to the amyloid increase and microglial activation. Further proteomic profiling of these mouse models reveals the accumulated Aβ and related proteins in the brain of the 5xFAD/KO mice, supporting MDK’s protective role against amyloid pathology in AD.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD046539 and PXD061103 (the whole proteome of AD mouse models), and PXD045746 and PXD061104 (the detergent-insoluble proteome of the mice).