PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human; Pull-down; Fetal brain; Smim45-107aa

ABSTRACT:
We acknowledge the commentary by Leushkin et al. on our work, which scrutinizes the status of the de novo genes and the coding potential of a specific case gene (ENSG00000205704) in our proof-of-concept study. While we recognize the evolving nature of defining de novo genes with ribosome profiling data, we respectfully disagree with their assertions for the definition of ages, de novo status, translation and functions of these genes. Notably, the field’s consensus definition of de novo gene is based on the age of the open reading frames (ORFs), rather than that of the locus. Moreover, ribosome profiles alone, although indicative for translation, should not be used as a groundtruth for stable translation and in vivo functions, especially when generated from samples with limited range of temporospatial conditions and analyzed with parameters better suited for highly-expressed, conserved genes, as described in Leushkin et al. Here we present additional data and analyses, especially the verification of the status of these de novo genes and the compelling evidence for in vivo translation of the case gene, to address their concerns. The data presented in our initial report, coupled with this study, robustly support our original conclusions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Anti-SMIM45-107aa Pull-down and mass spectrometry study

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human fetal brain tissue (PCW21) was lysed in IP lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific, 87788) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, 78429). Proteins were quantified using the BCA assay, and each protein lysate (1 mg) was incubated with SMIM45-202 antibodies (1 μg) or rabbit-IgG (1 μg) with gentle rotation for 1 h, then protein A beads (20 μL; Invitrogen, 10001D) were added to the lysate and incubated overnight at 4 °C with gentle rotation. The next day, the beads were collected by magnet and washed for five times. Proteins were eluted by incubating with 50 μL of loading buffer at room temperature for 20 minutes and separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. After Coomassie staining, gels between 10 to 25 kDa were cut and subjected to dehydration in acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific), then 20 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) were simultaneously added to the solution and incubated in the dark with gentle vertexing for 30 min, after which 10 ng/μL trypsin (Hualishi Tech. Ltd., Beijing, China) was added and incubated for 12 hours for protein digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted before LC-MS analysis. DDA acquisition was performed on a nanoflow DIONEX UltiMate 3000 RSLC Nano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 90 min LC gradient were used for peptides separation. The flowrate is 300 nL/min in a 7%–30% linear gradient of buffer B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 98% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides eluted from analytical columns were ionized at a potential +2.0 kV into Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific™, San Jose, USA). A full MS scan was acquired analyzing 350–1800 m/z at a 60,000 resolution (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3e6 charges and the maximum injection time of 50 ms. After the full MS scan, top 20 MS/MS scans were acquired, each with a 60,000 resolution, AGC target value of 1e5 charges, normalized collision energy of 28%, isolation window of 1.6 m/z, maximum injection time of 45 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
The mass spectrometry data generated in this study were analysed against a protein database combining Swiss-Prot proteins (version March 23, 2024, 20433 entries), the target de novo protein and built-in contaminats using pfind (v3.2), with the following parameters: open seach for modification, peptide mass tolerances: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 20 ppm. Up to two missed cleavages were permitted for fully tryptic peptides. FDR threshold was set as 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. Peptides uniquly mapped to single, specific entry was defined as unique peptides and included in the following annotation.