PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Proteasome; Mitosis; Spindle; Degradation; Kinesin; Ubiquitin

ABSTRACT:
During regulated protein degradation, the 26S proteasome recognizes ubiquitinated substrates through its 19S particle and then degrades them in its 20S enzymatic core. Despite this close interdependency between proteasome subunits, we demonstrate that knockouts from different proteasome subcomplexes result in distinct cellular phenotypes. In particular, depletion of 19S PSMD lid proteins, but not that of other proteasome subunits, prevents bipolar spindle assembly during mitosis. Despite decreased ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation in PSMD knockouts, we find that the monopolar spindle phenotype is instead caused by the aberrant degradation of the kinesin motor protein KIF11. We show that KIF11 degradation occurs through the 20S proteasome in a ubiquitin-independent manner upon loss of 19S proteins and that the resulting alterations in spindle forces lead to the unique monopolar phenotype. Thus, the presence of the 19S particle ensures proper spindle formation by restraining ubiquitin-independent degradation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
19S proteasome loss regulates mitotic spindle assembly through a ubiquitin-independent degradation mechanism

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For whole-cell quantitative proteomics, cells were treated with either 50 nM PSMD1 siRNAs or 50 nM control siRNAs for 48 hours. For interphase cells, 2 mM Thymidine (Sigma-Aldrich) was added 24 hours prior to harvesting to arrest cells in S phase. For mitotic cells, 1 µM taxol (Invitrogen) was added 24 hours prior to harvesting to arrest cells in mitosis. Mitotic cells were isolated by mitotic shake off. Three biological replicates were collected for each condition. Cells were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80˚C. To prepare protein extracts, cells were resuspended in RIPA buffer (225 mM NaCl, 1.5% Nonidet P-40 substitute, 0.75% Na Deoxycholate, 0.15% SDS, 75 mM Tris pH 8) with Complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 1 mM phenylmehtylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 0.4 mM Sodium Orthovanadate, 5 mM Sodium Fluoride, and 20 mM Beta-glycerophosphate. Cells were lysed with Branson Digital Sonifier tip sonicator at 30% amplitude for 10 seconds once. Lysates were centrifuged at 20,000g for 30 minutes at 4˚C. Supernatant was then mixed with 20% Trichloroacetic Acid (Fisher Bioreagents) overnight on ice to precipitate proteins. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 20,000g at 4˚C. Pellets were washed two times with cold acetone and dried in an Eppendorf Vacufuge.   To prepare samples for mass spectrometry, pellets were first resuspended in SDS lysis buffer (5%, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5) with 20 mM DTT and incubated at 95˚C for 10 minutes. Samples were then incubated with 40 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 minutes in the dark. 1.2% phosphoric acid was added to the sample, which was then run over S-Trap microcolumns (ProtiFi) and subjected to tryptic digest on the columns overnight (Promega). Digested peptides were then eluted, quantified with Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay Kit (Pierce), and lyophilized. A more detailed protocol for S-Trap digestion and elution can be found in the ProtiFi S-trap micro kit protocol.     For TMT-based quantitative mass spectrometry, peptides from each sample were mixed with different TMT10plex labels at a 1:10 ratio by mass. Labeling occurred in 30% acetonitrile and 24.5 mM TEAB pH8.5 for 1 hour at room temperature.  After 1 hour, the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine for 15 minutes at room temperature. TMT-labeled samples were then pooled, lyophilized, and stored at -80˚C. Next, samples were fractionated using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Pierce). Fractions were lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by mass spectrometry with an Orbitrap Exploris 480. Protein identification and Tandem Mass Tag quantification was done in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).   The following conditions were used for TMT-MS experiments in this work. For Figure 3A: Cells were treated with siRNAs for 48 hours and arrested in S phase with 2 mM thymidine prior to harvesting. Protein abundances were obtained using TMT-based (Tandem Mass Tag) quantitative mass spectrometry of three replicates for each condition. For Figure S3A: Cells were transduced with lentivirus with a guide targeting a control AAVS safe-harbor locus. Then they were treated with either PSMD1 or control siRNAs for 48 hours and arrested in mitosis with 1 µM taxol prior to harvesting. Mitotic cells were specifically isolated from interphase cells using mitotic shake off. Protein abundances were obtained using TMT-based (Tandem Mass Tag) quantitative mass spectrometry of three replicates for PSMD1 RNAi condition and two replicates for control RNAi condition. For Figure 5E: Cells were treated with siRNAs for 48 hours and with 2 mM Thymidine 24 hours prior to harvesting. Protein abundances were obtained using TMT-based (Tandem Mass Tag) quantitative mass spectrometry of three replicates for PSMD1 RNAi condition and two replicates for control RNAi condition.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to identify proteins and peptides. The Sequest HT search engine (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was employed in conjunction with the Homo sapiens protein database (UP000005640), including GFP. The maximum missed cleavage sites for trypsin was 2. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The following post-translational modifications were considered: dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da on S, T, Y), dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da on M), dynamic acetylation (+42.011 Da at the N-terminus), and static carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da on C). For TMT-based experiments, static TMT6plex labeling (+229.163 Da) was applied at any N-terminus and lysine residues (K), or TMTpro labeling (+304.207 Da) was used on K or N-terminus. TMT 10plex isotope correction values were accounted for (Thermo Fisher; 90111 LOT# VK306786) or 16plex isotope correction values (Thermo Fisher; YC353564). Peptide identifications in each sample were filtered using Percolator to ensure a false discovery rate (FDR) of no more than 0.01. Protein abundances were normalized based on the total protein amount. In quantitative GFP immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments, protein levels were further normalized to GFP levels to correct for variations in IP efficiency.