PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: T cell; Cell culture
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: phosphorylated residue; dimethylated residue; acetylated residue; N6,N6,N6-trimethyl-L-lysine (from L-lysinium residue); butanoylated residue; N6,N6,N6-trimethyl-L-lysine (from L-lysinium residue); propanoylated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Proteomics; Search engine; Post-translational modification; Data analysis; Histone

ABSTRACT:
To identify confident spectra from histone peptides containing PTMs, we present a method in which one kind of modification is searched each time. We then combine the identifications of multiple search engines to obtain confident results. We find that two search engines, pFind and Mascot, identify most of the confident results. This study will be beneficial those who are interested in histone proteomics analysis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Histione HCD and CID datasets for evaluation of search engines

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HeLa Cell Culture ─ As previously described (1), HeLa cells were cultured in suspension with Minimum Essential Medium Eagle (MEM) Joklik modification for Suspension Cultures with 10% Newborn Calf Serum (Thermo Scientific SH30118.03), 1% Glutmax, and 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin. The cell density was maintained within the range of 1-10x105 cells/mL. Histones were acid extracted and subjected to chemical derivatization using propionic anhydride and trypsin digestion as previously described (2). Samples were then desalted and injected onto an online nano LC-MS/MS as described in (2).  Nano Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry ─ The samples were loaded onto one of the two instrument setups as shown in Supplemental Table 1, all at 300 nL/min. Histone peptides were resolved on a two-step gradient from 2% ACN to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 40 minutes, then from 30% ACN to 95% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 20 minutes. Q-Exactive and Orbitrap Velos Pro were operated in the data dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 0.5 min). MS instrument methods were set up as previously reported (3). Settings for resolution, automatic gain control (AGC), and normalized collision energy (NCE) were listed in Supplemental Table 1. Every cycle one full MS scan (m/z 290 to 1600) was collected and followed by 15 or 12 MS/MS scans using either HCD or CID. All isolation windows were set at 2.0 m/z. Ions with a charge state of one and a rejection list of common contaminant ions (including keratin, trypsin and BSA) (exclusion width=10 ppm) were excluded from MS/MS.    1. Zee, B. M.; Britton, L. M.; Wolle, D.; Haberman, D. M.; Garcia, B. A., Origins and formation of histone methylation across the human cell cycle. Mol Cell Biol 2012, 32, (13), 2503-14.    2. Lin, S.; Garcia, B. A., Examining histone posttranslational modification patterns by high-resolution mass spectrometry. Methods Enzymol 2012, 512, 3-28.    3. Zee, B. M.; Levin, R. S.; Dimaggio, P. A.; Garcia, B. A., Global turnover of histone post-translational modifications and variants in human cells. Epigenetics Chromatin 2010, 3, (1), 22.

DATA PROCESSING:
Database and Data ─ Protein sequences and MS/MS spectra are prepared first. A histone fasta file is built from the Uniprot human database (57 entries, including H1, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4). Two datasets (noted as HCD_Histone and CID_Histone) are obtained from the same HeLa histone sample. We note that some precursor m/z values exported by the instrument software Xcalibur are not monoisotopic, and some MS/MS spectra are from two or more co-fragmented peptides. Therefore, we use pParse to convert RAW files to MGF files by exporting the monoisotopic peaks of all precursors, including co-eluted precursors (1). The MGF files are searched using pFind, Mascot, Sequest HT in ProteomeDiscoverer, ProteinPilot, and PEAKS. Because OMSSA in COMPASS, X!Tandem in TPP, and Andromeda in MaxQuant have their own input format, we then convert MGF files to TXT files for OMSSA, use ReAdW (2) to convert RAW files to mzXML files for X!Tandem (in which some precursors are calibrated to the monoisotopic but no co-eluted peptides are exported), and use RAW files directly for Andromeda (in MaxQuant the ‘second peptide’ mode can detect some co-eluted peptides).  Search parameters ─ Search parameters are set for all search engines. The version of each search engine is shown in Supplemental Table 2. We set the following search parameters (as shown in Table 1): precursor mass tolerance ±10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ±0.02 Th for HCD and ±0.4 Th for CID, trypsin only cleaving after arginine and up to 2 miscleavages, peptide N-terminal propionylation (Propionyl[Peptide N-term]/+56.026) as the fixed modification. To obtain more identification for different kinds of peptides, we set seven sets of variable modifications: (1) only Propionyl[K]/+56.026 for unmodified peptides, (2) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Acetyl[K]/+42.011 for acetylated peptides, (3) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Methyl_Propionyl[K]/+70.042 for mono-methylated peptides, (4) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Dimethyl[K]/+28.031 for di-methylated peptides, (5) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Trimethyl[K]/+42.047 for tri-methylated peptides, Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Phospho[ST]/+79.966 for phosphorylated peptides, and all the above modifications for multi-modified peptides. In total we have 112 searches (i.e. two datasets, eight search engines, and seven searches).  Workflow ─ The workflow is shown in Figure 1. Firstly, RAW files are converted to MGF files, TXT files, and mzXML files. Secondly, each search engine searches with separate modifications. Thirdly, search results are filtered for separate modifications. The target-decoy approach is used in most search engines (3), except TPP, which uses probability to filter search results (4). A FDR of less than 1% at the spectra level is used to filter search results. Fourthly, redundant IDs are removed. When there are redundant spectra in different searches for one specific engine, the peptide-spectral matches with higher scores were kept. Lastly, to obtain confident results, all the filtered IDs for different search engines are combined. The number of search engines identifying one specific spectrum is counted, and spectra identified by only one search engine are filtered out.    1. Yuan, Z. F.; Liu, C.; Wang, H. P.; Sun, R. X.; Fu, Y.; Zhang, J. F.; Wang, L. H.; Chi, H.; Li, Y.; Xiu, L. Y.; Wang, W. P.; He, S. M., pParse: a method for accurate determination of monoisotopic peaks in high-resolution mass spectra. Proteomics 2012, 12, (2), 226-35.    2. http://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi/files/.    3. Elias, J. E.; Gygi, S. P., Target-decoy search strategy for increased confidence in large-scale protein identifications by mass spectrometry. Nat Methods 2007, 4, (3), 207-14.    4. Keller, A.; Nesvizhskii, A. I.; Kolker, E.; Aebersold, R., Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy of peptide identifications made by MS/MS and database search. Anal Chem 2002, 74, (20), 5383-92.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Data Sets
HeLa Cell Culture
As previously described, HeLa cells were cultured in suspension with minimum essential medium Eagle (MEM) Joklik modification for suspension cultures with 10% newborn calf serum (Thermo Scientific SH30118.03), 1% Glutmax, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. The cell density was maintained within the range of (1 to 10) × 105 cells/mL. Histones were acid-extracted and subjected to chemical derivatization using propionic anhydride and trypsin digestion, as previously described. Samples were then desalted and injected onto an online nano-LC–MS/MS, as described in ref.
Nanoliquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry
The samples were loaded onto one of the two instrument setups, as shown in Supplemental Table 1 in the SI, all at 300 nL/min. Histone peptides were resolved on a two-step gradient from 2% ACN to 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 40 min, then from 30% ACN to 95% ACN in 0.1% formic acid over 20 min. Q-Exactive and Orbitrap Velos Pro were operated in the data-dependent mode with dynamic exclusion enabled (repeat count: 1, exclusion duration: 0.5 min). MS instrument methods were set up as previously reported. Settings for resolution, automatic gain control (AGC), and normalized collision energy (NCE) were listed in Supplemental Table 1 in the SI. Every cycle one full MS scan (m/z 290 to 1600) was collected and followed by 15 or 12 MS/MS scans using either HCD or CID. All isolation windows were set at 2.0 m/z. Ions with a charge state of one and a rejection list of common contaminant ions (including keratin, trypsin, and BSA) (exclusion width = 10 ppm) were excluded from MS/MS.
Database Search
Database and Data
Protein sequences and MS/MS spectra are prepared first. A histone fasta file is built from the Uniprot human database (57 entries, including H1, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4). Two data sets (noted as HCD_Histone and CID_Histone) are obtained from the same HeLa histone sample. We note that some precursor m/z values exported by the instrument software Xcalibur are not monoisotopic, and some MS/MS spectra are from two or more cofragmented peptides. Therefore, we use pParse to convert RAW files to MGF files by exporting the monoisotopic peaks of all precursors, including coeluted precursors. The MGF files are searched using pFind, Mascot, Sequest HT in ProteomeDiscoverer, ProteinPilot, and PEAKS. Because OMSSA in COMPASS, X!Tandem in TPP, and Andromeda in MaxQuant have their own input format, we then convert MGF files to TXT files for OMSSA, use ReAdW to convert RAW files to mzXML files for X!Tandem (in which some precursors are calibrated to the monoisotopic but no coeluted peptides are exported), and use RAW files directly for Andromeda. (In MaxQuant, the “second peptide” mode can detect some coeluted peptides.)
Search Parameters
Search parameters are set for all search engines. The version of each search engine is shown in Supplemental Table 2 in the SI. We set the following search parameters (as shown in Table 1): precursor mass tolerance ±10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ±0.02 Th for HCD and ±0.4 Th for CID, trypsin only cleaving after arginine and up to two miscleavages, peptide N-terminal propionylation (Propionyl[Peptide N-term]/+56.026) as the fixed modification. To obtain more identification for different kinds of peptides, we set seven sets of variable modifications: (1) only Propionyl[K]/+56.026 for unmodified peptides, (2) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Acetyl[K]/+42.011 for acetylated peptides, (3) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Methyl_Propionyl[K]/+70.042 for monomethylated peptides, (4) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Dimethyl[K]/+28.031 for dimethylated peptides, (5) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Trimethyl[K]/+42.047 for trimethylated peptides, (6) Propionyl[K]/+56.026 and Phospho[ST]/+79.966 for phosphorylated peptides, and (7) all of the above modifications for multimodified peptides. In total, we have 112 searches (i.e., two data sets, eight search engines, and seven searches).
Workflow
The workflow is shown in Figure 1. First, RAW files are converted to MGF files, TXT files, and mzXML files. Second, each search engine searches with separate modifications. Third, search results are filtered for separate modifications. The target-decoy approach is used in most search engines, except TPP, which uses probability to filter search results. An FDR of <1% at the spectra level is used to filter search results. Fourth, redundant IDs are removed. When there are redundant spectra in different searches for one specific engine, the peptide-spectral matches with higher scores are kept. Lastly, to obtain confident results, all filtered IDs for different search engines are combined. The number of search engines identifying one specific spectrum is counted, and spectra identified by only one search engine are filtered out.

RESULTS:
Results
After generating the ID lists, we investigate the following results between search engines: (1) proportion of confident IDs, (2) proportion of overlapping IDs, and (3) search time and result space.
Proportion of Confident IDs
To compare different peptides, we categorize them as follows. If a peptide has only propionylation, it is an unmodified peptide. Otherwise, it is a modified peptide (i.e., it has acetylation, methylation, etc.). So from the first to the seventh set of search parameters, we can identify seven kinds of peptides individually: unmodified peptides (un), acetylated peptides (ac), monomethylated peptides (me), dimethylated peptides (di), trimethylated peptides (tr), phosphorylated peptides (ph), and multimodified peptides with different modifications coexisting (co), respectively.
To obtain confident results, we combine the IDs from all search engines. Although peptide identification is controlled by FDR less than 1%, the identification list may still include some false-positive results. If two or more search engines can identify one spectrum, the identification is considered confident. We therefore combine all IDs from the eight search engines together. More precisely, for a specific spectrum we count the number of search engines that identify the spectrum and then filter out the spectra that are identified by only one search engine.
The number of IDs before and after combination of search engines is shown in Figure 2. The last green solid bar indicates all confident IDs. Other solid bars indicate IDs before combination. Dashed bars indicate IDs after combination. In the seventh search, PEAKS does not have any results because the program runs out of memory. Other programs, however, do not have such a problem. OMSSA identifies comparable unmodified and acetylated spectra to other search engines but identifies very few other modified spectra. X!Tandem identifies comparable individually modified spectra to other search engines, but it could not identify many unmodified and multimodified spectra. The remaining search engines, pFind, Mascot, SEQUEST, ProteinPilot, and MaxQuant, identify comparable spectra in all cases.
To select suitable search engines for the analysis of histone modifications, we compare the confident results for each search engine (dashed bars in Figure 2). pFind, Mascot, SEQUEST, and PEAKS identify more confident spectra than the other search engines in general. Among these four search engines, SEQUEST and PEAKS identify the fewer acetylated spectra; PEAKS could not identify multimodified spectra; and pFind and Mascot behave better in most cases. Therefore, on the basis of results, we conclude that pFind and Mascot are the best search engines for the analysis of histone modifications.
To quantify the accuracy of search engines, we calculate the proportion of confident IDs (as shown in Table 2). The confident IDs by pFind are the spectra that are identified by pFind and at least one other search engine. All confident IDs are the spectra that are identified by at least two search engines. The precision of pFind is the proportion of confident IDs by pFind to all IDs by pFind (dashed red bar divided by solid red bar in Figure 2). The recall of pFind is the proportion of confident IDs by pFind to all confident IDs (dashed red bar divided by solid green bar in Figure 2). F-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, that is, F-score = 2/(1/Precision + 1/Recall). When the largest three F-scores (the third largest ≥80%) in each row are highlighted, it shows that pFind, Mascot, and PEAKS are the best three search engines. Because PEAKS is not good at identifying acetylated and multimodified spectra, pFind and Mascot are recommended.
Proportion of Overlapping IDs
To evaluate the similarity of search engines, we compare the overlapping of confident IDs between search engines. Figure 2 and Table 2 show that pFind and Mascot have more IDs than other search engines. We compare pFind to other search engines with confident IDs (as shown in Figure 3). Other-pFind indicates IDs only in the other search engine. pFind∩Other indicates IDs in both pFind and the other search engine. pFind-Other indicates IDs only in pFind. Compared with pFind∩Other, Other-pFind is small, which means pFind covers most IDs of the other search engine. Compared with pFind∩Mascot, pFind-Mascot is also small, which means pFind and Mascot get similar results.
To quantify the similarity of search engines, we calculate the proportion of overlapping IDs (as shown in Table 3). Common means IDs in both pFind and the other search engine. Common/pFind is the proportion of confident IDs in common with confident IDs by pFind. Common/Other is the proportion of confident IDs in common with confident IDs by the other search engine. The harmonic mean of these two ratios is 2/(1/(Common/pFind) + 1/(Common/Other)). When the largest three harmonic means (the third largest ≥80%) in each row are highlighted, it shows that Mascot has very similar results to pFind, and SEQUEST and PEAKS have less similar results to pFind.
Search Time and Result Space
Besides the accuracy of search engines, we also compare their search time and result space. We obtain the search time and size of the result files from the first to the sixth set of search parameters for each search engine. As the search time and result space are similar between the six searches for each search engine, we show only the median of time and space for each search engine (as shown in Table 4). PEAKS runs the most slowly, from 2 to 7 h. MaxQuant runs the second most slowly, ∼15 min. X!Tandem runs the fastest, ∼20 s. pFind and OMSSA run the second fastest, from 20 to 100 s. The MaxQuant results are the largest, from 200 to 600 MB. The OMSSA results are the smallest, from 1 to 5 MB. The pFind results are the second smallest, from 15 to 40 MB.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Mass spectrometry (MS) has become a key technique for proteomics analysis. The peptide-centric MS strategy is called bottom-up, in which proteins are extracted from cells, digested into peptides with proteases, and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS). More specifically, peptides are resolved by chromatography, ionized in mass spectrometers, and scanned to obtain full MS spectra. Next, some high-abundance peptides (precursor ions) are selected and fragmented to obtain MS/MS spectra by high-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) or collision-induced dissociation (CID). Then, peptides can be identified by searching the MS/MS spectra against a database and finally assembled into identified proteins. Database searching plays an important role in proteomics analysis because it can be used to translate thousands of MS/MS spectra into protein identifications (IDs).
Many database search engines have been developed to quickly and accurately analyze large volumes of proteomics data. Some of the more well-known search engines are Mascot, SEQUEST, PEAKS DB, ProteinPilot, pFind, Andromeda, OMSSA, and X!Tandem. However, the identification rate of MS/MS spectra is still low (e.g., in most searches, only 10–30% of spectra can be identified). There are many factors influencing peptide identification, such as incorrect precursor monoisotopic mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) or charge state, mixed MS/MS spectra from coeluted precursors, unspecific cleavage by proteases, unknown post-translational modifications (PTMs), incomplete databases, disability of search engines to distinguish similar sequences, spectra filtered out for low matching scores, and so on. Among all of these factors, incomplete PTM profiles are critical because PTMs usually are related to important biological functions. However, including a large number of PTMs in one database search increases the number of candidate peptides dramatically, leading to low search speed, more false-positive IDs, and fewer identified spectra. Therefore, confidently identifying more spectra with PTMs is a current major challenge in database searching.
There are few studies about how to filter search results and identify more spectra with PTMs. Fu et al. suggested that the individual PTM false discovery rate (FDR) rather than the global (unmodified and modified spectra searched together) FDR should be used when only PTM IDs are of interest and proposed a method to estimate the individual PTM FDR from the global FDR. Seo and coworkers analyzed the same sample multiple times by initially identifying unmodified peptides and adding them into an exclusion list for later runs. Huang and coworkers proposed an iterative search algorithm for the systematic identification of PTMs, in which unmodified spectra were identified by a basic search, and the leftover unidentified spectra were analyzed by iterative searches of many PTMs using a small number of them (usually two) each time.
As a group of heavily post-translationally modified proteins, histones play several important roles in chromatin biology and epigenetics. Owing to their complex modification patterns, histones are known to be very challenging to analyze using conventional commercially available search methods and often require specific in-house developed software to properly deal with their data sets (e.g., MILP, PTMap, MS-TopDown, and FAVA-based workflow). In this study, we present a method to evaluate database search engines on identifying spectra from histone peptides containing PTMs. In this method, no modification, each individual modification, and multiple PTMs are searched separately. Spectra of unmodified, individually modified, and multimodified peptides are obtained with a global FDR of <1%. After the database search with eight search engines (pFind, Mascot, SEQUEST, ProteinPilot, PEAKS, OMSSA in COMPASS, X!Tandem in TPP, and Andromeda in MaxQuant), we combine the IDs from all of the search engines and obtain confident results by discarding the spectra identified by only one search engine. We find that pFind and Mascot identify most of the confident results. Our evaluation of different search engines on identifying histone modifications will be beneficial to those who are interested in histone proteomics analysis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting Information Available
Nano-LC–MS/MS instrument settings (Supplementary Table 1), version of each search engine (Supplementary Table 2), peptide-spectral matches of reversed and original H4 4–17 (Supplementary Figure 1), separation of peptide isoforms K18ac and K23ac (Supplementary Figure 2), and number of peptide candidates in the second and the seventh searches (Supplementary Figure 3). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at . The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium () via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD001118 and DOI 10.6019/PXD001118.
Supplementary Material
The authors declare no competing financial interest.