PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: T cell; B cell; Cell culture
diseases: B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; 6x(13)C; 6x(13)C labeled L-lysine; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC; Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Effectors; Silac; Proteomics; And  hematological cancer.; Car-t cell

ABSTRACT:
Chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapy is at the forefront of cell immunotherapy. In this study, we generated an anti-CD19 CAR-Jurkat T cell line using a locally produced second-generation CD19 CAR construct, enabling us to analyze early proteomic changes crucial for understanding the signaling pathways and mechanisms of action of this CAR-T cell. SILAC-heavy tagged RAJI B-cells and anti-CD19 CAR-Jurkat T-cells were co-cultured for ten minutes. The proteomic profiles were obtained via DIA methodology on the Orbitrap Astral LC-MS/MS platform. The proteome was extensively covered, resulting in approximately 8800 protein identifications at 1% FDR. The effector CAR-Jurkat cells showed proteomic changes involving antigen presentation by CD74. The target RAJI B-cells exhibited more significant alterations, such as CD28, essential for T-cell survival and activation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomics analysis reveal early event molecular effectors of anti-CD19 CAR-T cell therapy in hematological cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Stable Isotope Labeling of Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC): Heavy-tagged RAJI B-cells and anti-CD19 CAR-Jurkat T-cells were cocultured for ten minutes. Samples were prepared using S-Trap-assisted on-based digestion, and the resulting peptides were vacuum-dried and stored until LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
The proteomic profiles were acquired using DIA methodology on an Orbitrap Astral LC-MS/MS platform. Based on the SILAC isotopically labeled peptides, the data were processed by DIA-NN and organized to separate proteins and peptides from the effector CAR-Jurkat and the target RAJI cells. The cut-off for the P-value was set at 0.05 after performing the t-test for differential analysis using the annotated proteins, which were later Z-score normalized before being used for the violin plot representation of 0 minutes vs 10 minutes co-culture. Additionally, the CURTAIN tool and GraphPad Prism were utilized.