PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cervical epithelial cell
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Pap test; Microbiome; Metaproteomics

ABSTRACT:
The human cervical-vaginal area contains proteins derived from microorganisms that may prevent or predispose women to gynecological conditions. The liquid Pap test fixative is an unexplored resource for analysis of microbial communities and the microbe-host interaction. Previously, we showed that the residual cell-free fixative from discarded Pap tests of healthy women could be used for mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomic identification of cervical-vaginal proteins.  In this study, we reprocessed these MS raw data files for metaproteomic analysis to characterize the microbial community composition and function of microbial proteins in the cervical-vaginal region. This was accomplished by developing a customized protein sequence database encompassing microbes likely present in the vagina. High-mass accuracy data were searched against the protein FASTA database using a two-step search method within the Galaxy for proteomics platform.  Data was analyzed by MEGAN6 (MetaGenomeAnalyzer) for phylogenetic and functional characterization.  We identified over 300 unique peptides from a variety of bacterial phyla and Candida.  Peptides corresponding to proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism, oxidation-reduction, and transport were identified.  By identifying microbial peptides in Pap test supernatants it may be possible to acquire a functional signature of these microbes, as well as detect specific proteins associated with cervical health and disease.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human Pap test LC-MS/MS metaproteomics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
De-identified residual (waste) Pap test samples in SurePathTM vials were obtained from women at least 50 years old with normal cervical cytology and without obvious signs of infection or visible blood contamination.SurePathTM vials were vortexed to resuspend proteins and to release cells/proteins from the cervical sampling device that remained in each vial.  The residual fluid was centrifuged for 5 min at 800 x g to pellet the cells, and the supernatant was removed for analysis.  Equal volumes of the cell-free SurePathTM fixative from 40 normal Pap test samples (median age of 58 years; ranging from 50-76 years) were pooled prior to trypsin digestion.  Pooled and individual samples (~50-100 µg protein) were prepared for mass spectrometry by Filter Aided Sample Preparation.  Peptides were 2D fractionated offline by high pH reverse phase chromatography and submitted to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA) as described in Boylan et al., Clin Proteomics 2014, 11:30.

DATA PROCESSING:
High accuracy MS/MS data was searched using a two-step method (Jagtap et al., 2013 and Jagtap et al., 2015)against a database composed of microbial and human protein sequences.  The database of microbial species of the urogenital tract [331,242 sequences from 130 bacterial proteomes plus Candida was generated from Human Microbiome Project reference genomes using an in-house program, MicPrDB (https://github.com/somiafiuni/MicPrDB) and merged with a “target” version of the Human Uniprot database and contaminant sequences, and 3-frame translated cDNA protein sequences [2,674,981 sequences in the 3-frame translated cDNA (EnSEMBL) database plus the target version of  the human Uniprot database with contaminant sequences (November 2014)]. The database search was performed with ProteinPilot™ within the Galaxy for proteomics (Galaxy-P) platform. Accession numbers associated with all microbial peptide identifications from the first search were merged with the human database plus contaminants to create a “target-decoy” database used for the calculation of the false discovery rate (FDR).  This refined target-decoy database of human plus bacterial proteins and translated 3-frame cDNA sequences was used to search high mass accuracy peak lists to identify distinct peptide sequences from spectra at 5% local FDR.  High confidence peptide matches were analyzed by using the downstream metagenomic/metaproteomic analysis tool MEGAN6 to parse BLASTP searches of peptide spectra. The BLASTP settings were as described in Jagtap et al., 2015 and Rudney et al., 2015.Briefly, all instances of the spectrum for a given peptide (PSMs) were retained, to allow for spectral counting. The PSMs list was split into a list of short sequences (≤30 amino acids), and a list of long sequences (>30 amino acids) and searched against the BLAST-NR database, using BLASTP parameters described below. For short peptide sequences, the following parameters were used - set expectation value cutoff: 200 000; scoring matrix: PAM30; gap costs: Existence 9, Extension 1; word size for wordfinder algorithm: 2; multiple hits window size: 15; threshold: minimum score to add a word to the BLAST lookup table: 16; and use composition-based statistics: 0 or F. Longer peptides were subjected to following BLASTP parameters: set expectation value cutoff: 10; scoring matrix: BLOSUM62; gap costs: existence 11, extension 1; word size for wordfinder algorithm: 3; multiple hits windowsize: 40; threshold: minimum score to add a word to the BLAST lookup table: 11; use composition-based statistics: 2,T or D.  MEGAN6 uses the Lowest Common Ancestor algorithm (LCA) to assign reads to taxa. It allows functional analyses using several different ontological systems. The greatest number of hits was obtained with InterPro2GO for functional classification to Gene Ontology categories and IPR protein families, and those results are reported here. The MEGAN6 parameters used were: minScore = 25.0, maxExpected = 10.0, top Percent = 10.0, min Support = 1, weighted LCA Percent = 80.0.

METHODS:
Methods
Sample collection and mass spectrometry analysis
De-identified residual (waste) Pap test samples in SurePathTM vials were obtained from the University of Minnesota BioNet Tissue Procurement Facility following approval by the University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board (Protocol 1101E94895) which does not require patient consent for use of de-identified clinical specimens. All experiments were performed in accordance with the relevant University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board guidelines and regulations. The collection of clinical specimens and processing for mass spectrometry has been previously described. Briefly, cells collected from the ectocervix of healthy women undergoing routine screening for cervical cancer using the BD SurePathTM liquid-based Pap test underwent automated processing, staining and examination by a pathologist for a clinical diagnosis. After one month, when the vials would have been discarded by the cytopathology laboratory, we were provided with vials from women at least 50 years old with normal cervical cytology and without obvious signs of infection or visible blood contamination. In all cases, the vials were stripped of identifying information and the remaining volume of SurePathTM solution (approximately 2 mL) was used for analysis by mass spectrometry. The ages of the individuals were as follows: NPap94, 52 yrs; NPap134, 67 yrs; NPap137, 61 yrs; NPap929, 60 yrs; and NPap933, 59 yrs. SurePathTM vials were vortexed to resuspend proteins and to release cells/proteins from the cervical sampling device that remained in each vial. The residual fluid was centrifuged for 5 min at 800 × g to pellet the cells, and the supernatant was removed for analysis. Equal volumes of the cell-free SurePathTM fixative from 40 normal Pap test samples (median age of 58 years; ranging from 50–76 years) were pooled prior to trypsin digestion. Acetone precipitated proteins from the pooled and individual samples (~50–100 µg protein) were prepared for mass spectrometry by Filter Aided Sample Preparation. Peptides were 2D fractionated offline by high pH reverse phase chromatography into 32 fractions. Fractions were concatenated into 16, and approximately 1 µg of each of the concatenated fractions was submitted to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA) as described previously.
Database searching and protein identification
High accuracy MS/MS data was searched using a two-step method against a database composed of microbial and human protein sequences. The database of microbial species of the urogenital tract [331,242 sequences from 130 bacterial proteomes plus Candida (Supplementary Table S1)] was generated from Human Microbiome Project reference genomes using an in-house program, MicPrDB (https://github.com/somiafiuni/MicPrDB) and merged with a “target” version of the Human Uniprot database and contaminant sequences, and 3-frame translated cDNA protein sequences [2,674,981 sequences in the 3-frame translated cDNA (EnSEMBL) database plus the target version of the human Uniprot database with contaminant sequences (November 2014)]. We included the 3-frame translated cDNA database for the first-step database search to ensure that spectra originating from variant peptides were not incorrectly assigned to microbial peptides (in native or modified form). In our prior work, we demonstrated that this approach yielded more accurate identifications. The Paragon search algorithm in ProteinPilot™ was used for searching the mass spectrometry data within the Galaxy for proteomics (Galaxy-P) platform using the workflow depicted in Fig. 1.
For the second step search, accession numbers associated with all microbial peptide identifications from the first search were merged with the human database plus contaminants to create a “target-decoy” database, by appending the reversed protein sequences to the forward sequences, which was used for the calculation of the false discovery rate (FDR). This refined target-decoy database of human plus bacterial proteins and translated 3-frame cDNA sequences was used to search high mass accuracy peak lists with ProteinPilot™. These searches generated a.group file and a Proteomics System Performance Evaluation Pipeline (PSPEP) FDR report. The.group file was used to generate a Peptide Summary Report, which with the PSPEP FDR report was used to identify microbial peptide sequences. Of the total measured spectra, 161,673 peptides were assigned from the combined human and microbial database at 5% local FDR; and a subset of these peptide-spectral matches were identified as distinct microbial peptides (see Supplementary Materials). The remaining spectra matched to human peptides and are previously described in ref..
All peptide-spectral matches were retained to allow for spectral counting, and text-formatting tools within Galaxy-P were used to generate a FASTA list for BLASTP searching. The FASTA list was split into a list of short sequences (≤30 amino acids), and a list of long sequences (>30 amino acids) and searched against the NCBInr database, using BLASTP parameters as previously described. For short peptide sequences, the following parameters were used - set expectation value cutoff: 200 000; scoring matrix: PAM30; gap costs: Existence 9, Extension 1; word size for wordfinder algorithm: 2; multiple hits window size: 15; threshold: minimum score to add a word to the BLAST lookup table: 16; and use composition-based statistics: 0 or F. Longer peptides were subjected to the following BLASTP parameters: set expectation value cutoff: 10; scoring matrix: BLOSUM62; gap costs: Existence 11, Extension 1; word size for wordfinder algorithm: 3; multiple hits windowsize: 40; threshold: minimum score to add a word to the BLAST lookup table: 11; and use composition-based statistics: 2,T or D.
The BLAST-P output files were merged and exported from Galaxy-P. The BLAST-P and the peptide FASTA files for each sample were imported into the metagenomic/metaproteomic analysis tool MEGAN6. MEGAN6 uses the Lowest Common Ancestor algorithm (LCA) to assign reads to taxa. It allows functional analyses using several different ontological systems. The greatest number of hits was obtained with InterPro2GO for functional classification to Gene Ontology categories and IPR protein families, and those results are reported here. The MEGAN6 LCA parameters used were: minScore = 25.0, maxExpected = 10.0, top Percent = 10.0, min Support = 1, weighted LCA Percent = 80.0. The MEGAN6 mapping file used for taxonomic assignments was acc2interpro-June2016X.abin, and the MEGAN6 mapping file used for InterPro2GO assignments was acc2interpro-June2016X.abin. Note that changes in the LCA parameters or the dates of the mapping files are likely to lead to some changes in assignments. In that sense, the assignments cannot be considered to be 100% definitive.
Data availability
The MS proteomics data in this paper have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomexchange.org/) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD009596.

RESULTS:
Results
High accuracy MS/MS data from residual Pap test supernatants was searched using a two-step method against a database composed of microbial and human protein sequences. The database of microbial species of the urogenital tract [130 bacterial proteomes plus Candida (Supplementary Table S1)] was generated from Human Microbiome Project reference genomes. The database search was performed with ProteinPilot™ within the Galaxy for proteomics (Galaxy-P) platform using the workflow depicted in Fig. 1. High confidence microbial peptide matches were analyzed by using the downstream metagenomic/metaproteomic analysis tool MEGAN6 for taxonomic assignment and functional characterization.
Phylogenetic analysis of pap test samples
Microbial peptides identified in the residual Pap test fluid from five individual samples, and a pool of samples from 40 women, were analyzed using MEGAN6 to assign peptides to microbial taxa. Of the 1463 total peptide spectral matches (PSMs) analyzed, 50% were assigned to phyla, 42% to genera and 15% to species (Table 1).
In the pooled sample, we found 156 PSMs belonging to 6 bacterial phyla (Actinobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Fusobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Spirochaetes) and the phylum Ascomycota (fungi) (Table 2). The number of PSMs assigned to phyla in four of the five individuals ranged from 21 to 67, while in sample NPap933 we found 434 PSM assignments. Of the seven bacterial phyla identified, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Proteobacteria, were identified by at least 2 PSMs in all samples (Table 2), with Firmicutes representing the largest phylum. Bacteroidetes was present at moderate levels, with at least 2 PSMs in the pooled sample and three of the individual samples. The remaining (minor) phyla were represented by a single PSM in the pooled sample, with 1–5 assignments in two or three of the individual samples.
Using a liberal threshold (1 PSM) we identified 30 genera in the pooled and individual Pap test samples (Supplementary Table S2). When we used a moderate threshold of 2 PSMs in at least one sample, the number of genera with PSMs was reduced to 21 (Fig. 2). By applying an even more stringent filter of 2 peptides in one or more samples, the number of genera identified was 18 (five in the pooled sample and 16 in the combined individual samples) (Supplementary Table S2). Lactobacillus was the only genus to meet the 2 peptide threshold in all six samples, and was also the genus with the most peptides assigned in all samples except NPap929. In the pooled sample, Gardnerella was the second most abundant genus (10 peptides), however Gardnerella did not meet the threshold in any of the individual samples. In the individual samples, the second most abundant genera were Corynebacterium, Acinetobacter, and Actinomyces. Of these, Actinomyces did not meet the two peptide threshold in the pooled sample.
At the species level, 218 of the 1463 input PSMs (15%, Table 1) were assigned to 43 bacterial species and the yeast Candida albicans. Using a moderate threshold, 183 assignments were made to 18 bacterial species; 7 were present in the pooled sample and 15 species in one or more of the individual samples (Fig. 3; Supplementary Table S3). Overall, five Lactobacillus species were identified, three Actinomyces species, and two Mobiluncus species. Only two species level assignments were made to NPap137, while NPap933 had 10 species level assignments, more than any individual or the pooled sample. Three species were unique to the NPap pool, having only one or no PSM assignments in the individual Pap test samples, while eleven species were identified in one or more of the individual samples, but not in the pooled sample. No Lactobacillus species were identified in the individual sample NPap929, unlike the other individuals. In contrast, this individual also had a higher number of PSM assignments to Gardnerella vaginalis. Actinomyces urogenitalis was the only species with at least two assignments in four of the five of the individual samples as well as the pooled sample.
Functional analysis of the metaproteome from pap test samples
MEGAN6 was used on BLASTP searches of protein sequences to generate functional characterization of the metaproteome and to assign peptides to protein families and Gene Ontology categories using InterPro2GO. Overall, 113 protein families in 54 Gene Ontology categories were identified with at least two PSMs (Supplementary Table S4 and Supplementary Table S5). The Gene Ontology categories for biological processes are shown in Table 3. In the pooled Pap test sample, 143 PSMs were mapped to 32 protein families in 29 Gene Ontology categories (Supplementary Table S4 and Supplementary Table S5). Seven of the top 20 protein families with the most PSM assignments were associated with glycolysis and lactic acid production, suggesting that the organisms identified were metabolically active. In total, nine of the 32 protein families identified in the pooled sample were associated with glycolysis. Other major protein families included: ribosomal proteins and proteins involved in transcription or translation, and proteins associated with DNA metabolism. The Gene Ontology categories for biological processes with the most PSM assignments were for oxidation-reduction processes, carbohydrate metabolism, and small molecule metabolism (Table 3).
The individual Pap test samples were also analyzed using the InterPro2GO database to assign peptides to protein families and Gene Ontology categories. Eleven protein families had at least two PSM assignments in two or more individual NPap samples (Supplementary Table S5). Unlike the pooled Pap test sample, no proteins associated with glycolysis were identified in multiple individual samples, although nine glycolysis proteins had assignments from NPap933 (Supplementary Table S5). In addition, over 40 ribosomal protein families were identified exclusively in NPap933. Interestingly, FliO, a protein involved in flagellar biosynthesis, was identified in several of the individual samples, but not in the pooled sample or in NPap933. Similar to the pooled Pap test sample, the Gene Ontology categories with the most assignments in multiple individual samples were oxidation-reduction and carbohydrate metabolism (Table 3). The categories for biosynthetic process, RNA and cellular amino acid metabolic processes were more prevalent in the individual Pap test samples than in the pool.
Peptides identified in multiple pap test samples
Our metaproteomic analysis of five individuals and one pool of samples from 40 women yielded a total of 367 microbial peptides assigned to 30 genera (Supplementary Table S2). Twenty-two peptides were identified in more than one sample. Table 4 shows the peptide sequences and the proteins to which they were matched, as well as the nine genus assignments. Twelve out of the twenty-two peptides were from Lactobacillus, including two unique peptides from phosphoglycerate kinase and three unique peptides from glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Two structural proteins from Lactobacillus, 50 S ribosomal protein L7/L12 and S-layer protein, were also identified in two samples. Haloacid dehalogenase peptides from Gardnerella and Viellonella were also identified in two samples.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The proteome of cervical-vaginal fluid (CVF) is extremely complex, containing proteins predominantly synthesized by the endocervix and vaginal cells, but also from the endometrial and tubal secretions and from the peritoneal fluid. In addition to host proteins, the CVF also contains diverse microbial communities resulting from microbes that colonize the cervical-vaginal area. The composition of the human vaginal microbiome varies between women, and under different conditions, such as in pregnancy and after menopause, and may contribute to preterm birth and genitourinary symptoms of menopause. The dominance of Lactobacilli or other lactic acid producing bacteria may protect against infection with HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases. However, the role of the cervical-vaginal microbiota in the etiology of most gynecological conditions is not well understood.
New molecular techniques have made it possible to study microbes without growing them in culture. The studies of the NIH Human Microbiome Project (HMP) have vastly increased the diversity of the bacteria identified in the human vagina over culture-dependent methods, and the development of a comprehensive database of 16 S rRNA sequences from common vaginal bacteria has allowed species level classification of bacteria from clinical samples. These molecular approaches yield detailed information on microbiome composition and the abundance of bacterial taxa present, however the functional significance of diverse microbial communities and their interaction with host proteins in differing states of health and disease is lacking.
Metaproteomic analysis provides a complementary approach to DNA-based phylogentic profiling, yielding information on the structure of polymicrobial communities, as well as protein expression and function. Using mass spectrometry based proteomic techniques, in combination with predicted protein databases based on high throughput sequencing, has the potential to yield important information on host-microbial interactions in healthy and diseased states. In particular, the metaproteome of extracellular microbial proteins may be important for understanding host-microbiome interactions and response to environmental stimuli.
We previously demonstrated the feasibility of using the residual fixative from discarded Pap tests for the identification of human cervical-vaginal proteins by mass spectrometry. Screening for cervical cancer by Pap tests has been performed routinely for over 50 years and over 30 million are performed annually in the U.S. The liquid-based Pap test consists of collecting cervical cells from the external cervical os and placing them into a vial containing an alcohol-based fixative. After processing the cells from the vials and staining them, they are examined by a pathologist to identify the presence of premalignant and malignant cells. Liquid-based Pap tests may also be used for the identification of human papilloma virus infection and the genomic amplification of the human telomerase gene, both of which are associated with the development of cervical cancer. The liquid fixative solution in which the cells are collected for Pap tests is discarded after examination of the cells. Using this unique sample source, we identified over 400 proteins from the Human Uniprot database, and defined a “Normal Pap test Core Proteome” consisting of 153 proteins. To evaluate this approach for the identification of taxonomic and functional information on the vaginal microbiome, these same raw data were analyzed using a two-step method for peptide sequence matching and protein identification for metaproteomic analysis of microbial peptides present in the residual Pap test fixative from women over age 50.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Somaieh Afiuni-Zadeh and Kristin L. M. Boylan contributed equally to this work.
Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41598-018-29092-4.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.