PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human); Bos taurus (bovine)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap; Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Protein carbonylation; Bovine serum albumine; Human plasma; Biotin-hydrazide

ABSTRACT:
Here we describe a peptide-centric approach (OXIPEP), where carbonylated residues within proteins are derivatized with biotin-hydrazide, enriched and identified by mass spectrometry.  The strength of the method lies in an improved protocol for elution of biotinylated peptides from monomeric avidin resin using hot water (95C) and increased sensitivity achieved by reduction of sample losses during sample preparation and chromatographic steps.  For the first time advanced bioinformatics analysis utilising diagnostic biotin fragment ions is used to facilitate semi-automatic in silico evaluation of biotin labelling and to increase the reliability of carbonyl peptide identification.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
OXIPEP: mass spectrometry strategy to characterize protein carbonylation.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
MCO-BSA - BSA that had been subjected to metal-catalyzed oxidation and untreated randomised human plasma sample have been treated with biotin-lc-hydrazide to label carbonylated amino acids. Subsequently proteins were digested and the resulting peptide mixture was subjected to avidin affinity purification to isolated biotinylated-carbonylated peptides. Samples were analysed using nLC-MS/MS on LTQ Orbitrap XL or qExactive HF mass spectrometers.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and an in-house MASCOT server (v2.3.02, Matrix Science Ltd.). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: tryptic or semi-tryptic digestion with up to three missed trypsin cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 6 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteines (+57.02146 Da) as fixed modification and oxidation (+15.99492 Da) of methionine as variable modification. The biotin-tagged samples were searched including the following variable modifications labelled with biotin-lc-hydrazide tag: aminoadipic semialdehyde (K) (+354.17256 Da), glutamic semialdehyde (R) (+312.15076 Da), glutamic semialdehyde (P) (+371.19911 Da), 2-amino-3-ketobutyric acid (T) (+353.18855 Da), decarboxylation of Glu and Asp (E, D) (+325.19363 Da), aspartate semialdehyde (M)(+323.19574 Da) and +14 Da carbonylation of LVKIEAQ (+369.18346 Da).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Protein carbonylation is an irreversible protein oxidation correlated with oxidative stress, various diseases and ageing. Here we describe a peptide-centric approach for identification and characterisation of up to 14 different types of carbonylated amino acids in proteins. The modified residues are derivatised with biotin-hydrazide, enriched and characterised by tandem mass spectrometry. The strength of the method lies in an improved elution of biotinylated peptides from monomeric avidin resin using hot water (95°C) and increased sensitivity achieved by reduction of analyte losses during sample preparation and chromatography. For the first time MS/MS data analysis utilising diagnostic biotin fragment ions is used to pinpoint sites of biotin labelling and improve the confidence of carbonyl peptide assignments. We identified a total of 125 carbonylated residues in bovine serum albumin after extensive in vitro metal ion-catalysed oxidation. Furthermore, we assigned 133 carbonylated sites in 36 proteins in native human plasma protein samples. The optimised workflow enabled detection of 10 hitherto undetected types of carbonylated amino acids in proteins: aldehyde and ketone modifications of leucine, valine, alanine, isoleucine, glutamine, lysine and glutamic acid (+14Da), an oxidised form of methionine - aspartate semialdehyde (-32Da) - and decarboxylated glutamic acid and aspartic acid (-30Da).<h4>Biological significance</h4>Proteomic tools provide a promising way to decode disease mechanisms at the protein level and help to understand how carbonylation affects protein structure and function. The challenge for future research is to identify the type and nature of oxidised residues to gain a deeper understanding of the mechanism(s) governing carbonylation in cells and organisms and assess their role in disease.