PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
organism parts: Plant cell; Whole body
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; carbamoylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Arabidopsis; Syringolin-a; Reactive oxygen species; Pathogen defense; Pseudomonas syringae; Apoplast; Proteasome; Microbe-associated molecular patterns; Flagellin

ABSTRACT:
Akin to mammalian extracellular fluids, the plant apoplastic fluid (APF) contains a unique collection of proteins, RNAs, and vesicles that drive many physiological processes ranging from cell wall assembly to defense against environmental challenges.  Using an improved method to enrich for the Arabidopsis APF, we better defined its composition and discovered that the APF harbors active proteasomes though microscopic detection, proteasome-specific activity and immunological assays, and mass spectrometry showing selective enrichment of the core protease.  Functional analysis of extracellular (ex)-proteasomes revealed that they help promote basal pathogen defense through proteolytic release of microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) such as flg22 from bacterial flagellin that induce protective reactive-oxygen-species (ROS) bursts.  Flagellin-triggered ROS is also strongly suppressed by the enigmatic Pseudomonas syringae virulence effector syringolin-A that blocks ex-proteasome activity.  Collectively, we provide a deep catalog of apoplast proteins and evidence that ex-proteasomes participate in the evolving arms race between pathogens and their plant hosts.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteasomes Accumulate in the Plant Apoplast Where They Participate in Microbe-Associated Molecular Pattern (MAMP)-Triggered  Pathogen Defense

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins from 100 µL of APF, APFp, and CL were precipitated in 4:1:3 (v/v) methanol/chloroform/ water, collected by centrifugation, washed once more with the same mix, and lyophilized to dryness.  The precipitates were resuspended into 100 µL of 8 M urea, and reduced for 1 hr at room temperature with 10 mM dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hr.  The reactions were quenched with 20 mM dithiotreitol, diluted with 900 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration below 1 M, and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50.  The resulting peptides were lyophilized to a final volume of ~200 µL, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid until the pH was below 3.0, and then desalted and concentrated with Pierce C18 tips (ThermoFischer Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  The peptides were eluted in 50 µL of 75% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid, lyophilized, and resuspended in 15 µL of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Nano-scale LC separation of the tryptic peptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation system equipped with a 75 µm x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific), in combination with a 2-hr linear 4%-to-36% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 250 nL/min.  Eluted peptides were analyzed online by a Q-Exactive Plus spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in the positive electrospray ionization mode at a capillary voltage of 2.1 kV.  Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans (mass range of 380-1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 was performed, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 3 x 106, and the maximum fill time set to 200 msec.  High-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of the top eight strongest peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 counts, and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z; the process excluded precursors that had unassigned or +1 to +7 charge states.  MS/MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 300 msec.   The resulting MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5, ThermoFisher Scientific), which was programmed to search the A. thaliana Col-0 proteome database (Araport11_pep_20220914) downloaded from TAIR (http://www.tair.com/.).  Peptides were assigned using SEQUEST HT75, with search parameters set to assume trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a static modification, while oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation were specified as dynamic modifications.  The target false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 (strict) was used as validation for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides.  Proteins containing equivalent peptides that could not be differentiated based on the MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  Label-free quantification as previously described76 was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a minimum Quan value threshold of 0.0001 using unique peptides, and ‘3 Top N’ peptides used for area calculation.  All genotypes/treatments were analyzed by four biological replicates, each analyzed by two technical replicates.  For inclusion in the datasets, the protein had to be detected in at least one technical replicate for each of the four biological replicates.  For proteins detected in two technical replicates, the average values were used, while the actual values were used for those detected by only one technical replicate.  Abundance values among the four biological replicates were normalized using the combined MS1 ion intensities (represented as e-values) for the entire sample or its compartments, or for all peptides from individual proteins as a semi-quantitative measure.