PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Synapse; Brain
diseases: Mental depression
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Synaptic plasticity; Drebrin; Actin; Long-term depression; Phosphorylation; Calpain

ABSTRACT:
Drebrin (DBN), an actin-binding protein critical for the structural integrity and function of dendritic spines, is highly phosphorylated at steady state in neurons. Here, we investigate the phosphorylation dynamics of DBN in the context of chemically induced long-term depression (cLTD), a synaptic plasticity model mimicking activity-dependent weakening of synapses. Using biochemical analyses and mass spectrometry analyses, we show that DBN undergoes rapid and robust changes in phosphorylation following cLTD induction. Notably, cLTD triggers a marked decrease in many DBN phosphorylation sites, accompanied by proteolytic cleavage of the protein, suggesting a tightly regulated mechanism linking post-translational modification to structural remodelling of the synapse. Our findings highlight the dynamic regulation of DBN by phosphorylation during synaptic depression and support its potential role as a modulator of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Phosphoprofile reorganization of the actin binding protein Drebrin during long term depression

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Lysates (in 2% SDS, 150mM NaCl, 10mM dithiothreitol, 40mM 2-chloroacetamide, 50mM TRIS-HCl (pH 8.5), with phosphatase and protease inhibitors) were heated for 10 minutes at 95°C, cooled down to room temperature and incubated with Benzonase (50 units) for 30 minutes at 37°C. After quenching with 80mM dithiothreitol, samples were centrifuged for 10 minutes at 12 000 g and the soluble fraction was subjected to SP3 clean-up and tryptic digest as previously described (PMID: 30464214). Briefly, 200 μg protein aliquots were diluted in acetonitrile (70% final concentration), and paramagnetic beads containing 1:1 hydrophilic and hydrophobic beads were added at a protein/bead ratio of 1:10. After 20 minutes incubation on a rotor wheel, samples were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile. Digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 4 μg trypsin and LysC) was added and samples were incubated over night at 37°C. The peptide containing supernatant was collected, acidified with formic acid (1% final concentration) and dried down. Samples were resolved in 50mM HEPES (pH 8) and labelled with 16-plex tandem mass tag (TMTpro, Fisher Scientific) reagents following the vendors instructions. After combining all samples and C18 SepPak-based clean-up (Waters, 200mg/1cc), samples were fractionated by high-pH reversed phase off-line chromatography (1290 Infinity, Agilent) and pooled into 30 fractions. 10% of each fraction was taken out for global proteome measurements. The remaining 90% were further pooled onto 15 fractions and applied to IMAC based phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges and the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies). For LC-MS/MS measurements, peptides were reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid and separated on a reversed-phase column (20 cm fritless silica microcolumns with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) using a 98 min gradient with a 250 nl/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA) concentration (from 2% to 60%) on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using the following settings: full-scan automatic gain control (AGC) target 3E6 at 60K resolution; scan range 350–1500 m/z; maximum injection time 10ms; MS/MS scan AGC target of 1E5 at 45K resolution; maximum injection time 86ms (global) and 120ms (phosphopeptide enriched samples); normalized collision energy of 30 and dynamic exclusion time of 30s; precursor charge state 2–6, 20 MS2 scans per full scan.

DATA PROCESSING:
RAW data were analyzed with MaxQuant software package (v 1.6.10.43) using the Uniprot databases for mouse (2022–03). The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, deamidation (N and Q) and phosphorylation (STY) and fixed modification of carbamidomethylated cysteine. Reporter ion MS2 for TMT16 was selected (internal and N-terminal) and TMT batch specific corrections factors were specified. The FDR (false discovery rate) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were included for quantification. The resulting text files were used for data analyses. Reverse hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site were excluded. Protein groups and phosphosite tables were further filtered for 100 % valid value. Corrected reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed and normalized using median z-score within each sample.