PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Colon
diseases: Colorectal cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: L-arginine residue; residues isobaric at 128.058578 Da; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation; Acetyl
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Tissue proteomics; Shotgun proteomics; Mass spectrometry; Colorectal cancer; Q exactive orbitrap

ABSTRACT:
Inflammation has been identified as an important factor in cancer development and progression, including colorectal cancer [CRC]. To determine the role of inflammation and the specific contribution of activated fibroblasts in cancer development and progression we analyzed six human CRC tissue specimens and paired normal adjacent mucosa samples by LS/MS-MS. Amongst other, indeed several inflammation associated proteins were found differentially expressed compared to normal colonic mucosa. Two candidate molecules, SPARC and THBS2 were recently identified as proteins of a fibroblast inflammation signature. Analysis of public available RNA expression datasets revealed, that the mRNA of both SPARC and THBS2 are upregulated in CRC, typically in association with the CRC consensus molecular subtype 4 [CMS4]. Immunohistochemistry staining also demonstrated upregulation of SPARC and THBS2 in the tumor stroma compared to normal adjacent mucosa and indicated co-localization with the mesenchymal marker [alpha]SMA. In vitro 3D co-culture experiments with human colon derived fibroblasts and CRC cell lines resulted in enhanced SPARC and THBS2 protein levels when both cell types were cultivated in direct physical contact, compared to fibroblasts or cancer cells alone. This study demonstrates the feasibility of detecting tumor-specific signatures by LC-MS/MS and compatibility with RNA expression datasets. We identified an inflammation signature in CRC tissue and the data emphasized the contribution of activated fibroblasts in these events.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome Profiling Identifies Markers for Inflammation-Related Tumor-Fibroblast Interaction in Colorectal Cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tissue acquisition The study was approved by the Ethics Commission of the Medical University of Vienna (application number 1659/2012). Patients suffering from colorectal cancer and underwent surgery at the General Hospital of Vienna were asked for their informed consent to use part of the resected tissue for analysis of tumor protein markers. Tumor tissue and mucosa from the resection margin (control tissue) were classified according to standard histological evaluation methods and used for protein extraction and LC-MS/MS analysis.  Extraction and digestion of proteins  Frozen tissue samples were incubated in sample buffer (7.5M urea, 1.5M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100mM dithiothreitol) for 10min. Subsequently, proteins were extracted by means of an ultrasonic stick. Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany). Thereafter, in-solution digestion of proteins was performed using trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Germany), as described previously (Bileck, Kreutz et al. 2014, Slany, Bileck et al. 2016). LC-MS/MS analysis Samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% FA containing 10fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.1% FA). 5µl were injected into the nano HPLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) loading peptides on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, peptides were eluted to a 50cmx75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300nl/min, using a gradient from 8 to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 235min. The nano HPLC system was coupled to a QExactive orbitrap with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400 to 1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200), MS/MS scans at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200), using a top 12 method and applying HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy.

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20 193 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

METHODS:
Methods
Tissue acquisition
The study was approved by the Ethics Commission of the Medical University of Vienna (EK 1659/2012). Patients suffering from colorectal cancer who underwent surgery at the General Hospital of Vienna were asked for their informed consent to use part of the resected tissue for analysis of tumor protein markers. Tumor tissue and normal mucosa 15 cm or as far as possible from the tumor (control tissue) were excised by the pathologist and stored at − 80 °C. For protein extraction and LC–MS/MS analysis 6 tissue pairs were used, 3 of them from stage II tumors without any sign of invasion (low-stage) and 3 from tumors that had already spread to the lymph-nodes or the peritoneum (high-stage). Each tissue was analysed individually and the abundance data pooled for statistical analysis. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections were analyzed by IHC.
For immunohistochemistry formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections were obtained from the original 6 patients as well as additional 20 tumors (stages II, III and IV) and 10 normal mucosa resection margins.
Extraction and digestion of proteins
Frozen tissue samples were incubated in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol) for 10 min on ice. Subsequently, proteins were extracted by means of an ultrasonic stick. Protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad-Laboratories, Germany). Thereafter, in-solution digestion of proteins was performed with trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Germany), as described previously. Briefly, 20 µg of protein were concentrated on a pre-washed 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (Pall Austria Filter GmbH, Vienna, Austria). Upon reduction with dithiothreitol (5 mg/ml dissolved in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8) and alkylation with iodoacetamide (10 mg/ml in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer), proteins were digested enzymatically overnight at 37 °C using trypsin (Roche Diagnostics, Germany). After digestion of proteins, peptide samples were cleaned up using C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried and stored until further LC–MS/MS analyses.
LC–MS/MS analysis
Samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30% formic acid containing 10 fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides and then immediately diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid). The synthetic peptides [Glu1-Fribrinopeptide B, EGVNDNEEGFFSAR; M28, TTPAVLDSDGSYFLYSK; HK0, VLETKSLYVR; HK1, VLETK(ε-AC)SLYVR] were spiked into each sample as an internal quality control for monitoring LC–MS instrument stability. Five microliters of the solution were injected into the nano HPLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) loading peptides on a 2 cm × 75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, peptides were eluted to a 50 cm × 75 µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min, using a gradient from 8 to 40% mobile phase B (80% acetonnitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) over 235 min. The nano-HPLC system was coupled to a QExactive orbitrap with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400 to 1400 at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z = 200), MS/MS scans at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z = 200), using a top 12 method and applying HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy.
Protein data interpretation
Identification of proteins and label-free quantification (LFQ) were performed using the MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 software including the Andromeda search engine and the Perseus statistical analysis package version 1.5.2.3, searching against the UniProt database for human proteins (version 102,014 with 20,195 entries, restricted to reviewed entries only). Search criteria included a peptide mass tolerance of 25 ppm, an MS/MS match tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of two missed cleavages and at least one unique peptide per protein. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Furthermore, match between runs was performed using a 5 min match time window. For peptides and proteins, a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 0.01 was applied. Protein regulation was determined by comparing the LFQ values for each individual protein in the different samples using Perseus, normalizing to the same initial protein amount of 20 µg. Regarding the protein inference problem, indistinguishable proteins sharing the same peptides were summed up into protein groups. For quantitative analysis, a protein had to be found in at least 4 of 6 replicates in a group and imputation of missing values were performed based on normal distribution. Changes in protein abundance values were determined by a two-sided t test, considering proteins as significantly altered when the abundance difference was at least threefold with p < 0.05. Additionally, to highlight the most robust changes in protein abundance, we performed a permutation-based FDR correction applying a global FDR < 0.05. Proteins meeting this additional criterion are marked with a “+” for multiparameter (MP) significance in the tables und used for further study.
Additionally, raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) utilizing Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science, UK) in order to enable upload of mass spectrometric data to a publicly available repository. Therefore, protein identification was performed by searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20.193 entries) with mass tolerance at the MS1 level of 50 ppm and 100 mmu at the MS2 level allowing for up to two missed cleavages per peptide. Peptide modifications set were carbamido-methylation for cysteines as fixed modification as wells as methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Data was submitted to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository and can be accessed via http://www.proteomeexchange.org with the identifier PXD006776.
Biological context of protein subset
To put the 24 protein subset into biological context, we analysed GO-term enrichment of biological processes using the Cytoscape plugin ClueGO in combination with CluePedia. Detected proteins were used as universe, p values were corrected according to Benjamini–Hochberg.
Immunohistochemical analysis
Tumors were fixed, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. After sectioning, slides were dewaxed by incubation at 65 °C for 10 min and subsequent xylol treatment. Rehydration was performed in a gradient of ethanol and ddH2O, then endogenous peroxidases were inactivated with 0.3% (v/v) H2O2 in 1× PBS and antigens retrieved in a steamer with 10 mM citrate-buffer pH 6. Slides were washed in 1× PBS containing 0.1% Tween 20 (PBST), blocked for 5 min at room temperature (RT) with Ultra V Block (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated with primary antibodies for 30 min at RT. If not otherwise stated, primary antibodies were diluted in PBST containing 1% goat serum (Dako) as follows: THBS2 (TA590658, Origene) 1:150, αSMA (1A4, Dako) 1:100, SerpinB5 (sc-271,694, Santa Cruz) 1:100, SPARC (D10F10, Cell Signaling) 1:2400 in SignalStain Antibody Diluent (Cell Signaling). Bound antibodies were detected by incubation for 10 min with Primary Antibody Enhancer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by 15 min with HRP Polymer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), visualized by incubation for 2 min with DAB substrate (Dako), and counterstained with hematoxylin solution.
For analysis, slides were digitalized using a microscopic slidescanner (Pannoramic Midi, 3DHistech) with a 40× objective and 5 randomly chosen areas analyzed using Tissue Studio® (Definiens®) histomorphometric software (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Marker intensity thresholds were set to 0.25/0.5/0.75 for low/mid/high DAB detection. The percentage of stained area compared to total area for both epithelial and stromal compartments of tumor/normal tissue sections were statistically analyzed with GraphPad Prism 6 by Mann–Whitney U test and considered significant when p < 0.5.
Computational analysis of differential expression
For comparing gene expression between the subtypes and healthy colon mucosa, published data sets were obtained from ArrayExpress as used in the consensus subtype classification of CRC. Additionally, the data set GSE44076, also obtained from ArrayExpress, was analyzed independently.
All analysis were performed with the statistics program R. The datasets were pre-processed and normalized as follows: Data from the consensus subtype classification was normalized using fRMA. Comparison was made between the consensus molecular subtypes (CMS2-CMS1, CMS3-CMS1… etc.). For GSE44076, normalization was performed using RMA (as no fRMA vectors were available for the hgu219 platform) followed by comparison of data between mucosa, normal and tumor.
For all datasets, limma package (Bioconductor.org) was used in R to perform linear modelling and create contrasts for pair-wise comparisons. After model fitting, empirical Bayesian statistics was used for analysis of differential expression. FDR detection was performed with the Benjamini–Hochberg method.

RESULTS:
Results
Protein abundance in tumor tissue
Surgical specimens of both tumor and normal mucosa were obtained from 6 colon cancer patients. With regard to tumor stage, there were 3 localised tumors (stage II, low-stage) and 3 invasive tumors (stage III and IV, high-stage). To avoid artefacts caused by cell isolation procedures whole tissue specimens were homogenized and extracted using sample buffer to yield total protein samples for proteome analysis by LC–MS/MS. We identified a total of 4864 proteins in the analyzed samples (Fig. 1a; Additional file 2: Table S1). 
Statistical analysis of the pooled results revealed 122 proteins that were increased in abundance and 81 proteins that were significantly decreased in the tumor tissues compared to normal mucosa. When the comparison was made separately for low-stage versus normal and high-stage versus normal, alterations were similar for the majority of proteins with very few exceptions. Relevant for our analysis were fibroblast activation protein (FAP) and the macrophage marker MRC1 that only achieved multi-parameter significance in low-stage tumors versus normal tissue. Both proteins were included in spite of this restriction, because they are classical cell type markers. In addition, the mast cell markers TPSAB1, CPA3, and CMA1 were significantly different in high-stage tumors compared to low-stage (Additional file 2: Table S1).
To determine whether proteins with altered abundance originated from the tumor epithelium or from the connective tissue, we turned to the analysis of gene expression data published by Isella et al., who identified stromal contribution (SC) to CRC xenografts by their host origin. Alignment with the SC calculated by Isella et al. was possible for 187 out of 203 proteins identified in our analysis (Additional file 3: Table S2). Of those proteins 115 had elevated levels in the tumor and 73 had higher abundance in the normal tissue. The alignment revealed that the majority of proteins that were elevated in the tumor (104/115) were mostly of parenchymal origin (SC < 50%) (Fig. 1b). This included SerpinB5, a protein induced by TGFβ signaling and/or cell stress as the strongest increased protein. Only 11 of the high-abundance proteins were of stromal origin (highlighted in Fig. 1b; Table 1). Prominent among those proteins was latent-transforming growth factor β-binding protein 2 (LTBP2)—an indicator of TGFβ signaling that has been previously identified as a product of CRC-associated fibroblasts obtained from a spontaneous mouse colon cancer model. Another protein whose level was elevated in the tumor was insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7 (IGFBP7) that has been recently described as a tumor stroma and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) marker in various epithelial cancers. The fibroblast activation protein (FAP) was increased more than fourfold. The elevated stromal proteins thrombospondin-2 (THBS2) and secreted protein acidic and cysteine-rich (SPARC) have been previously identified as parts of a fibroblast-specific inflammation signature. In addition, collagens and lysyloxidase homolog 2 (COL8A1, COL12A1, LOXL2) were found elevated as well as adipocyte enhancer-binding protein 1 (AEBP1) that is involved in wound healing and the endothelial activation marker endoglin (ENG). 
Forty-five of the 73 proteins that were decreased in abundance in the tumor came mostly from the stroma (SC > 50% according to) including ECM constituents and mast cell markers. In addition, ECM proteins of epithelial origin were also altered in a tumor-specific manner (Table 2). Among the collagen I associated FACIT collagens, the type XII α1-chain was increased. The type XIV α1-chain was decreased, but narrowly missed the threefold change threshold (not shown). Among the widespread network collagens, the type VI α5-chain was decreased. At the same time type VIII α1-chain was increased and the basement membrane component laminin B shifted from subunit B3 to subunit B2. In addition, LOXL2 was increased. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) were not strongly changed: for MMP 1, 8, and 9 differences missed significance (p > 0.05) and MMP 2 and 14 were increased but missed the threshold (not shown). The small leucine-repeat proteoglycans decorin (DCN) and asporin (ASPN) were strongly decreased. 
The mast cell markers TPSAB1, CPA3 and CMA1 were decreased in abundance especially in the low-stage tumors together with reduced levels of the macrophage marker MRC1 (Table 3). In high-stage tumors the abundance of these proteins increased and was significantly higher than in low-stage, but not higher than in normal tissue. 
In summary, this defines a set of 24 proteins, 20 of those originating from the stroma, playing important roles in ECM-organization, angiogenesis, TGFβ signaling and inflammation (Fig. 2). Gene ontology (GO)-term enrichment analysis based on biological processes grouped most of the 24 proteins into ECM-organization (GO ID: GO:0030198, 14 proteins, p < 0.0001,), angiogenesis (GO ID: GO:0001525, 8 proteins, p < 0.0001) and TGFβ receptor signaling pathways (GO ID: GO:0007179, 3 proteins, p = 0.0017) (Additional file 4: Table S3). Due to the mostly indirect role of inflammation, the specific GO-term “inflammatory response” (GO ID: GO:0006954) and child terms were not covered, instead processes connected to inflammation like “response to corticosteroid” (GO ID: GO:0031960, 3 proteins, p < 0.0001), “blood vessel development” (GO ID: GO:0001568, 8 proteins, p < 0.0001) or “endothelial cell migration” (GO ID: GO:0043542, 4 proteins, p < 0.0001) were included. 
Transcriptome profile in published data sets
To assess whether the alterations we observed were similar at the transcriptional level, we turned to transcriptome datasets available from Sanz-Pamplona et al. who analyzed gene expression of 98 stage II CRC tumors and their corresponding normal mucosa as well as of mucosa from 50 healthy individuals. We compared the published RNA levels of parenchymal SerpinB5, as well as 6 upregulated stromal proteins (THBS2, SPARC, FAP, COL12A1, COL8A1, LTBP2, Fig. 3a–f). Significant induction of RNA levels was found for all 7 markers in the tumor samples as compared with the normal mucosa indicating that the upregulated proteins found by LC–MS/MS originated from cells of the tumor and its microenvironment (Fig. 3a–g). Interestingly, increased mRNA expression was already observed in normal tissue of tumor patients compared to healthy donors for THBS2, SPARC, LTBP2 (Fig. 3a, b, f) as well as the collagens COL8A1 and COL12A1 (Fig. 3d, e). For the mast cell marker CMA1 and the macrophage marker MRC1, mRNA-levels in the normal mucosa of CRC patients were elevated compared to both healthy and tumor tissue. In the tumor tissue, CMA1 mRNA was low throughout, while MRC1 mRNA levels showed high inter-individual variations (Fig. 3h, i). Overall, mRNA level changes correlated well with protein abundance alterations for 19 of the 24 proteins in our marker set (Additional file 1: Figures S2, S3). Exceptions were the laminin chains, collagen XXVIII, ASPN and AEBP1. 
RNA expression data from the CRC consensus classification were used as a second source for gene expression profiles. The connective tissue markers we found increased at protein level (Table 1) were also increased on the RNA level in CSM4 tumors that are characterized by a high connective tissue content when compared to any other subtype. Figure 3 shows the regulation pattern for FAP, THBS2, SPARC, COL8A1, and COL12A1 (Fig. 4a–e). SerpinB5, originating from the parenchyma, was not enriched in CMS4 tumors (Fig. 4f). 
Tissue localization of proteins
From the list of proteins increased in the tumor, 3 were chosen for verification of tissue localization. Those were SerpinB5, because it was the strongest elevated marker and should localize to the parenchyma; SPARC and THBS2, because they have previously been described as prominent parts of a fibroblast-specific inflammation signature and their SC was > 70%. Tissue sections of 26 CRC tissues (tumor stage II–IV) and 16 normal mucosa specimen were stained by IHC and quantified separately for the epithelial and stromal compartment (Additional file 1: Figure S1).
SerpinB5 staining was very weak in normal mucosa (Fig. 5a). In the tumors, staining was strong and almost exclusively localized in epithelial cells (Fig. 5b). Quantification of staining intensity showed a significant increase in the tumor both when total tissue was assessed and when only the epithelial cells were scored (Fig. 5c, d). Specifically, all tumors harbored SerpinB5-positiv cells representing 61.3 ± 20.6% of the parenchyme. This represents a highly significant increase as compared to normal tissue (10.5 ± 9.2%). 
In contrast, staining for THBS2 was seen in both the tumor and the stroma. In normal colon tissue, it was highest in the blood vessel walls and the muscularis mucosae. Otherwise staining was evenly distributed between the stromal and epithelial compartment (Fig. 5e). In the 6 tumors used in the proteome analysis, IHC showed increased staining in the stroma (Fig. 5f; Additional file 1: Figure S4). In the larger patient cohort used for IHC validation we found higher inter-specimen variability than for SerpinB5 or SPARC. In some of the specimen, staining intensity increased in the epithelium as well as in the stroma. This is also reflected by the quantification results that produced significant increase in staining intensity for both total tumor and stroma, but also large standard deviations (Fig. 5g, h).
Overall SPARC staining intensities were weak. In the normal colon, signals came mostly from the submucosal blood vessel endothelial cells. Both the epithelial cells and the stromal cells of the mucosa were almost all negative (Fig. 5i). In the tumor stroma, staining increased compared to the normal stroma (Fig. 5j) but the difference did not reach significance (Fig. 5k). Higher magnification revealed that staining was strongest in individual cells of the tumor microenvironment (Fig. 5j insert). This population was observed in all 26 tumor specimen and accounted for 10.66 ± 5.15% of the stained area in the tumors, while it was almost absent (0.46 ± 0.64%) in normal tissue (Fig. 5l).
αSMA was stained as a well-established fibroblast activation marker and was positive in proximity to the epithelium and around blood vessels in normal tissue (Fig. 5m). In the tumor it was clearly elevated throughout the stromal compartment (Fig. 5n) similar to the staining pattern of THSB2 (Fig. 5f).

INTRODUCTION:
Background
Accumulating evidence powerfully demonstrates that reactive fibroblasts are central players in physiological and pathological processes. Activation patterns consist of alterations in the cytoskeleton, production of growth factors as well as cytokines, modulation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and a migratory phenotype. Cancer associated fibroblasts (CAF) are activated by growth factors derived from the cancer cells (e.g. transforming growth factor β—TGFβ) and develop a wound healing phenotype. They are also stimulated by the inflammatory environment which is a hallmark of cancer. Especially cells of the innate immune system may be pro-tumorigenic, pro-angiogenic and pro-metastatic. This resulted in the description of cancer as a wound that does not heal. In this chronic inflammatory environment, endothelial cells and fibroblasts have been shown to express cell type-specific pro-inflammatory signatures that can be modeled by exposure of cells to interleukin 1β (IL1β) in vitro. Comparison of fibroblasts obtained from the skin, the lung and the bone marrow demonstrated that these signatures are tissue-specific and that tissue-specific characteristics are retained in cancer-associated fibroblasts.
In colorectal cancer (CRC) such activated fibroblasts have been identified as a driving force of tumor development and both TGFβ and inflammation are activating factors. High expression of TGFβ is a well-established characteristic in CRC and has been identified as a marker of poor prognosis. Inflammation is already apparent in premalignant lesions derived either from chronic inflammatory bowel disease giving rise to typically inflammation-driven tumors or from upregulation of cyclooxygenase-2 in colonic polyps. The inflammatory environment has been shown to support expansion of tumor-initiating cells by providing eicosanoids and interleukins. These small subpopulations of tumor-initiating cells have been identified in CRC and were reported to be involved in therapy resistance and metastasis.
This paper aims to determine whether a deeper insight into the connective tissue processes in CRC and the contribution of cancer-associated fibroblasts can be gained by using tissue-proteomics. For this purpose, we have undertaken a liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) based proteome analysis of human CRC tissue specimens and paired normal intestine. We focused on stromal, inflammation related proteins, verified selected markers using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and linked those candidates to the Consensus Molecular Subtype signatures by screening publicly available RNA expression datasets.