PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Heart
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; carbamoylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Peptidomics; Nano lc-ms/ms; Atrial natriuretic peptide; Isolated atrial amyloidosis

ABSTRACT:
Isolated atrial amyloidosis (IAA) is a localized cardiac disorder characterized by atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) amyloids deposition in the atria, linked to aging and atrial fibrillation (AF). While monomeric ANP regulates blood pressure, its dimeric form is associated with cardiovascular conditions, including AF. The mechanistic link between ANP aggregation, IAA, and AF remains unclear. Here, we present the first high-resolution structural characterization of ANP fibrils extracted from AF patients, revealing two distinct fibril polymorphs. Both present covalent ANP dimers as building blocks but diverge in their structural architecture: one features antiparallel dimers stabilized by a single disulfide bond, while the other consists of parallel dimers bridged by two interchain disulfide bonds. These fibril morphologies were conserved across patients, suggesting a common aggregation mechanism in IAA. Overall, our findings ascribe to dimeric ANP a critical role in amyloid formation, offering promising directions for earlier detection and treatment of IAA.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Structural characterization of atrial natriuretic peptide amyloid fibrils from patients with atrial fibrillation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteomic analysis was performed using nano-liquid chromatography electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-ESI-MS/MS) in a shotgun, label-free approach on water extracts obtained from Pt1 and Pt2. Briefly, fibrillar proteins were solubilized in 8 M urea for 1 hour at room temperature and protein concentration was determined using Bradford assay. Protein samples were reduced with 13 mM dithioerythritol (DTE) for 30 min at 50 °C and alkylated with 26 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hour at RT, in the dark. Alkylation was quenched with 1 mM aqueous methylamine. Samples were subsequently diluted with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) and digested overnight at 37 °C using sequencing-grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) at a 20:1 protein-to-enzyme ratio. The digestion was blocked by acidification to inactivate the protease. Prior to nLC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were desalted and purified using Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Acquired raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.5). Database searching was performed against the Homo sapiens reference proteome from UniProt (45,451 target sequences, downloaded on 18th June 2025). Search parameters included semi-tryptic cleavage specificity, with carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal carbamylation as a variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Percolator node was used to filter peptide spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides to a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. Peptide identifications were further filtered to include only those with XCorr ≥ 1.5