PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Ascend; FAIMS compensation voltage
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Brain; palaeoproteomics; lc-ms/ms; ion mobility; faims

ABSTRACT:
Palaeoproteomics leverages the persistence, diversity, and biological import of ancient proteins to explore the past, and answer fundamental questions about phylogeny, environment, diet, and disease. These insights are largely gleaned from hard tissues like bone and teeth, as well-established protocols exist for extracting ancient proteins from mineralised tissues. No such method, however, exists for the soft tissues, which are underexplored in palaeoproteomics given permission for destructive analysis routinely depends on a proven methodology. Considering less than one-tenth of all human proteins are expressed in bone, compared to three-quarters in the internal organs, the amount of biological information presently inaccessible is substantial. We address this omission with an optimised LC-FAIMS-MS/MS workflow yielding the largest, most diverse palaeoproteome yet described. Using archaeological human brains, we test ten protocols with varied chemistries and find that urea lysis effectively disrupts preserved membrane regions to expose low-abundant, intracellular analytes. Further, we show that ion mobility spectrometry improves unique protein identification by as much as 40%, and represents a means of “pre-cleaning” dirty archaeological samples. Our methodology will be useful for improving protein recovery from a range of ancient tissues and depositional environments.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Deep palaeoproteomic profiling of archaeological human brains

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We tested ten protocols for ancient protein recovery from brain tissues using a bottom-up LC-MS/MS approach, comparing the effectiveness of a range of extraction buffers and clean-up strategies. The former include urea, SDS and sodium laurate (SL); while the latter include the in-StageTip method (iST), solid-phase extraction (SPE), suspension trapping (S-Trap), filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), and in-gel purification with SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). We acquired liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) data in both data dependent- and data independent-acquisition modes (DDA and DIA, respectively). We also assessed the use of a high-field asymmetric-waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) source at different compensation voltages to reduce chemical noise and improve detection of low-abundant proteins.

DATA PROCESSING:
Both DDA and DIA data were searched against the human brain proteome with semi-specific tryptic digestion and up to three missed cleavages allowed, with the following modifications: carbamidomethylation of Cys (fixed), N-terminal acetylation (variable), oxidation of Met and Pro (variable), and deamidation of Asn, Gln and Arg (variable). The human brain proteome was retrieved by downloading all protein-coding genes detected in the human brain (n = 15,331) from the Human Protein Atlas (v.23.0, accessed 15.02.2024), and converting Ensembl identifiers to UniProt accession numbers using the UniProt ID mapping tool (v. 2024.01). Having removed duplicates, the remaining proteins (n = 15,049) were downloaded as a FASTA file. A search of DDA data based on in silico FASTA digest with label-free quantification and match-between-runs in MaxQuant (v.2.4.3.0) yielded the fewest unique proteins identified at 1% FDR but the most information in terms of protein modification, and all further analyses of DDA data were performed on this dataset using the R programming language (v.2024.04.2). Global peptide and protein lists were removed of potential contaminants, reversed identifications, and identifications with < 2 unique peptides, then filtered for q-value and posterior error probability (PEP) ≤ .01. Modified specific and dependent peptide lists were removed of unannotated modifications and those corresponding to < 2 unique peptides, then filtered for q-value and PEP ≤ .05. A search of DDA data based on in silico FASTA digest with label-free quantification and match-between-runs in MaxQuant (v.2.4.3.0) [49] yielded the fewest unique proteins identified at 1% FDR but the most information in terms of protein modification, and all further analyses of DDA data were performed on this dataset using the R programming language (v.2024.04.2). Global peptide and protein lists were removed of potential contaminants, reversed identifications, and identifications with < 2 unique peptides, then filtered for q-value and posterior error probability (PEP) ≤ .01. Modified specific and dependent peptide lists were removed of unannotated modifications and those corresponding to < 2 unique peptides, then filtered for q-value and PEP ≤ .05. DDA data were searched against in silico FASTA digest with label-free quantification and match-between-runs in MaxQuant (v.2.4.3.0). Spectral library search of DIA data based on library-free generation was performed in DIA-NN (v.1.9).