PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Colon
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; lactic acid
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Post-translation modification; Subcellular fractionation method; Lactylation

ABSTRACT:
Protein lactylation is a novel post-translational modification (PTM) involved in many important physiological processes such as macrophage polarization, immune regulation and tumour cell growth. However, most studies to date have focused on the function of lactylation on histones, and little is known about the distribution of lactylation on subcellular proteins. Here, we utilized subcellular fractionation methods to perform the global profiling of lactylation in human colon carcinoma HCT116 cells. This approach detected more unique lactylated proteins compared to the standard method when the amount of antibody and cells was equal. In total, 899 lysine lactylation sites were detected on 441 proteins, including 291 newly discovered lactylation sites and 63 newly lactylated proteins reported under the DDA and DIA acquisition modes. Functional enrichment analysis revealed that the majority of these proteins are involved in nucleosome assembly and slicesome function. For each subcellular fraction, the newly discovered lactylated proteins account for 10% to 20%. Notably, XPC not only has four new lactylation modification sites, but also one of which has been shown to be essential for the nucleotide excision repair process. Additionally, one of the newly discovered lactylation sites in scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) was found to be very important for the negative regulation of transcriptional activity. In conclusion, we describe a novel method that provides for understanding the characterization of subcellular lactylated proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Global Profiling of Protein Lactylation Across Subcellular Fractionation Methods in HCT-116

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
To detect lactylation, cells were treated with 25 mM sodium lactate for 48 h. The harvested cells were washed three times with cold PBS and then centrifuged at 800 g for 5min. The cell pellets were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, cat. no. P1003B) containing protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor (ApexBio Technology, cat. no. K1013) on ice for 30 min. Subcellular components were extracted using three commercial kits according to the respective manufacturer's recommended procedures. The Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Protein Extraction Kits (Beyotime, P0027) were used for nuclear proteins. The Mitochondria/Nuclei Isolation Kit (KeyGEN BioTECH, KGA828) was used for cytoplasmic and mitochondrial proteins. The Minute Plasma Membrane Protein Isolation Kit (Invent Biotechnologies,SM-005) was used for membranal proteins. The Protein concentrations were determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Beyotime, P0011).

DATA PROCESSING:
For DDA Data, PEAKS Studio XPro (Bioinformatics Solutions) against the UniProt human proteome database (20423 human entries, downloaded in May 2023) was used to analyze the mass data. Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid, mass tolerance for precursors was set to 10 ppm and mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.02 Da. Other parameters used for data analysis include allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages and semi-specific trypsin digestion. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and lysine lactylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to 1% FDR employing a target-decoy database search approach. For lactylation assignment, the modified peptides must reach an AScore ≥ 20. For DIA data, Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks (DiaNN, v1.8.1) was used to identification with FASTA digest for library-free search/library generation. The parameters were set as following, trypsin was set as the protease and allowing a maximum of one missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N termini were set as variable modifications. To add the lysine lactylation to the modification, the command 1 (--strip-unknown-mods) and command 2 (--var-mod Unimod:378, 72.021129, K) have been added to the additional options. The output files were filtered to a 1% FDR.