PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver; Liver
diseases: Obesity
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Redox proteomics; mass spectrometry; oxidative signaling; fibroblasts; cancer; obesity; redox stress.

ABSTRACT:
Cysteine oxidative modifications are fundamental signaling events that regulate cellular functions under both physiological and pathological conditions. However, our understanding of these modifications is limited by their low abundance and the technical challenges associated with studying their dynamics in a comprehensive and unbiased manner. Here, we developed the SICyLIA-TMT workflow, which uses light and heavy iodoacetamide (IAA) to sequentially label reduced and reversibly oxidized cysteine residues within the same sample. By applying tandem mass tags (TMTs) to differentially label peptides of each experimental conditions, our strategy allows simultaneous analysis of both oxidative modification dynamics and protein levels across multiple experimental conditions from only micrograms of starting material. Furthermore, to enhance the detection of low-abundance, cysteine residues carrying oxidative modifications, we dedicated a TMT channel as carrier for heavy IAA-labelled peptides (SICyLIA-cTMT). This strategy remarkably increased the quantification of reversibly oxidized cysteine residues and enabled precise stoichiometry calculations. Last, combining SICyLIA-TMT with the latest generation of MS instruments, Orbitrap Astral, we halved the measuring time in the mass spectrometer without impacting the depth of the redox proteome. We showed the applicability of SICyLIA-TMT to both cells in culture and full organs under stress condition. Hence, SICyLIA-cTMT is a versatile method that achieves unparalleled quantification accuracy and depth of the redox proteome while significantly reducing MS analysis time, making a significant step change in the study of oxidative signaling.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
SICyLIA-cTMT enables dissecting redox proteome dynamics with high accuracy and depth at micrograms scale (PART 6 =  Metabolically stressed liver tissues without carrier).

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein concentration was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit (PierceTM). Proteins were reduced with DTT, final concentration 10 mM, to reduce reversible oxidative modifications on cysteine residues, for 1 hr at room temperature, shaking 1,000 rpm, which were subsequently alkylated in the dark with heavy IAA (13C2D2H2INO, Sigma), 55 mM final concentration, 1h at room temperature, shaking 1,000 rpm. Alkylated proteins were precipitated in two steps using 24% and 10% solutions of trichloroacetic acid (TCA). In both steps, pellets were incubated at 4 °C for 10 min and centrifuged at 18,000 g for 5 min. Supernatants were carefully aspirated and pellets were finally washed with water until the supernatant reached neutral pH. For CAFs treated with hydrogen peroxide, proteins were precipitates with ice cold acetone overnight at -20˚C. Precipitated proteins were washed twice with ice cold acetone. Washed pellets were reconstituted in HEPES 200 mM and digested first with Endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako chemicals) for one hour, followed by Trypsin overnight (Promega). The digested peptides from each experiment, pool or carrier samples, were differentially labelled using Thermo Fisher Scientific TMT16plex reagent for liver tissues and CAFs with carrier channel samples or with TMT10plex reagent for all the other experiments. 20 g (for TMT16plex) and 30 g (for TMT 10Plex) of each sample was labelled with 0.1 mg of TMT reagent dissolved in 50 μl of 100% anhydrous acetonitrile. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 2 hours shaking at 1,000 rpm and quenched adding a 5% hydroxylamine solution. Fully labelled samples were mixed in equal amount and desalted using a 50 mg Sep Pak C18 reverse phase solid-phase extraction cartridge (Waters). High pH peptide fractionation  Desalted TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm i.d. - Kinetex EVO (5 μm, 100 Å)) on a HPLC system (Agilent, LC 1260 Infinity II, Agilent). A two-step gradient was applied, from 1–28% B in 42 min, then from 28–46% B in 13 min to obtain a total of 21 fractions for MS analysis as previously described 9. MS analysis on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos and Q-Exactive HF Fractionated peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF or or to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A (water) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded with 6 µl of buffer A into a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Packed emitter was kept at 50 °C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using different gradients which we optimized for three sets of fractions: 1–7, 8–15, and 16–21. Each fraction was acquired for a duration of 190 minutes for the Fusion Lumos or 120 minutes for the Q-Exactive HF. Eluting peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ESI Source Solutions) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. The Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) was used for data acquisition. A full scan was acquired at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, with a target value of 3e6 ions for a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 10 most intense ions for the Q-Exactive HF, or during a 3 sec cycle time for the Fusion Lumos. Ions were selected within an isolation window of 0.8 m/z, for a maximum injection time of 96 ms, or a target value of 100,000 ions. Peptide fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution for the Q-Exactive HF, or at 50,000 resolution for the Fusion Lumos.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.14.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine, querying SwissProt Homo sapiens (42,438 entries) or Mus musculus (25,198 entries) database. First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. MaxQuant was set to quantify on “Reporter ion MS2”, and TMT10 or 16 plex was chose as Isobaric label. Interference between TMT channels were corrected by MaxQuant using the correction factors provided by the manufacturer. The “Filter by PIF” option was activated and a “Reporter ion tolerance” of 0.003 Da was used. Modification by Iodoacetamide heavy or light on Cysteine residues (Carbamidomethylation), Methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. No fixed modification was used in the search. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. The files from MaxQuant output: “proteinGroups.txt”, “modificationSpecificPeptides.txt”, “peptides.txt” and both heavy and light “Carbamidomethyl (C)Sites.txt” were used for the analysis in Perseus version 1.6.15.0. The “proteinGroups.txt” file was used for proteome analysis and for normalization of cysteine containing peptides. The modificationSpecificPeptides.txt file was used as main table for peptide quantification. The columns with headers “C count”, “Start/End position”, “Length”, “Leading razor protein” from the peptides.txt file, and the columns with headers “Sequence Features”, “Score diff”, “Localisation prob”, “Position” and “Fasta” from the heavy and light Carbamidomethyl (C)Sites.txt files were merged to the modificationSpecificPeptides.txt file using the corresponding id and “Matching by row” tool in Perseus. The protein or peptides specified in MaxQuant as “Reverse” and “Potential Contaminants” were removed from all tables. For protein quantification, protein groups indicated as “Only identified by site” and those identified with zero unique peptides were removed from the table. Peptides with “Cys count” lower than 1 were excluded from analysis, and only cysteine containing peptides robustly quantified in all the replicate experiments were normalized to the total protein levels and included in the quantification analysis. The annotation of the cysteine residues was based on the sequence features database of UniProt using the Site Annotation built-in tool in Perseus. Gene Ontology annotation analysis was also performed using the built-in tool in Perseus. To assess the significance of regulated cysteine residues between experimental conditions, Student’s t-test or ANOVA test were used with a permutation-based FDR below 5%.