PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Testis
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Crispr/cas9; Kunitz domain; Proteolysis; Infertility; Wap domain; Spermiogenesis

ABSTRACT:
Our research defines the pivotal roles of the WFDC locus genes in male fertility, particularly in the regulation of sperm development and function. By employing CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene editing strategy to study this gene family, we provided robust genetic evidence confirming their interconnected functions, which are crucial for sperm differentiation and maturation. Disruptions within these genes can result in infertility, highlighting their regulatory significance. These findings substantiate the potential of targeting EPPIN and related genes for male contraceptive development. Moreover, our study suggests that mutations in the WFDC locus could be instrumental in diagnosing and treating idiopathic male infertility, thereby presenting new therapeutic prospects for reproductive health.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Multiple reproductive tract-specific whey acidic protein four-disulfide core genes demonstrate functional requirement for sperm differentiation and function in mice

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The tissues were lysed in 8M urea buffer followed by reduction and alkylation using IAA. The protein digestion was carried out using LysC and Trypsin proteases. The peptides were desalted on Water C18 50mg SePak column. The TMT peptide labelling was carried out using TMT10 plex as per manufacturer protocol. The offline deep fractionation was done on Agilent 1260 HPLC system to generate a 24 fraction pool. The fractions were analyzed online using VanVanquish Neo UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The MS data was acquired using TMT MS2 method.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data was processed using MSFragger (v3.5) and ion intensities extracted using MASIC. The reference protein database was downloaded from GENCODE (mouse M32 release). ). The gene product inference and iBAQ-based quantification was carried out using the gpGrouper algorithm (PMID: 30093420). The median normalized iBAQ values were used for data analysis.