PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Bone marrow; Blood cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Bone marrow; Red cells; Reticulocyte; Absolute quantification

ABSTRACT:
Erythropoiesis is the fabrication process of erythrocytes and is located in bone marrow. After commitment, erythroid progenitors differentiate into erythroblasts and generate immature reticulocytes. Reticulocytes are then released in the blood circulation and mature into ertythrocytes. While absolute quantification of the proteome of erythroblasts, circulating reticulocytes and ertythrocytes have already been studied, a few is known about immature reticulocytes located in the bone marrow. Here, we mesured the absolute quantification of immature bone marrow reticulocytes and compare it to mature circulating reticulocytes and erythrocytes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Comprehensive Phenotypic and Proteomic Analyses of Human Reticulocyte Maturation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
One million of reticulocytes from n=4 different patients were lysed in 50µl of lysis buffer (Tris HCl 100mM pH8.5, sodium dodecyl sulfate 2%) and boiled 5 minutes at 95°C. Proteins were digested using the Filtered-Aided-Sample-Preparation method (FASP) essentially as described. Briefly, protein disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated by adding a final concentration of 20mM TCEP and 50mM chloroacetamide and heating the samples 5 minutes at 95°C. After cooling at room temperature, extracts were diluted in 3 volume of Tris Urea buffer (8M Urea, 50mM Tris/HCl 50mM pH8.5) and transferred onto 30kDa centrifuged filters (Millipore). Samples were centrifuged 20-30 minutes at 12 000 g, wash 3 times in Tris Urea buffer and 3 times in Tris/HCl 50mM, pH8.5, before their overnight digestion with 1µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37°C on the filter. Digested peptides were then eluted by centrifugation, and fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips in 5 fractions and dried in a speedvac. Peptides of each fraction were solubilized in 10 µl of 0.1% Trifluoroacetique acid, 10% acetonitril (ACN) loading buffer. Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry analyses were performed on an U3000 RSLC nanoflow-HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1 µl of each fraction were concentrated and washed on a C18 reverse-phase precolumn (3 m particle size, 100 A˚ pore size, 75 m inner diameter, 2 cm length, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were then separated by C18 rapid separation liquid chromatography (RSLC) Dionex U3000 on an Aurora C18 reverse phase column (1.6 μm particle size, 100 Angström pore size, 75μm inner diameter, 25cm length) with a 3 h binary gradient from 99% solution A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 55% solution B (80% ACN, 0.085% formic acid) before injection into an Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in a data dependent scheme with full MS scans acquired, followed by up to 10 successive MS/MS HCD-fragmentations on the most abundant ions detected. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. Mass spectrometer settings for full scan MS were: full MS automated gain control (AGC) target 1.106 with 60 ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT) and resolution of 70 000. The MS scans spanned from 350 to 1500 m/z. Precursor selection window was set at 2 m/z. HCD normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 27% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17 500 with AGC target 1.105 within 60ms MIIT.

DATA PROCESSING:
Obtained mass spectrometry data and raw data of Circulating reticulocytes and erythrocytes from PXD009258 (from Pride repository) were analyzed using Maxquant software, version 1.6.1.0 2. The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot reviewed database (Uniprot-Swissprot, release 2023-10) and a list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant that was incremented in our laboratory for frequently observed contaminant proteins. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of cystein was set as constant modification and variable modifications were restricted to acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine. The peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. Minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids and maximal length at 6000 Da. Second peptide search was allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 ratio counts were required for LFQ. Data from all experiments were analyzed simultaneously with the match between runs (MBR) option with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment time window of 30 min. Functional analyses of data issued from Maxquant were analyzed with Perseus software, version 1.6.15.0 and Excel.