PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Kidney
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Borderline rejection; Kidney transplant rejection; Immunohistochemical staining; T-cell mediated rejection; Mass spectrometry proteomics

ABSTRACT:
T cell-mediated rejection (TCMR) remains a challenge in kidney transplantation. Based on a histopathological biopsy examination, patients can be classified into groups defining their kidney’s status, i.e. no rejection (NR), borderline rejection (BR) and acute rejection (AR). Yet, this classification is not perfect, since for the borderline cases, a number of patients may or may not require further clinical intervention. Although in other studies, detection of early signs of rejection in the urine proteome was already attempted, these results failed to be replicated. Thus, a robust method of classification by biopsy proteome profiling may provide a possible solution. Unlike for urine or small extracellular vesicle’s analysis, biopsy proteome directly reflects the subclinical changes leading to allograft loss. Kidney tissue biopsies from patients classified into NR, BR and AR groups based on the current Banff guidelines were subjected to a mass spectrometry based proteomic profiling. Using qualitative, quantitative, profile and ROC analysis, a set of four proteins (i.e., GNB4, PDK1, AGXT and CD73) was chosen for further validation using immunohistochemical (IHC) methods. Proteomic analysis identified 2547 proteins across all groups with their abundance profiles showing high degree of similarity between the BR and AR datasets. In a quantitative comparison, GNB4 and AGXT emerged as the proteins significantly differentiating the groups with the highest fold change. Moreover, AGXT was indicated as a potential biomarker candidate following a ROC analysis. Morover, PDK1 and CD73 were found to best classify the samples in a binary fashion. These candidate biomarkers were validated using an IHC approach, where only upregulation of GNB4 in immune cells and PDK1 in macrophages could be confirmed, with no significant changes in the tubular epithelium. Based on these results, GNB4 and PDK1 presence in the immune cells and macrophages has been identified as an interesting target for further extensive studies. If their relevance was to be confirmed in a large patient cohort, their analysis could potentially serve an extension of the already established histopathological classification in the context of kidney transplant rejection. This retrospective study was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Medical University of Gdańsk no. NKBBN/201/2021.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Biopsy proteome-based classification of T-cell-mediated kidney allograft rejection

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
To the FFPE tissues, 0.5 mL of heptane was added, and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature and spun down at 16,000g for 2 min. Heptane was discarded, and this de-waxing step was repeated three times. Finally, 50µL of methanol was added, samples were centrifuged at 16,000g for 2 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining pellet was air-dried for 20 min. Proteins were extracted from the FFPE tissues using the Qproteome FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen). The pellet was reconstituted with 100µL of extraction buffer, then incubated at 100°C for 20 min and at 80°C for 2h with 750 rpm mixing. After cooling to 4°C, samples were centrifuged at 20,000g for 15 min at 4°C, and the extraction buffer was topped up to 125µL. Next, 400µL of methanol, 100µL of chloroform, and 300µL of water were added, and each time the samples were mixed and spun down. The supernatant was discarded, and 300µL of methanol, then 1 mL of acetone, was added, with mixing, spinning down, and supernatant removal. The air-dried protein pellet was resuspended in 50µL of 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corporation) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBIC) and heated to 100°C for 20 min. Following centrifugation at 20,000g for 15 min, the supernatant’s protein concentration was determined as described by Wiśniewski and Gaugaz (17). Next, 50µL of 50 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM AmBIC was added, and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 1h with 950 rpm mixing. Alkylation was performed using 50µL of 100 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1h. Samples were digested with a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50 for 18h at 37°C in 150µL of AmBIC. After digestion, 45µL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid was added. Samples were incubated with 45µL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid at 37°C with agitation at 950 rpm for 60 min and centrifuged at 18,000g for 30 min. After desalting, peptides were vacuum dried and re-dissolved in 20µL of water. Quantification of peptides was performed as per Wiśniewski and Gaugaz (17). Finally, samples were acidified to 0.1% (v/v) TFA for analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data was processed using Protein Discoverer v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on the Uniprot database with 10 ppm MS and 0.08Da MS/MS accuracy. Methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylation, and two missed digestion sites were allowed. Proteins were identified if at least two peptides per protein at the false-discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01 were found. Total ion current was used as a normalization factor. Missing values were imputed with random numbers from a lognormal distribution with parameters estimated by the maximum likelihood method while accounting for the missing tail (truncation between 0 and the lowest measured value for a particular protein). Kruskal−Wallis with post-hoc Conover test was used for quantitative analyses (18) with Jonckheere−Terpstra test for trend analysis (19). Effect size was calculated as eta-squared with standardized Conover test, yielding Pallant's "r" (20) with Cohen’s interpretation, i.e., small (|r| > 0.1), medium (|r| > 0.3), and a large effect (|r| > 0.5) (21). Fisher’s exact test was used for binary analysis with Cramér's V as an effect size measure and the Cochran-Armitage test for trend (22). The Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction was applied, and the statistical significance threshold was set to 0.05. Identified proteins were considered as differentially expressed /accumulated when the p-value after FDR correction was lower than 0.05. Analyses were conducted using R v.4.3.1 and MatLab v.2023a. ROC analysis was performed using MetaboAnalyst 6.0 (www.metaboanalyst.ca) with balanced sub-sampling and Monte Carlo cross-validation and feature ranking by Linear Support Vector Machine and a built-in algorithm.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Patient samples
Retrospective FFPE kidney allograft tissue cores were obtained at the Medical University of Gdańsk Transplant Center. For this retrospective proteomic study, samples were obtained from patients who underwent a for-cause biopsy – performed due to worsening kidney function or proteinuria, or erythrocyturia—between 2014 and 2022. Based on histopathological assessment of the collected material, patient samples were later classified into three groups: no rejection (NR; n = 10), borderline rejection (BR; n = 12), and acute rejection (AR; n = 10). All biopsies were classified according to the current Banff criteria at the Department of Pathology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland. For the immunohistochemistry staining, due to the limited amount of material, a separate set of samples of deceased kidney donors’ preimplantation biopsies was obtained. Thus, for the immunohistochemistry analysis, the grouping was as follows: donor kidney (DK; n = 8), borderline rejection (BR_IHC; n = 8), and acute rejection (AR_IHC; n = 9). Fully anonymized clinical data for these sample groups are available as supplementary tables (see Additional File 1 and Additional File 2). No statistically significant correlation was found between the available clinical data and the biopsy-related group assignments.
Sample preparation for proteomics analysis
To the FFPE tissues, 0.5 mL of heptane was added, and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature and spun down at 16,000 g for 2 min. Heptane was discarded, and this de-waxing step was repeated three times. Finally, 50µL of methanol was added, samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 2 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The remaining pellet was air-dried for 20 min. Proteins were extracted from the FFPE tissues according to a modified procedure used by Geoui et al. and using the Qproteome FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen). The pellet was reconstituted with 100µL of extraction buffer, then incubated at 100 °C for 20 min and at 80 °C for 2 h with 750 rpm mixing. After cooling to 4 °C, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the extraction buffer was topped up to 125µL. Next, 400µL of methanol, 100µL of chloroform, and 300µL of water were added, and each time the samples were mixed and spun down. The supernatant was discarded, and 300µL of methanol, then 1 mL of acetone, was added, with mixing, spinning down, and supernatant removal. The air-dried protein pellet was resuspended in 50µL of 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corporation) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBIC) and heated to 100 °C for 20 min. Following centrifugation at 20,000 g for 15 min, the supernatant protein concentration was determined as described by Wiśniewski and Gaugaz. Next, 50µL of 50 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM AmBIC was added, and the samples were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h with 950 rpm mixing. Alkylation was performed using 50µL of 100 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 h. Samples were digested with a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50 for 18 h at 37 °C in 150µL of AmBIC. After digestion, 45µL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid was added. Samples were incubated with 45µL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid at 37 °C with agitation at 950 rpm for 60 min and centrifuged at 18,000 g for 30 min. After desalting, peptides were vacuum-dried and re-dissolved in 20µL of water. Quantification of peptides was performed as per Wiśniewski and Gaugaz. Finally, samples were acidified to 0.1% (v/v) TFA for analysis.
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics
Peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC nanoViper column (75 µm × 25 cm, 2 µm particle size) with a 190 min gradient of 4 – 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nl/min using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nanoLC system. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using Exploris 480 Orbitrap (ThermoFisher) with top-10 data-dependent acquisition in positive ionization at MS resolution of 70,000 and MS/MS of 17,500. Peptides with ≥ 2 charges in the 300–2000 m/z range were fragmented at normalized collision energy of 28% using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Raw data was processed using Protein Discoverer v.2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on the Uniprot database with 10 ppm MS and 0.08 Da MS/MS accuracy. Methionine oxidation, carbamidomethylation, and two missed digestion sites were allowed. Proteins were identified if at least two peptides per protein at the false-discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01 were found. Total ion current was used as a normalization factor.
Statistical analysis
Missing values were imputed with random numbers from a lognormal distribution with parameters estimated by the maximum likelihood method while accounting for the missing tail (truncation between 0 and the lowest measured value for a particular protein). The Kruskal–Wallis test with post hoc Conover comparisons was used for quantitative analyses with the Jonckheere − Terpstra test for trend analysis. Effect size was calculated as eta-squared with standardized Conover test, yielding Pallant’s “r” with Cohen’s interpretation, i.e., small (|r|> 0.1), medium (|r|> 0.3), and a large effect (|r|> 0.5). Fisher’s exact test was used for binary analysis with Cramér’s V as an effect size measure and the Cochran-Armitage test for trend. The Benjamini–Hochberg multiple testing correction was applied, and the statistical significance threshold was set to 0.05. Identified proteins were considered as differentially expressed /accumulated when the p-value after FDR correction was lower than 0.05. Analyses were conducted using R v.4.3.1 and MatLab v.2023a. ROC analysis was performed using MetaboAnalyst 6.0 (www.metaboanalyst.ca) with balanced sub-sampling, Monte Carlo cross-validation, and feature ranking by Linear Support Vector Machine and a built-in algorithm.
Immunohistochemistry staining
The FFPE tissues, provided in 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes, were initially deparaffinized and subsequently embedded individually in separate paraffin blocks. Sectioning of these tissue blocks was performed using the Microm HM 355S microtome (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Slides of 4 µm thickness were deparaffinized and hydrated, then epitope retrieval was performed using the DAKO PT Link instrument (Agilent Technologies) at preheat temperature 85–97 °C for 10 min, epitope retrieval at 97 °C for 20 min and a cooldown to 75 °C for 20 min. Subsequently, EnVision FLEX Target Retrieval Solution diluted 1:50 (Agilent Technologies) was used as follows: HIGH pH for GNB4, PDK1, CD73, and LOW pH for AGXT. The slides were treated with Flex Peroxidase Blocking solution for 10 min, primary antibody for 20 min, Flex HRP for 15 min, Flex DAB with Substrate-Chromogen for 10 min, and Flex hematoxylin for approximately 45 s. Antibodies were diluted 1:300 for AGXT (#22,394–1-AP, Proteintech), CD73 (#PA5-29,750, Invitrogen), GNB4 (#PA5-113,327, Invitrogen) and 1:100 for PDK1 (#MA5-32,702, Invitrogen) using the FLEX Antibody Diluent. EnVision FLEX Wash buffer diluted 20 × was applied before the addition of each reagent for 10 min. One slide for each patient was stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Digitization was performed using a Pannoramic 250 slide scanner with the Pannoramic Viewer software v.1.15 (3DHISTECH).

RESULTS:
Results
Proteomic profiling of kidney tissues
Proteomic profiling of kidney tissues in a retrospective analysis of biopsies from patients without (NR) and with borderline (BR) or acute transplant rejection (AR) allowed the identification of 2547 proteins in total. Out of these, quantitative analysis was possible for 2273 proteins, whereas 274 proteins were included in a binary type of analysis (i.e., present/absent). The complete list of identified and quantified proteins is presented as a supplementary table (see Additional File 3). 1029 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified (FDR < 0.05): 392 between BR and NR groups, 628 between AR and NR, and 616 between AR and BR (Fig. 1A, 1, 1, 1). To find proteins upregulated in both borderline and acute rejection (as compared to the no-rejection group), further analysis was focused on analyzing common proteins that differentiated AR or BR from NR. This comparison resulted in 225 proteins commonly differentiating AR and BR from NR groups (163 in a quantitative manner and 62 in a binary fashion; Fig. 1E and 1, respectively). Noteworthy, hierarchical clustering of the proteomic data revealed a very similar profile of samples in the AR and BR groups.
A hypothetical panel of potential proteomic biomarkers of TCMR was tested using a multivariate approach (Fig. 2A). Due to the similarity of proteomic profiles in the AR and BR groups, a model comparing NR vs both AR and BR (collectively labeled ‘R’—rejection) was constructed. Here, a set comprising ten proteins was indicated as the one with the best predictive accuracy (88.2%) with an AUC of 0.946. Notably, AGXT, which was chosen for further validation (see below), was among proteins having a high predictive value based on the ROC analysis (Fig. 2B). Additional panels for paired comparisons are available as a supplementary figure (see Additional File 4).
To further narrow down the proteins associated with the kidney transplant rejection, we focused on the subset of 80 proteins upregulated in both AR and BR (as compared to NR) that showed a large effect size (|r|> 0.5) of differences supplementary figure (see Additional File 5). These proteins were characterized functionally in silico. Among processes linked to the subset of AR/BR-upregulated proteins, the most significantly overrepresented were: response to stimulus, positive regulation of biological process, cellular component organization and immune system process (see Additional File 6). Further, the Reactome Pathways enrichment analysis revealed infectious disease, neutrophil degranulation, immune system and innate immune system as the most significantly overrepresented process. Moreover, this subset of proteins included species linked to RHO-GTPase pathway effectors and cytokine signaling (Fig. 3).
Among the 80 proteins significantly upregulated in the AR/BR groups, guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunit beta-4 (GNB4) exhibited the highest relative abundance, with approximately 80-fold upregulation compared to the NR group (Fig. 4A). Next, alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase protein (AGXT) was about tenfold upregulated compared to the NR group. ROC analysis further identified it as a key protein with strong predictive value. Although GNB4 did not appear in the list of most frequently chosen proteins for the prediction of transplant status, its high upregulation makes it an ideal candidate for a biomarker, which warrants further validation using IHC. Moreover, two proteins had the most predominant presence in the AR and BR groups as compared to the NR group based on the binary analysis: PDH kinase 1 (PDK1) and 5’-nucleotidase (CD73) (Fig. 4C, 4). Hence, these four proteins were selected for further validation study using immunohistochemical methods.
Immunohistochemical validation of selected proteins characteristic of transplant rejection
Four proteins (GNB4, AGXT, PDK1, and CD73) putatively discriminating patients with a transplant rejection, as identified by proteomic profiling, were validated using the immunohistochemical approach in a set of kidney biopsies from healthy kidney donors (DK) and patients with borderline (AR_IHC) and acute (AR_IHC) transplant rejection. Localization of these proteins in tissue sections was determined, i.e., staining intensity and area in either tubular epithelium, immune cells, and/or macrophages were assessed (Fig. 5). Out of four proteins selected for immunohistochemical analysis, neither AGXT nor CD73 yielded statistically significant differences between the experimental groups. Hence, the presentation of results was focused on GNB4 and PDK1.
We found that neither PDK1 nor GNB4 was significantly up-regulated in the tubular epithelium of patients with the transplant rejection (in the case of PDK1, lower intensity of the staining was noted in the BR_IHC group in comparison to DK vs AR_IHC) (Fig. 6A, 6). On the other hand, significant differences were noted among the compared groups in the case of the immune cells component of the specimen. For PDK1, both the area and intensity of staining of immune cells were significantly higher in the BR_IHC and AR_IHC groups compared to the DK (differences in the staining of GNB4 were not statistically significant when all immune cells were considered) (Fig. 6B, 6). However, in the case of GNB4, significantly stronger staining (both area and intensity) in the BR_IHC and AR_IHC groups was noted specifically for macrophages (PDK1 was not detected in macrophages) (Fig. 6C, 6).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Enhanced understanding of the immune system role in allograft rejection along with advancements in immunosuppressive therapy have enabled more effective organ transplantation; however, T cell-mediated rejection (TCMR) remains a common complication. The kidney allograft function decline, which may occur shortly after transplantation or even years later, usually manifests clinically with decreased urine output and proteinuria, with more severe cases including transplant tenderness. Even though TCMR responds well to immunosuppressive therapy, rejection still proceeds in around 10–12% of patients. Kidney allograft biopsy, evaluated according to the Banff classification, remains the gold standard for diagnosing rejection. This grading system includes the classification of cases into “category 4: TCMR”, with its subcategories including “acute TCMR”, and also defines certain cases as “category 3: borderline (suspicious) for acute TCMR”.
Borderline rejection is a difficult diagnostic category. The diagnosis is made upon the assessment of the areal extent of interstitial inflammation and tubulitis using arbitrary thresholds. The thresholds are broad (especially depending on the edition of the Banff criteria) expanding from minor or absent interstitial infiltration (Banff i1and i0) to 10–25% cortical inflammation with foci of various degree tubulitis (Banff t1, t2, and t3). What is more, both interstitial inflammation and tubulitis are nonspecific lesions associated with various conditions in both native and transplanted kidneys. Both the lack of pathognomonic qualitative criteria and broad quantitative criteria result in borderline rejection being potentially a heterogenous diagnostic grouping.
There have been conflicting reports on the clinical significance of borderline cases. They are associated with increased numbers of subsequent clinical interventions; however in many cases, the pathological changes may also resolve spontaneously. Although borderline rejection may indicate inadequate control of the alloimmune response, it remains unclear whether all patients require anti-rejection treatment and which interventions are most effective in preventing unfavorable outcomes. Some cases of borderline rejection may actually represent acute rejection with discrepancies arising from sampling errors and inter-observer variability in assigning Banff scores. For this reason, there is an ongoing search for tools to improve the diagnostic accuracy of an inherently imperfect histopathological assessment.
Molecular alterations precede visible structural changes and, if quantitatively assessed, they offer an immense diagnostic potential. Proteomic analysis allows for the detection and quantification of thousands of proteins, facilitating the identification of changes associated with allograft rejection and providing insights into the underlying biological processes. This approach has been successfully applied before, enabling the discrimination between acute and no rejection patients with high reliability (AUC = 0.87) based on a panel of three serum proteins proposed by Wang et al.. Epidermal growth factor analysis in the urine of patients was proposed as a potential biomarker of antibody-mediated rejection (AUC = 0.78) in a study reported by Heidari et al.. Yet, in an expanded multicenter study enrolling 635 patients, discrimination for acute TCMR based on urine analysis yielded subpar results. It is possible that, thus far, noninvasive analyses have given unsatisfactory or unrepeatable results because proteins that would reflect allograft rejection status are low-abundant components of urine or blood (as compared to other highly abundant proteins, e.g., serum albumin). Thus, a robust method of TCMR classification is still needed, which could be achieved via mass spectrometry (MS) based analysis of biopsy specimens. This study aimed to identify possible proteomic signatures of both borderline for acute TCMR (BR) and acute TCMR (AR), (collectively labeled ‘R’—rejection), using kidney allograft biopsy specimens (FFPE material) and to validate selected biomarker candidates based on immunohistochemical methods (used as a standard procedure during a histopathological examination).

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
Data availability
The mass spectrometry datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available on ProteomeXchange via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD064523. Immunohistochemistry results analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Medical University of Gdańsk (no. NKBBN/201/2021). Due to the retrospective nature of the study and no involvement of additional patient procedures, informed consent was waived.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.