PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Breast cancer; Golgin-97; Inflammatory; Golgi; Metastasis

ABSTRACT:
The Golgi apparatus serves as a central hub for trafficking, regulating the anterograde transport and modification of proteins and lipids, or recycling extracellular proteins via retrograde transport through endosomes. Several Golgi-localized proteins have been reported to be involved in regulating cancer cell migration and invasion. Our previous study showed that the Golgi tethering factor golgin-97 is downregulated in breast cancer and is correlated with patient prognosis. Here, we demonstrated that the knockout of golgin-97 promotes tumor malignancy in breast cancer in vivo. We identified differentially expressed proteins between golgin-97 knockout cells and their parental breast cells using a quantitative proteomic approach based on 6-plex tandem mass tags (TMT) technology. Bioinformatics analysis further revealed that golgin-97 knockout was significantly related to inflammation-related factors and MAPK signaling pathways. We also integrated proteomic and genomic datasets to explore the biological impacts of golgin-97 in regulating breast cancer progression.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Quantitative proteomics reveals inflammatory signaling in golgin-97 knockout-mediated breast cancer progression

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein extracts prepared from MDA-MB-231 and golgin-97 KO cells were reduced by adding 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and incubating for 60 min at 60°C. Alkylation was performed by adding 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate and incubating at 25°C for 30 min in the dark. Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was employed at a protein-to-trypsin ratio of 100 μg: 1 μg and incubated at 37 ℃ for overnight. The resulting peptides were labeled with a 6-plex tandem mass tag (TMT) kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific) and then subjected to via an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Separate and analyze peptide mixtures by two-dimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (2D LC-MS/MS) using a strong cation exchange and reversed-phase C18 liquid chromatography system. This was achieved via the use of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system, which was coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
The resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot human sequence database via the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK, version 2.2.04). To quantify the identified proteins, the raw spectrometry data, including the reporter ion quantifier nodes for TMT, were analyzed via Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The mass tolerance values for parent and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.03 Da, respectively. Tryptic peptides with a maximum of two missing cleavage sites were included for analysis. Certain modifications were accounted for when identifying proteins. These included the oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, and pyroglutamination of N-terminal glutamine as variable modifications. The methylthiolation of cysteine was considered a fixed modification. In addition, the experiment included the addition of TMT to lysine residues and the N-termini of the peptides.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell culture, chemical reagents, and chemotherapy drugs
The TNBC cell line MDA-MB-231 was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Virginia). Golgin-97 KO MDA-MB-231 cells were generated via CRISPR‒Cas9 gene KO in our laboratory. Both wild-type MDA-MB-231 (hereafter referred to as MDA-MB-231) cells and golgin-97 KO MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Gibco, Waltham, MA, USA) containing 10% FBS (Gibco), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco), and 1% L-glutamine (Gibco). SB203580, U0126, and paclitaxel were purchased from MedChemExpress (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). Cobalt chloride (CoCl2) was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA).
CRISPR‒Cas9 gene deletion
Golgin-97−/− KO MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were generated with an optimized single-guide RNA (sgRNA; human golgin-97, accession no. NM_002077.3) and the Cas9 expression plasmid pRGEN-Cas9-CMV (ToolGen, Seoul, Korea). Details for establishing cell lines with golgin-97 KO are described in Appendix S1 (available online).
Cancer metastasis in the zebrafish model
The zebrafish xenotransplantation procedure was described previously. Briefly, 24 h postfertilization (hpf), zebrafish embryos of the wild-type Tübingen strain were dechorionated and anesthetized in E3 medium containing phenylthiourea and tricaine before cell injection. MDA-MB-231 cells (control or golgin-97 KO) were labeled with the lipophilic fluorochrome CM-DiI (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). Stained cells were injected into the yolk sacs of zebrafish embryos via a microinjector according to the instruction manual. The injected zebrafish were maintained in E3 medium. Images of the zebrafish were acquired with a Z16 APO microscope using a Leica DFC490 color camera system.
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) and bioinformatic analysis
Total RNA was extracted from MDA-MB-231 and golgin-97 KO cells via TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the instruction manual. NGS was carried out via Illumina’s sequencing-by-synthesis technology (Illumina, USS) as described previously. For pathway enrichment analysis, the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) whose expression was altered twofold in golgin-97 KO cells compared with that in MDA-MB-231 cells were subjected to pathway analysis via DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7 (https://david-d.ncifcrf.gov/home.jsp) and QIAGEN Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software.
Quantitative proteomic analysis of the differential proteome resulting from golgin-97 KO
Protein extracts prepared from MDA-MB-231 and golgin-97 KO cells were digested with trypsin, chemically labeled with a tandem mass tag (TMT), and then subjected to two-dimensional liquid chromatography‒tandem mass spectrometry (2D LC‒MS/MS). The details for protein identification and quantification via mass spectrometry are provided in Appendix S1 (available online).
Small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection
siRNAs targeting p38 MAPK, ERK1/2 and golgin-97 were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific or Dharmacon and used for gene knockdown with Lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagents (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sequences of the siRNAs used in this study are listed in Table S1.
Cell viability assay
Cell viability was determined by using a Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay (TEN-CCK8) (BIOTOOLS Co., Ltd., New Taipei City, Taiwan). The detailed methods of the cell viability assay are available in Appendix S1 (available online).
Cell and animal tissue RNA extraction and quantitative RT‒PCR
Total RNA was extracted from cells or tumor tissue, and cDNA was prepared for qRT‒PCR as described previously. The sequences of the primers used in this study are listed in Table S2.
Western blotting
The detailed Western blotting methods are available in Appendix S1. The primary antibodies used included anti-golgin-97 (13192S), anti-IκBα (4814S), anti-p38 (8690S), anti-phospho-ERK1/2 (9101S), anti-cleaved caspase-3 (#9661) and anti-caspase-3 (#9662), which were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). The anti-ERK (sc-93) antibody was purchased from Santa Cruz (DT, USA). Anti-phospho-p38 (09–272) and anti-β-actin (MAB1501) antibodies were obtained from Merck Millipore (Burlington, MA, USA). The anti-HIF1α (GTX127309) antibody was purchased from GeneTex (Irvine, CA, USA). The anti-TGN46 antibody was purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA, USA).
Wound healing migration assay
The cell migration ability was analyzed via a wound healing assay. The detailed methods are available in Appendix S1 (available online).
Animal model of metastasis
This study was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Chang Gung University (CGU107–228). Four-week-old female immunodeficient nonobese diabetic/SCID (NOD. CB17-Prkdcscid/JNarl) mice were purchased from the National Laboratory Animal Center (Taipei, Taiwan) to establish the tail vein injection and orthotopic inoculation models as described in Appendix S1 (available online).
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis
The detailed IHC methods are available in Appendix S1.
Statistical analysis
All experiments were performed at least in triplicate, and the data are presented as the means ± standard deviations (SDs). Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software) statistical software packages were used for data analysis. Unpaired t tests, one-way ANOVA, two-way ANOVA, and log-rank tests were used for comparisons between the control and experimental groups. A P value less than 0.05 (P < 0.05) was considered to indicate significance.

RESULTS:
Results
Golgin-97 KO modulates the malignancy of breast cancer cells in vivo
Our previous studies revealed that golgin-97 knockdown promotes NF-κB activation and leads to increased migration/invasion of breast cancer cells. Herein, we applied CRISPR–Cas9 to generate four clonal golgin-97 KO cell lines (Fig. S1A). We confirmed that the expression levels of IκBα and TGN46 were reduced, accompanied by increased migration and invasion of 2–9 and 2–20 KO cells (Fig. S1B). Therefore, to verify the effects of golgin-97 depletion on cancer metastasis in vivo, cancer cells were injected into the perivitelline cavity of fertilized zebrafish embryos. Four experiments were conducted with ten fish per group, resulting in a total of more than 30 zebrafish per group. The results indicated that 20% of the MDA-MB-231 cells had metastasized by day one, an increase of 24% according to subsequent observations. In comparison, golgin-97 KO (2–9) cells presented a greater metastasis rate, beginning at 46% on day one, peaking at 52% on day two, and subsequently declining to 36% on day three. Golgin-97 KO (2–20) cells presented lower rates of metastasis, with rates of 17%, 30%, and 34%, respectively. In the present study, we present the quantitative results obtained on day two, as shown in Fig. 1B. CM-DiI staining further revealed that the number of cancer cell clusters spread distal to the primary site was significantly greater in fish injected with golgin-97 KO cells than in those injected with MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 1A and B). Furthermore, when MDA-MB-231 and golgin-97 KO cells were injected into the lateral tail veins of immunodeficient NOD/SCID mice, a trend toward the formation of lung foci was observed in golgin-97 KO cell-injected mice, suggesting that golgin-97 KO breast cancer cells have a greater rate of survival and colonization success (Fig. 1C). H&E staining revealed that golgin-97 KO increased the tumor cell density and resulted in the formation of large nodules in the stroma (Fig. 1D). Thus, these differences in cell morphology and organization suggest that golgin-97 KO enhances the invasive potential of cancer. In addition, the orthotopic mouse model demonstrated that the tumors derived from golgin-97 KO cells were significantly larger than the tumors derived from MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 1E). Quantitative analysis revealed a significant increase in tumor size in golgin-97 KO cell-injected mice on day 35 (Fig. 1F). As expected, the survival time of golgin-97 KO mice was shorter than that of MDA-MB-231 mice (Fig. 1G). These results collectively support the suppressive role of golgin-97 in the tumor growth and metastatic progression of breast cancer in vivo.
Multi-omics reveals the involvement of key factors in golgin-97 KO-mediated breast cancer progression
To identify signaling pathways containing potential therapeutic targets regulated by golgin-97, NGS and quantitative proteomic analysis were applied. Analysis of the intersection of the two resulting datasets revealed that 783 DEGs were significantly upregulated, with a twofold change in expression, in two golgin-97 KO cell lines (2–9 KO and 2–20 KO) compared with that in MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 2A). The IPA results suggested that several upstream regulators and pathway networks, including cytokines (IL-1β, TNF), growth factors (BMP4, AGT), signal transduction factors (p38 MAPK), and transcription factors (NF-κB-RelA), are significantly involved in the upregulation of these 783 DEGs (Fig. 2B and Table 1). The RT‒qPCR results verified that the expression levels of three DEGs (IL-1β, IL-6, and MMP1) regulated by the abovementioned key regulators were significantly higher in golgin-97 KO cells than in MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 2C). Additionally, DAVID bioinformatic analysis revealed that the DEGs upregulated by golgin-97 KO mediate biological processes such as the Wnt signaling pathway, the MAPK cascade, wound healing, and the cellular response to IL-1 (Fig. 2D). We also performed TMT-based quantitative proteomics to identify 7271 quantified proteins in golgin-97 KO and MDA-MB-231 cells. Using 1.5 SDs of the fold change as a cutoff value, we identified 219 proteins upregulated (1.44-fold increase) by golgin-97 KO. Consistent with the NGS analysis results, our combined proteomic analysis/IPA revealed that TGFβ1, EHF, TNF, JUNB, and IL-1α were the main activators upregulated in response to golgin-97 KO (Fig. 2E and Table S3). These results were consistent with our earlier study in which we utilized a quantitative proteomics approach to establish a dataset that profiles the secreted proteome, termed the secretome, which comprises 1,872 identified and quantified proteins from the conditioned media of MDA-MB-231 cells, both with and without golgin-97 knockdown. Among the proteins identified, 103 exhibited a 1.5-fold change in secretion levels. Of these proteins, 88, including IL-6, IL-8, GM-CSF, TL1A, PLAU, and ISG15, exhibited upregulation, whereas 15 proteins demonstrated downregulation in the golgin-97-knockdown cells in comparison to the control cells. Gene Ontology analysis revealed that these 103 proteins were associated primarily with processes associated with the wound response, cell migration, cellular localization, cellular motility, and immune system functions (Fig. S2). Our previous study also revealed that conditioned medium from golgin-97-knockdown cells promoted recipient cell migration and invasion, whereas an NF-κB inhibitor reduced golgin-97-knockdown-induced TNBC cell motility. Taken together, these results suggest that golgin-97 KO promotes cancer progression primarily by modulating inflammatory responses and Wnt/MAPK signaling in breast cancer cells. 
Golgin-97 KO induces tumor progression and metastasis accompanied by lung colonization and inflammatory cell infiltration
In this study, we measured higher levels of murine TGFβ and the proinflammatory cytokine TNFα in primary tumors derived from golgin-97 KO cells than in those derived from MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 3A), indicating that golgin-97 KO may promote tumor growth and metastasis by modulating the tumor microenvironment. Moreover, IHC analysis of primary tumors revealed increased expression of the proliferation marker Ki67 and the macrophage/monocyte marker CD68 in golgin-97 KO tumors (Fig. 3B). To investigate whether golgin-97 influences macrophage polarization in the tumor microenvironment of breast cancer, we conducted a co-culture experiment involving cancer cells and PMA-induced human leukemia monocytic THP-1 cells. Our results indicated that both parental MDA-MB-231 cells and golgin-97 KO cells induced a mix of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory factors production, enabling macrophages to exhibit characteristics of both M1 and M2 polarization. This finding aligns with recent studies that highlight the complexity of macrophage polarization, where cells can display traits of both M1 and M2 phenotypes. To further examine the effect of golgin-97 on macrophage polarization and function within the tumor microenvironment associated with breast cancer in vivo, we performed an association analysis of golgin-97 gene expression (GOLGA1) with M1 and M2 macrophages in BRCA-Basal (TNBC > 70%) via TIMER2.0 (http://timer.cistrome.org/), an integrated online database that compiles cancer research and immune association data from multiple sources. Our analysis suggested that golgin-97 may be positively correlated with M1 macrophages, as indicated by the CIBERSORT data, but negatively correlated with M2 macrophages, according to findings from the TIDE data (Fig. S3). Together, these observations suggest that the downregulation of golgin-97 in breast cancer cells may increase M2 macrophage polarization through complex communication between multiple cell types in tumor microenvironment. Next, we examined whether golgin-97 KO promotes metastatic tumor cell colonization. H&E staining and Ki67 and CD68 expression were evaluated in lung sections. Quantitative analysis revealed that golgin-97 KO significantly increased the nodule number and lung metastatic colonization, as well as the infiltration of macrophages/monocytes (Fig. 3C-F). These results suggested that golgin-97 KO significantly and positively influences primary tumor colonization and metastasis, an effect that involves proinflammatory factor-controlled interplay between golgin-97 KO cells and stromal cells.
Targeting ERK/MAPK kinase attenuates golgin-97 KO-induced breast cancer malignancy and enhances paclitaxel treatment efficacy
To search for new therapeutic targets to benefit patients with malignancy and chronic inflammation induced by low expression of golgin-97, we conducted an IPA of the 783 upregulated DEGs identified from the intersection of NGS data derived from two golgin-97 KO cell lines. The analysis revealed a total of 629 chemical compounds, including both activators and inhibitors. Notably, when the predicted activation state of inhibition was examined, 36 chemical compounds were identified and subsequently ranked on the basis of a p value of less than 0.05, with the top five compounds documented in Table 2. Among these, we emphasized two leading chemical inhibitors: U0126 (MEK1/2 inhibitor) and SB203580 (p38 MAPK inhibitor). A wound healing assay revealed that golgin-97 KO cells had greater collective migration capacity than did MDA-MB-231 cells. Importantly, SB203580 and U0126 alone or in combination significantly reduced golgin-97 KO-induced cell motility (Fig. 4A). RT‒qPCR analysis revealed that U0126 and SB203580 significantly reduced the mRNA expression levels of IL-1β, IL-6, and MMP1 in golgin-97 KO cells (Fig. 4B). Gene-specific silencing via siRNA transfection was further used to confirm the phenomena shown by chemical inhibitor treatment. As shown in Fig. 4C, the mRNA expression levels of IL-1β, IL-6, and MMP1 were decreased by p38 MAPK knockdown. ERK1/2 knockdown reduced the mRNA expression of IL-1β and MMP1 but not that of IL-6. Knockdown of p38 MAPK and ERK1/2 also significantly inhibited the increased cell migration ability induced by golgin-97 depletion in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells (Fig. 4D-E), and the knockdown efficacy is shown in Fig. S4A-B. Although golgin-97 KO did not promote the proliferation of breast cancer cells in vitro, treatment with U0126 alone or in combination with SB203580 reduced the viability of golgin-97 KO cells and MDA-MB 231 cells after 48 h and 72 h, respectively (Fig. 4F). Paclitaxel (PTX) is the most commonly used chemical agent for the clinical treatment of TNBC, and long-term chemotherapy causes severe side effects in patients. We then tested whether treatment with U0126 or SB203580 as adjuvants with paclitaxel would benefit patients with golgin-97 deficiency. The results of the cell viability assay revealed that treatment with PTX or two-kinase inhibitors (U0126 and SB203580) was cytotoxic to golgin-97 KO cells (Fig. 4G). Notably, combined treatment with these three drugs (U0126 + SB203580 + PTX) significantly resulted in a synergistic effect compared with PTX alone or the combination of U0126 and SB203580 (Fig. 4G). These results suggest that the inhibition of both the ERK1/2 kinase pathway and the p38 MAPK pathway has therapeutic potential for the treatment of breast cancer patients with low expression of golgin-97. 
Inhibition of ERK/MAPK kinase is effective in overcoming golgin-97 KO-induced tumor growth and lung metastasis
We next examined the therapeutic potential of ERK1/2 kinase and p38 MAPK inhibitors in an orthotopic mouse model. We observed that treatment with PTX alone, two-kinase inhibitors, or a combination of the three drugs significantly reduced the tumor growth rate and tumor volume, with targeting of ERK1/2 kinase and p38 MAPK enhancing the efficacy of PTX-based chemotherapy. (Fig. 5A-B). Specifically, growth inhibition and survival protection were most pronounced in the kinase inhibitor treatment groups (Fig. 5B-C). To confirm whether these two kinase inhibitors modulate cancer-associated inflammation in this mouse model, the expression of CD68 and inflammatory mediators in primary tumors was examined. IHC revealed that PTX (PTX alone and three drugs), but not two-kinase inhibitor, significantly reduced CD68 expression (Fig. 5D-E). However, qRT‒PCR revealed that the administration of kinase inhibitors alone or in combination with PTX resulted in reduced mRNA expression of murine TNFα and TGFβ (Fig. 5F-G). Compared with that in the vehicle group, the expression of murine TGFβ but not TNFα was lower in the PTX alone group (Fig. 5F-G). Additionally, quantitative analysis of IHCs obtained from lung tissue sections revealed that treatment with two-kinase inhibitors (two-kinase inhibitors alone or three drugs) but not PTX alone resulted in lower levels of human Ki67 expression, indicating a reduction in lung metastatic colonization (Fig. 5H-I). Notably, we observed significant infiltration of CD68 and induction of cleaved caspase-3 expression in lung tissues treated with PTX alone or the three drugs, suggesting that PTX treatment may increase the potential for lung inflammation and lung injury (Fig. 5J-L). These results collectively suggest that ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK inhibitors can effectively treat golgin-97-KO-induced breast cancer malignancy by reducing inflammation at the primary tumor site and inhibiting lung organ metastasis.
Hypoxia mimetics and ERK/MAPK signaling regulate golgin-97 expression in breast cancer
Hypoxia is detected in most solid tumors and strongly promotes tumor growth and survival through metastasis. Interestingly, the activation of the hypoxia-inducible factor HIF1α/heme oxygenase-1 signaling pathway attenuated sepsis-induced acute lung injury and reduced Golgi stress by increasing the expression of Golgi structural proteins such as golgin-97. We then examined whether HIF1α influences golgin-97 and MAPK signal transduction in breast cancer cells. We detected HIF1α accumulation with increasing doses of CoCl2 but decreased protein levels of golgin-97, TGN46, and IκBα (Fig. 6A-D). Upon incubation with CoCl2, ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK were activated following the decrease in golgin-97 protein expression (Fig. 6A, E-F). These results suggest that, unlike acute lung injury, hypoxia may be a physiological condition that contributes to the downregulation of golgin-97 expression and the activation of ERK/MAPK signaling in cancer cells. Interestingly, treatment of MDA-MB-231 cells with U0126 alone or with two inhibitors (SB203580 + U0126) for 24 h caused a significant increase in golgin-97 protein expression in the MDA-MB-231 cells (Fig. 6G-H). A slight increase (approximately 20%) in golgin-97 mRNA levels was observed in combination-treated cells, suggesting an unexpected mechanism by which MAPK signaling regulates golgin-97 expression at the protein level (Fig. S5A). Consistent with these findings, we also observed an increase in golgin-97 protein but not golgin-97 mRNA expression with single knockdown of ERK1/2 and double knockdown of ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK in MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 cells (Fig. 6I-L and S5B-3C). These results support the hypothesis that a potential negative regulatory loop exists between ERK/MAPK signaling and golgin-97 expression under hypoxic conditions; therefore, the inhibition of ERK/MAPK may abrogate the tumor-promoting pathways induced by golgin-97 deficiency (Fig. 6M).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in female patients and the second leading cause of death among women overall. Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has been shown to have a higher incidence of metastasis, a poorer prognosis, and poorer overall survival than other subtypes of breast cancer. TNBC lacks the expression of the sensitive therapeutic markers estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, leading to the ineffectiveness of endocrine therapy. Systemic chemotherapy with anthracyclines and taxanes is the most common first-line treatment modality. However, anticancer drug resistance, off-target toxicity, and complications, including pneumonia with severe inflammation, are major obstacles to the development of cancer chemotherapy regimens. Although the possible molecular mechanisms of TNBC tumor growth, metastasis, and therapy have been increasingly revealed, their clinical application is still limited. Thus, identifying new molecular targets for predicting clinical prognosis and finding effective strategies for treating TNBC are crucial. 
The Golgi apparatus is the trafficking hub that regulates the anterograde transport of modified proteins and lipids or retrieves extracellular proteins through retrograde transport from endosomes. There is growing evidence that the Golgi apparatus is a hub for different signaling pathways. Several Golgi-localized proteins have recently been reported to be involved in the function of the Golgi and are related to the regulation of cancer cell migration and invasion. Golgin-97, localized at the trans-Golgi network (TGN), is a coiled-coil protein first identified in Sjogren’s syndrome patients. Golgin-97 maintains Golgi integrity and acts as a tethering molecule that mediates the vesicular trafficking of specific cargoes (such as E-cadherin). Golgin-97 expression is significantly lower in invasive ductal breast cancer than in ductal carcinoma in situ. Low expression of golgin-97 has also been positively associated with poor overall survival in patients with breast, lung, and ovarian cancers, supporting a suppressive role of golgin-97 in regulating cancer progression. We then revealed a noncanonical role of golgin-97 in suppressing TNBC cell motility through the modulation of NF-κB activity in vitro. Unfortunately, the inhibition of NF-κB alone is insufficient to induce pronounced apoptosis in tumor cells, and long-term treatment with NF-κB inhibitors influences normal cell function, leading to severe systemic toxicity and immunosuppression. Additionally, whether and how golgin-97 depletion promotes cancer metastasis in vivo and the mechanisms affecting golgin-97 downregulation in breast cancer remain unclear.
In this study, we established a cell line with stable golgin-97 depletion via CRISPR‒Cas9 gene knockout (KO) and demonstrated that golgin-97 depletion promoted MDA-MB-231 cell migration and metastasis. Multi-omics analysis and functional characterization demonstrated the therapeutic potential of p38 MAPK inhibitors and ERK1/2 inhibitors in golgin-97 KO-induced cancer progression in vitro and in vivo, confirming their biological importance in breast cancer and anticancer drug development.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
The online version contains Appendix S1, Supplementary Figures S1-S7, and Supplementary Tables S1-S3. All the data are contained within the article and/or the supporting information. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository  with the dataset identifier PXD056499.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD056499 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride).
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The animal protocol was reviewed and approved by the Laboratory Animal Use Committee of Chang Gung University (CGU107-228).