PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480; Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: 

ABSTRACT:
The essential chaperonin TRiC/CCT mediates protein folding in cooperation with the co-chaperone prefoldin (PFD). As shown in vitro, the cylindrical TRiC complex facilitates folding through ATP-regulated client protein encapsulation. However, the functional dynamics of the chaperonin system in vivo remain unexplored. Here, we developed single-particle tracking in human cells to monitor the interactions of TRiC/PFD with newly synthesized proteins. Both chaperones engaged nascent polypeptides repeatedly in brief probing events, typically lasting around one second, with PFD recruiting TRiC. As shown with the chaperonin client actin, the co-translational interactions of PFD and TRiC increased in frequency and lifetime during chain elongation. Close to translation termination, PFD bound for several seconds, facilitating TRiC recruitment for post-translational folding involving multiple reaction cycles of ~2.5 s. Notably, the lifetimes of TRiC interactions with a folding-defective actin mutant were markedly prolonged, indicating that client conformational properties modulate TRiC function. Mutant actin continued cycling on TRiC until targeted for degradation. Surprisingly, TRiC often remained confined near its client protein between successive binding cycles, suggesting that the chaperonin machinery operates within a localized ‘protective zone’ where free diffusion is restricted. Together, these findings offer detailed insight into the single-molecule dynamics and supramolecular organization of the chaperonin system in the cellular environment.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Single molecule dynamics of the TRiC chaperonin system in vivo 

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell pellets were resuspended in 400 µL of SDC buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma-Aldrich), 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0. After incubation for 5 minutes at 95°C, the samples were ultrasonicated for 10 minutes using 10 cycles of 30 seconds at high intensity followed by a 30-second pause between cycles (Bioruptor, Diagenode). The incubation and ultrasonication steps were repeated once more. The samples were then diluted 1:1 with MS-grade water (VWR), and proteins were digested with 1 µg Lys-C (Wako) for 4 hours, followed by an overnight digestion at 37°C with 2 µg trypsin (Promega). The resulting peptide solution was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Merck) to a final concentration of 1%, and then desalted using SCX-stage tips. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) nanoflow system coupled with a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific)or an Exploris 480. For measurments of the QExactive HF, chromatographic separation was achieved on a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 µm; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were injected onto the column in buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid), with the column heated to 60°C. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a gradient from 2% to 30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 120 minutes (QExactive HF), followed by a ramp to 60% over 10 minutes, then to 95% over the next 5 minutes, which was maintained for another 5 minutes to measure the total proteome (Orbi4810). For immunoprecipitation (IP) measurements (Orbi4801), peptides were eluted using a gradient from 7% to 30% buffer B over 60 minutes, followed by an increase to 60% over 15 minutes, then to 95% over the next 5 minutes, and maintained at 95% for an additional 5 minutes. The QExactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with survey scans acquired over the m/z range of 300–1650 at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z = 200. Up to 10 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30. The AGC target for MS and MS2 scans were set to 3E6 and 1E5, respectively, with maximum injection times of 100 ms for MS and 60 ms for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds. For measurements on the Exploris 480, Peptides were loaded onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Thermo Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60 °C. Using the nanoelectrospray interface, eluting peptides were directly sprayed onto the Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated through the column at a flow rate of 300 nl/min by increasing percentage of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in the following steps: increase from 5% buffer B to 30% buffer B over 45 mins followed by an increase to 65% buffer B over 5 mins then 95% over the next 5 mins. Percentage of buffer B was maintained at 95% for another 5 mins The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1650 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z =200), and up to 15 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 28). The MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS and MS2 scans were set to 3E6 and 1E5 respectively within a maximum injection time of 25 and 28 ms for MS and MS2 scans respectively. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 2.2.0.0) with default settings. The peak list was searched against the human proteome database (UniProt: SwissProt and TrEMBL) as well as protein sequences of interest, with an allowed precursor mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a static modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation was set as variable modification. For total proteome measurements of cell pellets, deamidation on asparagine and glutamine was additionallz set as variable modificaton. Protein quantification across samples was performed using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant.The iBAQ algorithm was enabled for some of the data analysis.

SDRF SUMMARY:
Total runs: 24
organism part: homo sapiens
instrument: Exploris 480 Orbitrap; Q Exactive HF Orbitrap
cleavage agent details: Trypsin/P
modification parameters: Acetyl (Protein N-term); Carbamidomethyl (C); Deamidation (NQ); Oxidation (M)
label: label free sample