PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: acetylated residue
experiment types: SWATH MS; Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Ap-ms; Flip-ms; Hydroxyurea; Ada3; Lip-ms

ABSTRACT:
We applied serial ultrafiltration and limited proteolysis-coupled mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) to generate an atlas of peptides that act as markers for the formation or dissolution of protein-protein interactions (PPIs). Applied to Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the approach yielded 6,441 candidate PPI markers from 1,086 proteins, including 1,072 markers of known interfaces from 272 proteins. These include peptides mapping to both validated and putative protein binding interfaces, as well as markers of structural changes that accompany PPIs. The approach is based on detecting differences in protease susceptibility between the protein complex-bound and monomeric forms. We then used these peptide markers to track changes in protein-protein interactions in LiP-MS analyses of unfractionated lysates of yeast grown under hydroxyurea (HU) stress compared to control conditions. We captured known and novel protein complex rearrangements, supporting the key role played by Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA) and the activity of its acetyltransferase Gcn5 in the stress response. We validated our observed rearrangement of SAGA with an AP-MS experiment comparing Ada3 pulldowns of yeast grown under HU and control conditions. We further examined how protein complex rearrangements change in Gcn5 mutant cells; we found a set of protein complexes that depend directly or indirectly on Gcn5 activity and identified a link between Gcn5 activity and the regulation of P-bodies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Limited-proteolysis coupled to mass spectrometry (LiP-MS) data on a serially filtered yeast lysate (the FLiP library) and on lysates of wild-type and Gcn5 mutant yeast strains grown under hydroxyurea stress and control conditions. Affinity purification mass spectrometry on Ada3 pulldowns from yeast grown under hydroxyurea stress and control conditions.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
LiP-MS was performed as described previously (Malinovska et al., Nature Protocols, 2023) on yeast lysates separated by serial ultrafiltration, lysates of wild-type yeast grown under HU-stress and control conditions and lysates of Gcn5 mutant yeast grown under HU-stress and control conditions. AP-MS was performed on Ada3-3xFLAG pulldowns from yeast grown under HU stress and in control conditions. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.

DATA PROCESSING:
Each LiP-MS sample is accompanied by a tryptic control sample where the limited proteolysis step is omitted and which may be used for accurate protein quantification. All LiP-MS runs were acquired in data-independent acquisition mode (DIA). For each sample type (all LiP or all tryptic control replicates of a given condition), a pooled library sample was measured in data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The data of the serial ultrafiltration experiment generating the FLiP marker library was searched in Spectronaut version 15.6.211220.50606 and for all other experiments in Spectronaut version 17.1.221229.55965 (Biognosys). Hybrid libraries for the tryptic control and the LiP samples consisting of the corresponding DDA and DIA runs were created based on a Pulsar search using the default settings, with the exception of digest type, which was set to “semi-specific” for the LiP samples only, and the minimal peptide length, which was set to 6. The data were searched against the UniProt fasta database (strain S288c, UP000002311, July 2019). For the serial ultrafiltration experiment, the targeted data extraction was performed in Spectronaut 15 with default settings (BGS Factory Settings) except for the data filtering, which was set to “Qvalue percentile” with a cutoff of 0.75. For all other experiments analyzed in Spectronaut 17, default settings were used. In all experiments, the FDR was set to 1% on precursor and protein levels and no values were imputed. The LiP and tryptic control samples were searched separately. From the LiP search, we exported peptide intensities, and from the tryptic control search, we exported protein intensities. The AP-MS data was aquired in DDA and was searched in Spectromine version 3.2.22022.52329 (Biognosys). The search was performed with default parameters except for the proteotypicity filter, which was set to “Proteotypic only” and normalization, which was not applied. The data were searched against the UniProt fasta database (strain S288c, UP000002311, July 2019) and a list of typical contaminants. The FDR was set to 1% on peptide and protein levels. For SAINT analysis, the control and HU-stressed samples were searched separately but together with their respective wild type backgrounds and proteins were quantified by both spectral matches and protein intensities.  The table “File_List.xlsx” allows the assignment of different sample types, conditions and replicates to the corresponding .raw files. Further information can be found in the accompanying publication.