PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Blood brain barrier; Iron homeostasis; Apoe4; Tfr

ABSTRACT:
We compare the proteome of the brain endothelial cells obtained with the newly optimized protocol (iCE-BECs) to the primary human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMVECs) and the widely used immortalized brain endothelial cell line HCMECD3. The goal is to investigate the applicability of iCE-BECs for transport assays, measuring the expression of transporters and receptors with whole cell proteomics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ApoE4 disrupts intracellular trafficking and iron homeostasis in an improved iPSC-based model of human brain endothelial cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We compared primary brain endothelial cells (HBMVEC, n=6 from three different batches), immortalized endothelial cells (HCMEC/D3, n=3 different passages), and induced ECM-supported brain endothelial cells (iCE-BECs, n=4 differentiations) with whole proteomics analysis. HCMEC/D3 (SCC066, Merck) cells were cultured in EGM-2 Endothelial Cell Growth Medium-2 BulletKit (CC-3162, Lonza) for three sequential passages and collected when at confluence. Three independent batches of HBMVECs were purchased from AngioProteomie (cAP-0002, AngioProteomie) and cultured in EGM-2 Endothelial Cell Growth Medium-2 BulletKit (CC-3162, Lonza) in flasks coated with quick coating solution (cAP-01, Angioproteomie). Each cell batch was cultured for two subsequent passages and collected when at confluence. iCE-BECs were differentiated as described in the manuscript with the same title and collected at day 14 in culture. Culture media were removed and cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Cells were detached using trypsin 0.25%-EDTA (ThermoFisher, 25200056) for HCMEC/D3 or TrypLETM (12563011, ThermoFisher) for HBMVECs and iCE-BECs, resuspended in culture medium and centrifuged at 180 g at 4°C for 5 min. Cell pellets were then washed with cold PBS and centrifuged. This washing step was repeated again once before snap freezing the cell pellets on dry ice for about 15 min. Cell pellets were then stored at -80°C.  Samples were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin and peptides purified using the PreOmics iST kit according to the supplier’s specifications. Peptide samples were resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.5% (v/v) formic acid solution and 1ug of peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography (nano capillary system, EASY-nLC™ 1200 system, Thermo Scientific) on a C18 reverse-phase nano-high-performance liquid chromatography column connected to a mass spectrometer (Orbitrap ExplorisTM 480, Thermo Scientific) via electrospray ionization.

DATA PROCESSING:
The DIA method consisted of one full range MS1 from 340 to 1210 m/z at 120k resolution, with a custom AGC target and 20ms max injection time. Then 28 DIA segments were acquired at 15k resolution with a standard AGC target and 20 ms max injection time. HCD fragmentation was set to normalized collision energy optimized for each segment. The spectra were recorded in profile mode. The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 3. Raw files have been processed with Spectronaut 18, with experiment settings based on BGS Default SNE for a DIA library free search, using global imputation to deal with missing values. Default settings included peptide and protein level false discovery rate control at 1 %. Measurements were normalized separately using local regression normalization. The mass spectrometric data were analyzed using Pulsar search engine as implemented in Spectronaut software, the false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 1 %. A human UniProt fasta database (Homo Sapiens, 2022 07 01) was used for the search engine, allowing for 2 missed cleavages and variable modifications (N term acetylation and methionine oxidation). Distributions of both raw and normalized data at the protein level were assessed to evaluate sample consistency. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was conducted to reveal the overall data structure and to identify potential experimental artifacts. Outlier detection was implemented using the Mahalanobis distance, calculated from the first three principal components. No outliers were removed. The differential abundance analysis was performed to identify proteins with significant changes in expression levels between the different conditions. For this statistical analysis, we utilized the R package “limma”. Unlike standard t-tests, which compare proteins individually, the “limma”; approach accounts for the overall variance observed across all proteins. This typically results in adjusted P-values, especially at the tails of the distribution, and is particularly well-suited for studies with small sample sizes.