PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Neuroinflammation; neurodegeneration; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; c9orf72; human pluripotent stem cells; cellular interactions; motor neurons; astrocytes; microglia; spinal cord; triculture; three-dimension; microtissue; drug screen; sartans; telmisartan

ABSTRACT:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor neurons (MN) loss. Mutations in C9orf72 are the leading genetic cause of ALS and involve hexanucleotide repeat expansions (HRE) in the noncoding region of the gene. Neuroinflammation is a key feature and candidate therapeutic target in ALS, particularly in individuals with C9orf72 mutations (C9-ALS), as the gene affects microglial cell function and neuroinflammation.  Here, we established a novel protocol to model the ALS neuroinflammatory axis by combining C9-ALS human iPSC-derived spinal MNs, astrocytes, and microglia. The resulting three-dimensional (3D) Spinal Microtissue (SM) represents a scalable multicellular platform for disease modeling and drug discovery. We next performed a screen of 190 FDA-approved compounds in C9-ALS SMs and in microglia-only tissues. Sartans, a class of Angiotensin II Receptor I Blockers (ARB), were identified as top hits in reducing C9-ALS-related neuroinflammation, including IL-6 and IL-8 levels in the culture supernatant. We validated these findings in SMs from two additional C9-ALS hiPSC lines and in isogenic control cultures using telmisartan, a particularly potent and brain penetrant sartan. Further, telmisartan rescued C9-ALS related MN death in both coculture and tricultures conditions and restored MN cell proportions within C9-ALS SMs. Our study suggests that C9-ALS microglia are toxic to MNs, and that telmisartan can attenuate microglia-related neuroinflammation and MN death presenting a potential treatment for C9-ALS.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Telmisartan is neuroprotective in a hiPSC-derived spinal microtissue model for C9orf72-ALS via inhibition of neuroinflammation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The beads were resuspended in 40 μL of 2M Urea, 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH 8.5 and treated with DL-dithiothreitol (1mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at 37°C with shaking (1100 rpm) on a Thermomixer (Thermo Fisher). Free cysteine residues were alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide (3.67mM final concentration) for 45 minutes at 25°C at 1100 rpm in the dark. LysC (750 ng) was added, followed by incubation for 1h at 37°C at 1150 rpm. Finally, trypsin (750 ng) was added, followed by incubation for 16 hours at 37°C at 1150 rpm. After incubation, the digest was acidified to pH <3 with the addition of 50% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the peptides were desalted on 3-plug C18 (3M EmporeTM high performance extraction disks) stage tips. Briefly, the stage tips were conditioned by sequential addition of: i) 100 μL 100% Acetonitrile (ACN), ii) 100 μL 70% ACN/0.1% TFA, iii) 100 μL 0.1% Formic Acid (FA), iv) 100 μL 0.1% FA. Following conditioning, the acidified peptide digest was loaded onto the stage tip. The stationary phase was washed once with 100 μL of 0.1% FA. Finally, samples were eluted using 50μL of 70% ACN/0.1% FA twice. Eluted peptides were dried under vacuum followed by reconstitution in 12 μL of 0.1% FA, sonication and transfer to an autosampler vial. Peptide yield was quantified by NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher).

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data files were processed using Spectronaut version 18.5 (Biognosys) and searched with the PULSAR search engine with a Homo sapiens UniProt protein database downloaded on 2024/05/28 (226,232 entries). cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modifications, while Methionine oxidation, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and Deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modification. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were permitted. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and 1% FDR was set as threshold for identification. Unpaired t-test was used to calculate p-value in differential analysis, volcano plot was generated based on log2FC and q-value (multiple testing corrected p-value using Benjamini-Hochberg method). A q-value of ≤0.05 was considered the statistically significant cut-off.

METHODS:
Methods
hiPSC cell culture
Experiments using human pluripotent stem cells were reviewed by the Tri-institutional ESCRO committee. Human iPSCs were maintained in Essential 8 medium on Vitronectin-coated plates, as previously described The working cell banks (WCBs) were expanded from the master cell banks obtained from the Answer ALS repository. hiPSC stocks were passaged at a 1:6 ratio, cryopreserved using Stem Cell Banker as the freezing medium, and subsequently thawed into Essential 8 medium supplemented with 10 μM ROCK inhibitor (Y-27632). Cells were maintained in this medium for 24 h post-thawing. All WCB stocks were used between passages 20–30, and differentiations were initiated two passages following thawing. For additional information see supplemental methods.
Generation and dissociation of 3D, spinal MN organoids from hiPSCs in 3D
Spinal MNs were generated in 3D as organoids. For dissociation, 10 organoids were collected and subjected to a papain dissociation technique following manufacturer instructions. For additional information on MN generation and dissociation see supplemental methods.
Generation of spinal astrocytes and microglia from hiPSCs
The spinal astrocyte protocol was adjusted from to generate spinal cord-specific astrocytes. Microglial differentiation followed. For additional information on those two protocols see supplemental methods.
Generation of SMs
SMs were generated similarly to cardiac microtissues but by mixing microglia, spinal MNs, and spinal astrocytes at a ratio of 1:3:1 in SM media—Neurobasal media containing brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF; 0.02 μg/mL), glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF; 0.02 μg/mL), and IL-34 (100 ng/mL). Briefly, microglia and astrocyte stocks were thawed and allowed to recover in serum-free medium for one week, whereas day 20–30 spinal MN organoids were dissociated using papain dissociation (Worthington Biochemical Corporation, Cat #: LK003150) for 1 h and 10 min on an orbital shaker and counted by trypan blue. Meanwhile, day 30 microglia were dissociated into a single-cell suspension using Accutase for 10 min at 37o C and counted by trypan blue. Simultaneously, day 50 spinal astrocytes were dissociated with trypsin at 37o C, and cells were counted by trypan blue. Spinal MNs, microglia, and spinal astrocytes were mixed to generate a total of 7,500 cells comprising 4,500 spinal MNs, 1,500 spinal astrocytes, and 1,500 microglia per microtissue and seeded in 100 μL of microtissue media per well in a low-attachment 96-well V-bottom plate (S-Bio PrimeSurface 3D culture: ultra-low-attachment plates, Cat #MS-9096VZ). Plates were centrifuged at 1,090 rpm for 10 min at room temperature (RT) and incubated under standard cell culture conditions (37oC, 5% CO2).
High-throughput screen
SM and microglia spheroids were generated in 100 μL of media as described earlier. After 24 h, the wells were treated with the TocriScreen FDA-Approved Drugs Library (Tocris, Cat. #7200) using a semi-automated system. The screening was conducted in single wells for the compounds, with triplicates for the positive, negative, and vehicle CTRLs. The final concentration of each compound was 5 μM. Plates were incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 72 h. After incubation, supernatants were carefully collected without disturbing the cells using a robotic system. The supernatants were immediately frozen at −80°C for subsequent analysis. Cytokine levels (IL-6 and IL-8) were measured using Eve Technologies’ Human High Sensitivity Custom 2-Plex Cytokine Assay. Quantitative analysis was performed in collaboration with the MSKCC Gene Editing & Screening Core.
Whole-mount staining of microtissues
To stain SMs in 3D, we modified protocols described previously. For additional information see supplemental methods.
Immunostaining of monolayer cultures
Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 min, permeabilized in 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 15, and blocked for 30 min in PBS with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). Primary antibody incubation was performed overnight at 4 °C at the specified dilutions in 1% BSA-PBS. Following three washes with PBS, cells were incubated with fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies (2 μg mL−1) and DAPI (1 μg μL−1) for 45 min at RT. Antibody details can be found in the supplemental information.
Cytokine arrays
This study used Luminex xMAP technology for multiplexed quantification of 14 human cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors. The multiplexing analysis was performed using the Luminex 200 system (Luminex, Austin, TX, USA) by Eve Technologies (Calgary, Alberta). For additional information see supplemental methods.
Protein digestion
Samples were loaded into Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters (3 kDa molecular weight cut off), concentrated to a final volume of 100 μL, and transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. The filters were then rinsed with 4 M urea and 50 mM EPPS pH 8.5, and the rinse was transferred to the samples tube. After protein quantification using the Pierce bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific), the proteins were reduced with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine to a final concentration of 5 mM for 20 min at RT. Free cysteine residues were alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 10 mM for 20 min in the dark at RT. The samples were cleaned using SP3 Sera-Mag carboxylate SpeedBeads beads (Cytiva, cat#: 65152105050250; 45152105050250, 50 μg/μL) according to the manufactures’ instructions. The beads were then resuspended in 50 μL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and the samples were digested with Lys-C (Wako) at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio and trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio at 37°C for overnight incubation with shaking (1200 rpm) on a thermomixer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After digestion, the samples were acidified with 2.65 μL of 99% formic acid (FA) at RT for 5 min with shaking (1,200 rpm), followed by addition of 1.2 mL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 min at RT with shaking (1,200 rpm). The samples were washed three times with 100% ACN and resuspended in 50 μL of 2% DMSO at 37°C for 30 min with shaking (1,200 rpm). The eluted peptides were dried under vacuum, reconstituted in water with 0.1% FA, and sonicated in a water bath sonicator. Peptide yield was quantified using a NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Mass spectrometry analyses
Peptides were separated on a 25 cm column with a 75 μm diameter and 1.7 μm particle size, composed of C18 stationary phase (IonOpticks Aurora 3 1801220). The separation was carried out using a 25-min gradient: from 3.2% to 9.6% B over 2 min at a flow rate of 400 nL/min and then to 18% B over 12 min at 200 nL/min, to 32% B over 19.5 min at 200 nL/min, and finally to 90% B over 5 min at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in high-performance liquid chromatography-grade water, and mobile phase B ACN with 0.1% FA. The separation was performed using a Vanquish Neo system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry (MS) data were acquired on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a data-independent acquisition mode, with a normalized collision energy of 25%. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 240 K, with a normalized automated gain control target 200%, a custom maximum injection time, and a scan range of 380–980 m/z. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Astral analyzer with a 2 m/z isolation window, a scan range of 150–2,000 m/z, a precursor mass range of 380–980 m/z, and a loop CTRL time of 0.6 s.
Analyses of MS data
Raw data files were processed using Spectronaut version 18.5 (Biognosys) and searched with the PULSAR search engine against a Homo sapiens UniProt protein database downloaded on 2024/05/28 (226,232 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation, acetylation of the protein N-terminus, and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modification. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were allowed. Searches utilized a reversed sequence decoy strategy to CTRL peptide false discovery rate (FDR), with a 1% FDR threshold set for identification. An unpaired t test was used to calculate p values in differential analysis. The volcano plot was generated based on log2 fold change (log2FC) and q value (multiple testing corrected p value using the Benjamini-Hochberg method). A q value of ≤0.05 was considered the statistically significant cutoff.
Live imaging with BioTek Cytation 5 cell imaging multimode reader
We utilized the BioTek Cytation 5 cell imaging multimode reader, which integrates automated microscopy and multimode detection. For additional information see supplemental methods.
Flow cytometry
Flow cytometry analysis of CD14 expression was performed using a PE-conjugated anti-CD14 antibody (clone M5E2, STEMCELL Technologies), after incubation with FcR blocking reagent (Miltenyi Biotec). ISL-1 and IBA-1 expression were detected following fixation and permeabilization of cells using BD Cytofix/Cytoperm solution (BD Pharmingen). Cells were marked with Zombie Violet Viability (BioLegend). After incubation with FcR blocking reagent (Miltenyi Biotec), cells were stained with anti-IBA (clone 019-19741, Wako) and anti-ISL-1 (Clone 39.4D5-s, Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank) primary antibodies, followed by staining with Alexa Fluor 488- and Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated secondary antibodies (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Flow cytometry was performed using a BD Biosciences LSR Fortessa flow cytometer with Diva software. Data were analyzed using FlowJo (BD Biosciences LLC).
Gene correction and validation for C9orf72 ALS iPSC line
The C9-ALS patient hiPSC lines were obtained from Answer ALS: the CS7VCZiALS iPSC lines carries a heterozygous 993 G4C2 repeating sequences, and the CS2DDGiALS carries a heterozygous 741 G4C2 repeating sequences in the intron 1 of C9orf72 gene. The gene correction was performed using CRISPR-Cas9-based HDR. For additional information see supplemental methods.
3D image processing and analysis
Image processing and analysis were conducted using Fiji in conjunction with custom computational routines implemented in Python and Julia. A standardized pipeline was applied to each confocal image, encompassing kernel size determination, image processing, and 3D object classification and analysis as described in the supplemental methods.
Statistical analysis
Results are shown as mean ± SEM. Mean values were compared between CTRL cells and cells from the patients in one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s multiple comparisons tests. One-way ANOVA, two-way ANOVA, Student’s t test, for paired or unpaired measurements was applied where indicated and appropriate. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 9 (v.9.2.0). Statistical significance is denoted as follows: NS, not significant; p > 0.05; ∗p < 0.05; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001. Results with p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.

RESULTS:
Results
Development of a 3D SM triculture model
To generate a 3D, multicellular SM model from hiPSCs, we first optimized two-dimensional (2D; monolayer) and 3D (organoid) protocols to direct differentiation into spinal motor neurons (spinal MNs), spinal astrocytes, and microglia. For these studies, we used patient C9-ALS hiPSCs and age- and gender-matched, healthy CTRL lines. Details on these cell lines are presented in Figure S1A. Spinal MNs were generated using a novel, highly efficient, and scalable 3D organoid protocol (Figure 1Ai) detailed in Figure S1B. This allowed us to generate high-purity spinal MNs (Figure S1C) between day 20–30 of differentiation (Figure 1Aii). Dissociated spinal MNs display typical neuronal morphology and express MN markers such as ISL-1 (Figure 1Aiii). For generating hiPSC-derived microglia, we used an adaptation of a previous protocol (Figures 1B and S1F). The resulting microglia are characterized by the presence of IBA-1 (Figure 1B) and CD14 (Figure S1G) on day 30. To obtain spinal cord astrocytes (spinal astrocytes), we directed the hiPSCs toward a spinal cord progenitor identity and transduced progenitors with nuclear factor I/A (NFIA), which yielded GFAP-positive astrocytes by day 50 (Figure 1C). Details of this protocol are summarized in Figure S1D. Day 50 spinal astrocytes showed characteristic morphology and expressed astrocyte makers such as GFAP, and their spinal identity was confirmed by the presence of Nkx6.1 and Olig2 by immunofluorescence (IF) (Figure 1C). All three cell types were generated from either C9-ALS or CTRL lines.
Next, spinal MNs, spinal astrocytes, and microglia from C9-ALS and CTRL hiPSCs were combined in suspension in 96-well V-bottom plates, as previously described for cardiac microtissues to generate a 3D, triculture platform, herein referred to as “spinal microtissue” (SM). Each SM is composed of 7,500 cells in total, consisting of 1,500 spinal astrocytes, 4,500 spinal MNs, and 1,500 microglia, ultimately forming a 1:3:1 ratio (Figure 1D) The cell composition of SMs was validated over time by assessing marker expression (ISL-1, IBA-1, and GFAP). No significant differences among cell types were found between C9-ALS and CTRL SMs on D5 (Figures 1E and 1F).
Sartans decrease neuroinflammation in ALS SMs from C9orf72 hiPSC lines
Cytokine profiling in C9-ALS and CTRL SM supernatants was performed to detect supernatant concentrations and fluorescence intensity of 14 inflammatory cytokines (Figure 2A). We selected IL-6 and IL-8 as inflammatory readouts for our compound screen, as they showed the best signal to noise ratio. Next, we performed a chemical screen of 190 FDA-approved compounds to identify modulators of neuroinflammation exclusively in C9-ALS SMs, using the TocriScreen FDA-Approved Drugs Library (Figure S2A). Because our pilot experiments strongly suggested a key role for microglia in driving IL-6 and IL-8 secretion in C9-ALS, the screen was performed in both C9-ALS SMs and in C9-ALS microglia similarly aggregated in 3D (microglia spheroids containing 7,500 cells/spheroid). At 24 h after microtissue generation (day 2), the chemical library was applied at 5 μM final concentration for each compound, and supernatants were collected 72 h later (day 5) (Figure 2B). The screen was performed in ultra-low-attachment 96-well V-bottom plates in single wells for the compounds and triplicates for the positive, negative, and vehicle CTRLs. IL-6 and IL-8 secretion were used as a readout for C9-ALS neuroinflammatory signature. Lipopolysaccharid (LPS; 1 μg/mL) was used as the positive CTRL needed to induce the opposite effect—namely, increasing inflammation. Tocilizumab (1 μM), a soluble IL-6 receptor (sIL6R) blocking antibody, was used as negative CTRL. By blocking trans-IL-6 signaling, we anticipated that it would reduce both IL-6 and IL-8 levels. 0.01% DMSO was used as vehicle CTRL. Tocilizumab showed little to no effect compared to DMSO in the case of IL-6 levels suggesting that blocking IL-6 signaling does not dramatically impact its secretion (Figure 2C). In addition, we assessed microtissue viability by measuring the diameter of each microtissue compared to the untreated wells and the DMSO-treated groups. We observed no significant decrease in SM viability for most compounds, including CTRLs. Compounds affecting microtissue or microglia spheroid viability were excluded from further analysis (Figure S2B). We quantified secreted IL-6 and IL-8 percent (%) reductions relative to DMSO-treated CTRLs as the primary screening readout. Hits were defined as compounds reducing IL-6 and/or IL-8 beyond set thresholds.
In C9-ALS SMs, we identified 24 IL-8 hits (20%–70% decrease) and 23 IL-6 hits (20%–60% decrease) (Figure 2D). In C9-ALS microglia spheroids, 45 compounds reduced IL-8 (20%–90%) and 66 reduced IL-6 (15%–60%) (Figure 2E). The top 15 hits per group were selected based on potency of IL-6 and IL-8 inhibition (Figures 2D and 2E). In SMs, telmisartan ranked the highest, reducing IL-8 by 65% and IL-6 by 50% (Figure 2D). In microglia spheroids, flutamide and delavirdine mesylate were the top IL-8 and IL-6 inhibitors, respectively (Figure 2E). Hit thresholds were determined using the negative CTRL (tocilizumab-treated) versus DMSO (Figure 2F). Notably, sartans, the top hits in C9-ALS SMs, were also effective in microglia spheroids, suggesting their ability to reduce IL-6 and IL-8 in both platforms (Figure 2G). Further details are in the methods section. To assess screen robustness, we performed a Z-prime factor analysis, measuring signal separation between the positive and vehicle CTRLs. Results were plotted as probability distributions against log-transformed assay signals, visualized as bell curves (Figures S2C and S2D).
Confirmation of telmisartan as a key hit in decreasing neuroinflammation in C9-ALS SMs
Because sartans were the top hits reducing IL-6 and IL-8 in both microglia and C9-ALS SMs, we validated their effects using telmisartan, valsartan, and azilsartan in a secondary screen. Validation was conducted on C9-ALS SMs derived from different hiPSC lines and their isogenic CTRLs, generated via CRISPR-Cas9 homology-directed repair (HDR). Details, including the gene editing strategy using CRISPR-Cas9 (HDR) to generate these lines, are depicted in Figure 3A. Following the original screening design, SMs were treated with 5 μM sartans on D2 and cultured for 72 h before supernatant analysis. Telmisartan, azilsartan, and valsartan significantly reduced IL-6 and IL-8 in C9-ALS SMs (Figures 3B and 3C). However, telmisartan had no significant effect on IL-6, IL-8, or other cytokines in isogenic CTRL SMs (Figure 3D), suggesting its effect is specific to C9-ALS (Figure S3A). Secretome analysis confirmed IL-8 (CXCL8) as a top upregulated protein in C9-ALS SMs (Figure S3B) and the most significantly reduced following telmisartan treatment, further supporting our findings (Figure S3C).
Telmisartan enhances survival of spinal MNs in C9-ALS co-cultures and tricultures
To assess telmisartan’s effect on spinal MN survival under C9-ALS conditions, we generated spinal MNs from a GPI:H2B-tdTomato-tagged hESC line and cultured them alone or with C9-ALS or CTRL glia (microglia and/or spinal astrocytes) under mono-, co-, and triculture conditions. Cells were treated with DMSO (CTRL) or telmisartan (5 μM) on D2, and live-cell imaging was performed every 4 h for 14 days (Figure 4A). Td-Tomato counts showed no significant difference in MN survival between untreated and telmisartan-treated groups in monoculture (Figure 4B) or when co-cultured with CTRL microglia (Figure 4C). However, telmisartan significantly improved MN survival in co-culture with C9-ALS microglia (Figure 4D). In the triculture model, telmisartan had no effect with wild-type glia (Figure 4E) but significantly increased MN survival in the C9-ALS glia-based setting (Figure 4F). Analysis of “motor neuron death” (net Td-Tomato change between the first and last time points) showed that MNs co-cultured with C9-ALS microglia exhibited significantly higher death counts compared to those co-cultured with CTRL microglia, and telmisartan treatment reduced MN death in the C9-ALS co-culture to levels similar to CTRL microglia (Figure 4G). No significant difference was observed between untreated and telmisartan-treated CTRL microglia co-cultures. Similarly, MNs in C9-ALS tricultures, which included both microglia and astrocytes, showed significantly higher death counts compared to those co-cultured with CTRL microglia (Figure 4G). Finally, supernatant collected after 14 days of culture was analyzed for cytokine levels, revealing that IL-6 and IL-8 levels were significantly elevated in C9-ALS co-cultures and tricultures compared to CTRLs (Figure 4H). Telmisartan treatment significantly reduced IL-6 and IL-8 levels in both C9-ALS co-cultures and tricultures, restoring them to baseline CTRL levels (Figure 4H). These findings suggest that telmisartan has a neuroprotective effect in C9-ALS models derived from patient induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by enhancing MN survival in a non-cell-autonomous manner and reducing C9-microglia-mediated pro-inflammatory cytokine levels.
Telmisartan shows time-dependent effect on C9-ALS SM cell ratios and rescues MN proportion
As the previous survival studies were performed in 2D co-culture and tri-culture models (Figure 4), we explored whether we could assess the role of telmisartan in our 3D SM platform using whole-mount staining to quantify cell proportions over a 14-day period. SMs were generated and treated with either 0.01% DMSO or 5 μM telmisartan using the same experimental paradigm depicted in Figure 2B. SMs were collected and fixed on days 5 (D5), 7 (D7), and 14 (D14) post-generation and stained using whole-mount IF analysis, as described in the methods section. Antibodies against ISL-1 (spinal MNs), IBA-1 (microglia), and glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP; spinal astrocytes) were used to determine the proportions of the three cell types over time in culture. The bar graphs (Figures S4A–S4D) depict the proportions of IBA-1+ microglia, GFAP+ astrocytes, and ISL-1+ MNs on D5, D7, and D14. Interestingly, the percentage of ISL-1+ MNs was significantly lower in C9-ALS compared to CTRL SMs on D14 (Figure S4F). With telmisartan treatment (C9-ALS + Telmi), ISL-1+ MN proportions on D5 and D7 showed a slight increase compared to their DMSO-treated counterparts (Figures S4A and S4C), with the most significant difference observed on D14, where the ISL-1+ MN population was significantly higher with telmisartan treatment compared to the DMSO group on D14 (Figures S4C and S4E). In the CTRL (DMSO) group, ISL-1-positive cells remained similar across all the time points, regardless of telmisartan treatment (Figures S4B and S4D). Collectively, these results support our findings that MN populations decline over time in C9-ALS compared to CTRL SMs and that telmisartan can mitigate this effect.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor neuron (MN) degeneration in the brain and spinal cord, leading to progressive paralysis and death within 3–5 years. While most ALS cases lack an identifiable genetic cause, the expansion of the G4C2 hexanucleotide repeats (GGGGCC) within the first intron of the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72) gene contributes to approximately 25%–40% of familial cases and 5% of sporadic ALS/FTD cases. The C9orf72 gene is implicated in various physiological processes, particularly in microglial and myeloid cells, and in pathways related to immune regulation and glial cell functions. Glial cell activation and dysfunction of astrocytes and microglia have been linked to both familial and sporadic ALS based on studies in postmortem tissue and in mouse and cellular models of the disease. Neuroinflammation may be particularly important for driving ALS disease progression and thereby presents a promising target for therapeutic intervention. However, there is a pressing need for a robust, scalable, and physiologically relevant model of human neuroinflammation to identify relevant candidate therapeutics.
Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) offer a unique opportunity to capture neuro-glial interactions in relevant human cell types using patient-specific or genetically engineered stem cell lines carrying patient-related mutations. There is long-standing evidence that glial cells contribute to disease phenotypes as first described for SOD1 mutant ALS models. C9orf72 ALS (C9-ALS) models show phenotypes such as RNA foci or dipeptide repeat-related pathologies in neurons as reviewed recently including neurotoxic effects mediated by C9-microglia in co-culture platforms.
Here, we developed a scalable 3D spinal microtissue (SM) model integrating human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived MNs, astrocytes, and microglia. C9-SMs showed elevated levels of secreted interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-8 compared to control (CTRL) SMs, reflecting a C9-ALS neuroinflammatory signature. Utilizing this inflammatory readout, we screened 190 Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved compounds; identified angiotensin II receptor I (AT1R) blockers (ARBs) as modulators of this neuroinflammatory signature; and demonstrated telmisartan’s ability to reduce inflammation and prevent MN loss.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Resource availability
Lead contact
Requests for further information, resources, and reagents should be directed to the lead contact, Lorenz Studer, studerl@mskcc.org.
Materials availability
The unique cell lines generated from this study are available from the lead contact. The unmodified C9ORF72 patient and CTRL hiPSC lines were obtained from the Answer ALS via the Cedars Sinai Biomanufacturing Center.
Data and code availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data generated in this study have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD057067.
Supplemental information
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2025.102535.