PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Mature neutrophil
diseases: Pneumonia
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Plasma; Human; Pneumonia; Neutrophils; Cap

ABSTRACT:
Neutrophils are crucial first responders in respiratory infections and play a dichotomous role in the host response during community-acquired pneumonia (CAP): providing protection and potentially causing damage. Existing research on neutrophil function in CAP relies on animal or ex-vivo studies, leaving a gap in human-centered investigations. Addressing this, we used mass spectrometry to characterize the neutrophil proteome of CAP patients at general ward admission and related the proteome to controls and clinical outcomes. We included 57 CAP patients and 26 controls and quantified 3482 proteins in neutrophil lysates and 386 proteins in concurrently collected plasma. We found that the extensively studied granule-related proteins in non-human models did not drive the neutrophil proteome changes associated with CAP. Proteome alterations were primarily due to an increased abundance of proteins related to (aerobic) metabolic activity and (m)RNA translation/processing, concurrent with a diminished presence of cytoskeletal organization-related proteins (all pathways p<0.001). Higher and lower abundances of specific proteins, primarily constituents of these pathways, were associated with prolonged time to clinical stability in CAP. Moreover, we identified a pronounced presence of platelet-related proteins in neutrophil lysates of particularly viral CAP patients, suggesting the existence of neutrophil-platelet complexes in non-critically ill CAP patients. Of the measured proteins in neutrophils, 4.3% were also detected in plasma. Our findings offer novel insights into the neutrophil proteome in human CAP and might serve as a proteomic resource for forthcoming investigations. Additionally, our study could pave the way for targeted strategies to fine-tune neutrophil responses, potentially improving CAP patient management.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Profiling of Neutrophils and Plasma in Community-Acquired Pneumonia Reveals Crucial Proteins in Diverse Biological Pathways Linked to Clinical Outcome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
EDTA plasma (for plasma proteomics) and heparin blood were obtained from CAP patients within 24 hours of hospital admission. Neutrophils were isolated from the lowest fraction of Ficoll-Paque separated heparin tubes. Erythrocytes were lysed with erythrocyte lysis buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, Missouri).  For mass spectrometry analysis of neutrophil   proteomes, cells were lysed in 1% sodium deoxycholate (Bioworld), 10 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific), 40 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 (Gibco). Lysates were incubated for 5 minutes at 95 °C and sonicated for 10 minutes in a sonifier bath (Branson model 2510), after which trypsin (Promega) was added in a 1:50 (w/w) protein ratio and digested overnight at room temperature. Tryptic digests were transferred to an Evotip Pure tips (Evosep) according to manufacturer guidelines and separated on a 15 cm × 150 μm, 1.5 μm Performance Column (EV1137 from EvoSep) with an Evosep One liquid chromatography system (Evosep) with the 15 samples per day program. Buffer A comprised 0.1 % formic acid, and buffer B of 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile (Biosolve, NLD). Peptides were ionised and introduced into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Data was acquired using Data Independent Acquisition (DIA), consisting of an MS1 scan from 390 to 1010 m/z, performed at 60K resolution (AGC target of 4 × 105) with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. This was followed by MS2 data acquisition in centroid mode using 75 isolation windows of 8 m/z. DIA segments/spectra were acquired at 30K resolution (with an AGC target of 4 × 105) with a maximum injection time of 54 ms. HCD fragmentation was used in MS2 with a normalised collision energy of 23%. A default charge state of 2 for MS2 was used. Spectra were recorded in centroid mode. The setting "injections for all available parallelisable time" was set.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw mass spectrometry data files were processed using the DIA-NN software (version 1.8). Proteins and peptides were detected by querying the human SwissProt database (release 2021.22.04). Standard settings were combined with a generated library-based spectra search. The maximum number of variable modifications was set at 2. Protein Interference used was "Protein names (from FASTA)" and quantification strategy "Robust LC (high accuracy)".  Data was analysed using R and Rstudio. Detected proteins were filtered for proteotypic and ≥2 unique peptides per protein, and proteins should be quantified in 75% of samples in at least one cell type and condition. LFQ values were transformed in log2 scale. Missing values were imputed by normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit.