PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
diseases: Critical covid-19; Bacterial sepsis
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Machine learning; Precision medicine; Subclasses; Plasma; Hierarchical clustering; Sepsis; Clinical routine data

ABSTRACT:
Background The heterogeneity of sepsis represents a major problem for the development of personalized sepsis therapies. Thus, sepsis subtyping emerged as an important tool to approach this problem, but little progress was made due to insufficient molecular insights. Modern proteomics techniques allow the identification of subtypes and enable molecular and mechanistical insights. Here, we analyzed a prospective multi-center sepsis cohort using plasma proteomics to describe and characterize sepsis plasma proteome subtypes. Methods Plasma samples from 333 patients collected at days 1 and 4 of sepsis were analyzed using liquid-chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. Plasma proteome subtypes were identified using K-means clustering and were characterized based on clinical routine data, cytokine measurements and proteomics data. A random forest machine learning (ML) classifier was generated to enable the assignment of patients to the subtypes in future. Results Four subtypes with different sepsis severity were identified. Cluster 0 represented the most severe sepsis with 100 % mortality. Cluster 1, 2 and 3 showed a gradual decrease of the median SOFA score, which was reflected by clinical data and cytokine measurements. On the proteome level, the subtypes were characterized by distinct molecular features. We found an alternating immune response with cluster 1 showing prominent activation of the adaptive immune system as indicated by elevated levels of immunoglobulins (Ig) that were verified using orthogonal measurements. Cluster 2 was characterized by acute inflammation and the lowest Ig levels. Cluster 3 represented the sepsis proteome baseline of the investigated cohort. We generated a ML classifier and optimized it for a minimum number of proteins that could realistically be implemented into routine diagnostics. The final model was based on 10 proteins and Ig quantities and allowed the assignment of patients to clusters 1, 2 and 3 with high confidence. Conclusion The identified plasma proteome subtypes provide insights into immune response and disease mechanisms and allow conclusions on appropriate therapeutic measures. Thus, they represent a step forward in the development of targeted therapies and personalized medicine in sepsis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Plasma proteomics identifies molecular subtypes in sepsis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteome analyses of plasma samples were conducted as described recently [DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105508]. Briefly, 1 µl of plasma per sample was digested using the SP3 protocol and 545 samples from 333 patients were analyzed distributed over eight batches. Batches C3 and S9 were analyzed on a Vanquish Neo UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 240. Batch S3 was analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. All other batches were measured on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 240 (all Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

DATA PROCESSING:
The samples were measured in data-independent acquisition mode and data were processed using DIA-NN (v.1.8.1) searching the UniProt/SwissProt database restricted to Homo sapiens (v.2022_05). All batches were processed separately and subsequently normalized and evaluated as described previously [DOI: 10.3390/ijms231911242].

METHODS:
Methods
Patient cohort
Patients with sepsis according to Sepsis-3 definition were enrolled within the multi-center, prospective, observational SepsisDataNet.NRW and CovidDataNet.NRW studies (German Clinical Trial Registry, No. DRKS00018871). The diagnosis of sepsis had to be made within 48 h before study inclusion, which then was on the first day of treatment in the ICU. Blood samples (EDTA plasma and serum) were collected at day 1 and day 4. Patient-related ICU data and baseline characteristics were derived from the electronic patient’s records. Treatment was provided in accordance with current guidelines and was not influenced by study inclusion. No patients with limits on resuscitation or withdrawn supportive care were enrolled.
Plasma proteomics
Proteome analyses of plasma samples were conducted as described recently. Briefly, 1 µl of plasma per sample was digested using the SP3 protocol and 545 samples from 333 patients were analyzed distributed over eight batches. Batches C3 and S9 were analyzed on a Vanquish Neo UHPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 240. Batch S3 was analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. All other batches were measured on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 240 (all Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The samples were measured in data-independent acquisition mode and data were processed using DIA-NN (v.1.8.1) searching the UniProt/SwissProt database restricted to Homo sapiens (v.2022_05). All batches were processed separately and subsequently normalized and evaluated as described before (Supplementary Fig. 1). Functional annotation and enrichment analyses were performed using the STRING web interface (string db.org, v.12.0).
Proteome clustering
Clustering was performed using day 1 protein intensities. Only proteins measured at both timepoints (days 1 and 4) with less than 30% missing values at each timepoint were included in the analysis. Correlating features remained in the data set (Supplementary Table 1). For clustering, missing values were imputed with the median. First, day 1 protein intensities were standardized using z-transformation for each protein. The standardization parameters (mean and standard deviation) were then applied to day 4 data to ensure consistent transformation across the timepoints. Subsequently, a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was calculated for day 1 to reduce dimensionality. The resulting principal components were used to project day 4 data into the same reduced feature space. Sepsis plasma proteome subtypes were identified using the k-means algorithm on the PCA results of the first 35 components (> 70% of variance, Supplementary Table 2, Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3). The optimal number of clusters was determined using silhouette curves, Gap statistics, the Davies-Bouldin index and initial biological interpretation of the results, resulting in four distinct clusters (Supplementary Figs. 4–6). To assign day 4 data to the clusters, the Euclidean distance to each cluster centre was calculated, and each data point was assigned to the cluster with the nearest cluster centre. All calculations were performed using Python (v.3.10.14) and the packages pandas (v.2.1.1) and scikit-learn (v.1.3.1).
Cytokine measurements
The LegendPlex Human Inflammation Panel 1 (Biolegend, San Diego) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions as described previously. Briefly, serum samples were mixed and incubated with the LegendPlex beads, subsequently washed, and incubated with detection antibodies. After a final washing step, the measurements were carried out using a flow cytometer (Canto II, BD Biosciences, CA). Cytokine concentrations were interpolated from calibration curves that were generated and measured together with the analyzed samples. Calculated concentrations below the lower limit of quantification (LOD) were considered to be zero, concentrations higher than the upper LOD were replaced by the respective upper LOD.
Immunoglobulin quantification
Serum aliquots were thawed and centrifuged at 10000xg for 5 s to pellet precipitates. The supernatant was used to determine the concentration of IgG, IgA and IgM. The measurement was performed turbidimetrically on the Cobas c501 system (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) using Roche reagents (Tina-quant IgA, IgG and IgM, second gen.), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Statistics
Clinical variables with multiple observations per day were aggregated by the median, minimum or maximum using the most clinical informative value (e.g. minimum value for quick value and maximum value for creatinine). The 25th percentile, median, and 75th percentile were calculated for each variable and subtype. For categorical variables, p-values were calculated using the chi-squared or fisher test and adjusted using Bonferroni correction. Kruskal-Wallis followed by Dunn’s post-hoc test for pairwise comparisons was applied for continuous variables. Differences in protein intensities between the four proteome subtypes were tested for statistical significance using ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test. ANOVA p-values were corrected according to Benjamini-Hochberg. Relative changes between the clusters were calculated as ratios of mean protein intensities. The significance threshold was set as an ANOVA pFDR value ≤ 0.05, a posthoc-test p value ≤ 0.05 and a ratio of means (RoM) ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67.
Machine learning
The proteomics data set was filtered for completeness as described above. In favour of quantities determined by clinical routine diagnostics, all entries representing immunoglobulins were removed and replaced by IgG, IgA, and IgM concentrations that were determined orthogonally. Proteins represented by routine measurements such as C-reactive protein (CRP), Fibrinogen gamma chain (FGG), Fibrinogen alpha chain (FGA), Fibrinogen beta chain (FGB), Hemoglobin subunit alpha (HBA2,) Hemoglobin subunit beta (HBB), and Hemoglobin subunit delta (HBD) were excluded as well (Supplementary Table 3). For the clinical dataset, routine ICU data with less than 30% missing values was considered. Variables with multiple observations per day were aggregated as described above and missing values were completed using data from the subsequent two days. Before model development, correlated features were removed by calculating the Pearson correlation between features and excluding one of the two features with an absolute correlation greater than 0.7 (Supplementary Table 4). For clinical data, only variables with a Kruskal–Wallis test p-value < 0.05 were used (Supplementary Tables 5 and 6). Cluster 0 was not considered for ML due to its low patient count, which was insufficient for robust modelling.
To identify the most relevant features, a multiclass classifier based on a Random Forest model was employed (Supplementary Fig. 7). The data were split into training and test sets (80% training, 20% test), and a 100 times Monte Carlo cross-validation (MCCV) was performed to evaluate the model metrics for different feature sets. Feature selection was conducted in a nested iterative manner: medical and proteomic features were added separately in two distinct loops. In the outer loop, medical features were incrementally included based on their importance ranking, while in the inner loop, proteomic features were iteratively added for each medical feature subset. This approach enabled independent evaluation of features from each domain. The order of features for iterative training was determined based on an additional 100 times MCCV (80% training, 20% validation). In this process, the median ranks of feature importance were computed using SHAP values (Shapley Additive Explanations) for medical and proteomics data. Missing values were imputed using the median in each MCCV iteration. The point at which the recall growth rate markedly declined was identified using the KneeLocator function of the keed package in Python. Based on this threshold, the most frequently selected proteins across MCCV iterations and IgA, IgG and IgM were used to train a Random Forest model (Fig. 3b), for which SHAP values were calculated to assess the contribution of each feature to the model’s predictions. The applied hyperparameters can be found in Supplementary Table 7. Calculations were done using Python (v.3.10.12) and the packages pandas (v.2.2.2), numpy (v.1.26.4), keed (v.0.8.5), shap (v0.46.0) and scikit-learn (v.1.5.1).

RESULTS:
Results
Cohort characteristics
The cohort comprised n = 333 patients that were enrolled in five university hospitals in Germany. The median age was 64 years (IQR 55–75) with 117 females (37.9%) and 216 males (62.1%). 74 patients (24.3%) showed a SARS-CoV-2 infection and the median SOFA score was 9 (IQR 5–12). The 30-day mortality was 39.6% (n = 132 patients). None of the patients had preexisting acute or chronic liver failure. Number of patients with a preexisting chronic kidney disease or the need for renal replacement therapy were n = 69 (21%) and n = 15 (5%), respectively. For all patients, plasma proteome analyses were done for day 1 while measurements for day 4 plasma samples were available for 213 patients.
Identification, trajectories and clinical representation of the sepsis plasma proteome subtypes
The k-means algorithm identified four sepsis plasma proteome subtypes on data from day 1. The four clusters showed a decreasing severity of sepsis as represented by the SOFA score with the highest scores found in cluster 0 and the lowest in cluster 3 (Fig. 1a; Table 1). Consequently, the highest 30-day mortality was also observed in cluster 0 (Figs. 1b and c), while no significant differences in 30-day mortality were found between the other three clusters. The median survival time in cluster 0 was 2 days at day 1 (IQR 0–3) and 4 days at day 4 (IQR 3–4.5). No significant differences were found for age, sex and the focus of infection. Proteome data corresponding to day 4 were used to assign the respective patients to the same clusters. The results illustrate a relative stability of the clusters with the majority of patients staying in one cluster. Some patients, however, also migrated from one cluster to another. Migration to cluster 0 showed a striking relationship with the outcome, with all patients passing through cluster 0 eventually dying (Fig. 1b). Patients in cluster 0 showed significantly shorter length of the ICU and hospital stay (Supplementary Fig. 8). Of note, we observed a significant difference in 30-day mortality between clusters 2 and 3 at day 4, accompanied by a significantly shorter survival-time of patients in cluster 2 (Supplementary Fig. 9, Supplementary Table 5).
Clinically, cluster 0 was characterized by acute liver failure (AST, ALT, LDH), lactate acidosis and accompanying high-grade acute kidney injury (AKI). Furthermore, aPPT, INR, platelet count and fibrinogen concentration indicated disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The decrease of CRP due to excessive consumption was less pronounced on day 4 compared to day 1 (Fig. 1d, Supplementary Table 5, Supplementary Fig. 10). These characteristics underlined the moribund character of patients in cluster 0. Cluster 1 showed a higher heart rate and elevated liver function markers AP, bilirubin, as well as lower CHE and cholesterol at day (1) On day 4, the heart rate was not significantly different between the four clusters, which was likely an effect of stabilization by the applied therapy. On day 1, cluster 2 was characterized by a moderate AKI with higher creatinine and urea levels and had the highest CRP levels of all four subtypes. Total protein was lower compared to clusters 1 and 3, an observation that was more pronounced on day 4, when cluster 2 also showed elevated AP levels and a decreased platelet count. Cluster 3 showed the overall mildest sepsis phenotypes and clinical values that were least alarming. Thus, it may be considered a baseline in our data set, however, at day 1 the 30-day survival was not significantly different from clusters 1 and 2. None of the three dysfunctions identified as most impactful - acute kidney injury, acute liver failure, and acute coagulopathy - were present prior to the onset of sepsis.
Immune status
At day 1, we found significant differences in the levels of IL-6, IL-8, IL10, IL-18 and CCL-2 (Supplementary Table 4). The distribution of cytokine concentrations resembled the distribution of the SOFA score, with the highest levels observed in cluster 0 and lowest in cluster 3 (Fig. 1e). At day 4, we additionally found IL-17a to be significantly differential between clusters 1 and 3. The counts of lymphocytes and white blood cells were not significantly differential between the subtypes.
Characteristics of the sepsis plasma proteome subtypes
Proteome analysis revealed the greatest differences between the subtypes in comparison to cluster 0. Overall, we found 271 significantly differential proteins between all four clusters at day 1 and 206 proteins at day 4 (Fig. 2a, Supplementary Fig. 11, Supplementary Table 8). Of these, 247 and 181 proteins were differential in comparison to cluster 0 at day 1 and day 4, respectively. This illustrates the unique plasma composition of cluster 0 which was associated with the most severe sepsis and highest mortality. The hierarchical cluster analysis of all significant proteins revealed five characteristic abundance patterns in relation to the identified subtypes on day 1. On day 4, four patterns could be discriminated, with regulation pattern α missing (Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12, Supplementary Table 9).
Typical of cluster 0, we found markers of cell death and tissue damage to be elevated, characterized by their common cytosolic location (Fig. 2a, abundance pattern δ). These consisted mainly of liver proteins associated with metabolic processes such as glucose, aldehyde and amino acid metabolism as well a cellular detoxification (Fig. 2b). The enriched biological processes might indicate an accumulation of the corresponding proteins before cell death, pointing towards enhanced elimination of reactive oxygen species and a metabolic shift towards anaerobic glycolysis. On the other hand, we found proteins related to blood coagulation but also complement activation and acute phase response to be depleted in cluster 0, showing the lowest levels across all subtypes (abundance patterns β and γ).
Decreasing levels of proteins associated with complement and coagulation as well as acute phase response were also apparent in cluster 1, highlighting the relevance of the associated processes in sepsis. Similarly, apolipoproteins, especially related to remodeling of high-density lipoprotein particles, were lower abundant in cluster 1 compared to clusters 2 and 3 (Fig. 2d, Supplementary Fig. 11b and c), showing even more pronounced depletion in cluster 0 (abundance pattern β). This finding was in accordance with clinical values, which indicated reduced liver function in cluster 1 and acute liver failure in cluster 0 (Fig. 1d). Another striking finding was the elevation of immunoglobulins (Ig) in cluster 1, in particular because this observation could not be anticipated based on clinical routine data (Fig. 2a, abundance pattern ε). High levels of immunoglobulins indicated a strong adaptive immune response in this subtype, corresponding to high SOFA scores and cytokine levels. The lowest immunoglobulin levels, in contrast, were found in cluster 2 which also corresponds to characteristically low levels in total protein. As no clinical routine parameter could be used to specifically substantiate these observations, total levels of IgG, IgA and IgM were determined post-hoc. These independent measurements verified the complementary levels of IgG and IgA, and showed the lowest levels of IgM in cluster 2 (Fig. 2c). In cluster 2, however, the highest levels of proteins related to acute inflammatory response were observed, including Serum amyloid A1 and A2 (SAA1, SAA2) as well as Haptoglobin (HP), and on day 4 also CRP (Fig. 2a, abundance pattern γ, Fig. 2d). Within the clusters 1, 2 and 3, the highest levels of the alarmins S100 A8 and A9 were also found in cluster 2 (Supplementary Fig. 11).
On day 1, an additional regulation pattern of proteins was observed, showing their lowest levels in cluster 3 (Fig. 2a, α pattern). This set of proteins contained proteins related to leukocyte transmigration (ICAM1, VCAM1), the kidney function marker Cystatin C (CST3) and immunoregulatory proteins such as VSIG4. A similar regulation pattern was not observed on day 4. The lowest abundance in cluster 3 as well as the increasing levels corresponding with increasing disease severity underlined the baseline character of cluster 3.
Prediction of sepsis plasma proteome subtypes by supervised machine learning
A random forest machine learning (ML) classifier was generated to showcase patient stratification according to sepsis plasma proteome subtypes. First, the number of features beyond which only a marginal improvement in recall was achieved was identified by iteratively adding features to the model and evaluating recall Classifiers based mainly on clinical features showed only poor performance, highlighting the complementarity of clinical routine measurements and plasma proteomics data (Fig. 3a, Supplementary Table 10). Over 100 iterations of Monte Carlo cross-validation (MCCV), the most frequently selected proteins in combinations with ten features were encoded by the following genes: C9, ITIH3, ALB, GPLD1, C2, SERPINF2, C18orf63, SERPINC1, SERPINA4, and PON1 (Table 2, Supplementary Fig. 13). At this level, the inclusion of clinical features resulted in only minimal performance gains. We then used the identified features to train a new model and evaluate its metrics by MCCV. As Igs provided particularly relevant information for differentiation of clusters 1 and 2, they were also incorporated into the final model. Here, a discrepancy greater than 0.1 was observed between the training and test sets for all evaluated metrics, indicating overfitting, likely caused by an insufficient number of data points. Despite overfitting, an acceptable model performance was still achieved for test data across all three clusters with an AUROC of 0.932 ± 0.022 as well as a precision of 0.703 ± 0.066 and a recall of 0.802 ± 0.044 (Table 3). We assessed the contribution of individual features to the model predictions and found C9, C2 and SERPINF2 (Fig. 3b) with the overall highest predictive values. In Cluster 1, the most important features were ALB, GPLD1, SERPINC1 and SERPINA4 (Fig. 3c), which were associated with lower values, while C18orf63 levels were elevated (Supplementary Fig. 14). In Cluster 2 the most important features C9, C2, SERPINF2 and ITIH3 showed increased levels. In Cluster 3, ITIH3 and SERPINA4 showed the highest importance, with lower levels of ITIH3 and higher levels of SERPINA4 being associated with cluster-specific predictions.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Sepsis is a life-threatening condition caused by a dysregulated immune response to an infection. It is a frequent cause of death in intensive care units (ICU) and represents a major burden in global healthcare with persistently high mortality rates. Up to now, the major improvements in sepsis therapy were based on the effective treatment of the underlying infection and supportive measures. All therapeutic approaches that specifically targeted molecular mechanisms in sepsis failed in large clinical trials. The major reason for this is seen in the fact that sepsis is a complex, multifactorial syndrome and patient subgroups that might benefit from the tested medication were masked by others in heterogeneous clinical cohorts. The concept of personalized medicine is based on the identification and treatment of only those patients that benefit from a therapy. This, however, requires accurate knowledge of the pathophysiological processes underlying the disease and appropriate markers for patient stratification.
In this respect, high throughput technologies can be used to screen patients for biomarkers and elucidate molecular disease mechanisms in an unbiased manner. Mass spectrometry-based plasma proteomics have emerged as a powerful analytical tool, giving access to large patient cohorts and a wide range of blood proteins. Despite these opportunities, studies that analyzed the blood proteome of septic patients remain comparably rare. A landmark study published in 2024 was the first with a cohort size that allowed the identification of patient subgroups representing molecular sepsis subtypes. This approach was complementary to others, that mostly used clinical standard parameters or transcriptomic data. The generalizability of phenotyping studies, however, remains questionable, especially between different geographic locations. We conclude that beyond the mere identification, the molecular and clinical characterization of subtypes is an absolute necessity to receive transferable insights. In addition, a deep characterization is crucial to elucidate the pathophysiological relevance of the observed subtypes and infer future therapeutic concepts.
In this study, we analyzed proteomics data from a multicenter cohort comprising 333 patients and samples collected at two time points in early sepsis. We applied cluster analysis and identified four sepsis plasma proteome subtypes and their trajectories between both time points. We present a deep characterization of the subtypes and their clinical characteristics. In addition, we developed a supervised machine learning model to allocate new patients to the proteome clusters based on a minimized number of features, demonstrating how proteome subtypes could be implemented in clinical practice in the future.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD064125.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The SepsisDataNet.NRW and CovidDataNet.NRW studies were approved by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of Ruhr-University Bochum (Registration No. 5047–14 and 19-6606_6-BR, respectively) or the responsible ethics committee of each respective study center and conducted in accordance with the revised Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients or a legal representative.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.