PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Graphene; Gold nanoparticles; Biomolecular corona; Nanomaterials

ABSTRACT:
The biological fate of nanomaterials (NMs) is driven by the specific interactions that biomolecules, naturally adhering onto their surface, engage with cell membrane receptors and intracellular organelles. The molecular composition of this layer, called biomolecular corona (BMC), depends on both the physical-chemical features of the NM and the biological media in which the NM is dispersed and cells grow. In this work, we demonstrate that the widespread use of 10% fetal bovine serum for in vitro assay is unable to recapitulate the complexity of an in vivo systemic administration, with NMs being transported by the blood. To this purpose, we undertook a comparative journey involving proteomics, lipidomics, high-throughput multiparametric in vitro screening, as well as single molecular feature analysis, to investigate the molecular details behind this in vivo/in vitro bias. Our work indirectly highlights the need to introduce novel, more physiological-like media, closer in composition to human plasma, to produce realistic in vitro screening data for NMs. We also aim to set the basis to reduce this in vitro-in vivo mismatch, which currently limits the formulation of NMs for clinical settings.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
SOURCES OF BIASES IN THE IN VITRO TESTING OF NANOMATERIALS: THE ROLE OF BIOMOLECULAR CORONA

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The lipid content of the biomolecular corona was then extracted and analyzed as already published by our group36. In short, coronated NM were extracted with 1 mL of isopropanol, centrifuged and the supernatant removed and dried under nitrogen stream. The resulting pellet was kept for proteomic analysis. The day of analysis, the samples were redissolved in 50 µl of 9:1 methanol:chloroform for high-resolution LC-MS analysis and analysed using a Synapt G2 QToF mass spectrometer, coupled with a Acquity UPLC chromatographic system (both purchased from Waters Inc., Milford, USA). The instrumental parameters were identical to those already published by our group36. The protein content of BMC was prepared and digested (except for the TMT labelling) as already published by our group78: in short, the protein pellets were dissolved and reduced by adding 100 µl of urea 8 M, 1% SDS and 10 mM dithiothreithol dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate 50 mM and incubate at 56 °C for 1 hour. After centrifugation at 20,000xg for 20 minutes, the supernatant was collected, cycteine-alkylated with iodacetamide 55 mM for 20 minutes in the dark and digested with trypsin at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were then analyzed using a Thermo Exploris 480 High-resolution LC-MS system, coupled with a nano HPLC system. Peptides were separated using an Aurora (75 um X 20 cm) nano-LC column with a linear gradient of acetonitrile in water. Both eluents were added with 0.1% formic acid. Proteomics data were acquired in data independent mode as already described.

DATA PROCESSING:
All proteomics data were searched against the reference proteome of  both Homo Sapiens and Bos Taurus , using the corresponding FASTA files avalable from UNIPROT database and retrieving only the reviewed sequences. Database search was performed using Spectronaut software (purchased from Biognosys). The maximum allowed false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% and at least two peptides were used for positive protein identification and quantification. To discriminate between human and bovine genomes, only proteotypic peptides were used for quantification.