PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Blood plasma
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Mouse; Tmt; Plasma; Bottom-up proteomics; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
The risk of breast cancer increases decades after ionizing radiation exposure, thereby linking aging intrinsically to the evolution of cancer. We hypothesized that radiation accelerates aging and carcinogenesis through similar pathways, specifically low-grade systemic inflammation. Here, we used the radiation-genetic mammary chimera model to examine the differential expression of 532 plasma proteins in BALB/c female mice between radiation exposure and experiment termination at 18 months.  Mice were sham-irradiated or irradiated with 50 cGy prior to being orthotopically transplanted with syngeneic Trp53 null mammary epithelium and half were treated for 6 months with anti-inflammatory low-dose aspirin. Plasma was collected at 4, 8, and 18 months from non-tumor-bearing mice and from those that had developed tumors between 12 and 18 months. Plasma quantitative proteomic analysis identified significant alterations in proteins involved in the inflammatory response in irradiated mice as a function of age. Levels of C4b-binding protein were decreased at 4 months in irradiated mice compared to controls, which was blocked in aspirin-treated irradiated mice. Notable differences in the expression of proteins associated with the inflammation were evident in tumor-bearing versus similarly aged mice. Complement components C1qA, C1qB, and C1qC were significantly increased in tumor-bearing mice that had been irradiated, whereas similarly aged mice without tumors displayed a decline in complement system activity. The specific changes in the complement system, which mediates adaptive immune function, following radiation exposure may contribute to cancer progression as a function of age.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Quantitative Proteomics Analysis of Mouse Plasma using Tandem-Mass Tagging (TMT)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Plasma was processed through a Multiple Affinity Removal Spin Cartridge - Ms-3 (Mouse) (Agilent Technologies, Cat# 5188-5289, Santa Clara, CA) to deplete abundant proteins according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, plasma was diluted in buffer A (Agilent Technologies, Cat# 5185-5987, Santa Clara, CA) and loaded onto the cartridge equilibrated with buffer A, and the flow-through was collected. The cartridge was washed using buffer A, and the eluent was combined with the primary flow-through, which was then further processed for proteomic analysis. The cartridge was cleaned by applying buffer B (Agilent Technologies, Cat# 5185-5988, Santa Clara, CA) to remove the bound fraction for future uses. Protein concentration in the collected flow-through was measured by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay, and 100 µg protein was equally taken from every sample for tandem-mass tagging (TMT) and relative quantification of plasma proteins across specimens by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS). Briefly, the 100 µg protein fraction was reduced with 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were then precipitated by adding four times the sample volume of cold (-20°C) acetone followed by incubation at -20°C overnight. Protein was isolated by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 minutes. After removal of the supernatant, the protein pellet was air-dried at room temperature and resuspended in 100 mM Triethylammonium Bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5. Proteolysis was initiated by adding 2 µg of sequencing-grade modified trypsin and Lys-C mixture (Thermo Scientific, Cat# A41007, Waltham, MA) to the tube, followed by incubation at 37°C overnight. The reaction was stopped by lowering the pH with formic acid. The peptides were labeled using a TMT10plexTM Isobaric Label Reagents (Thermo Scientific, Cat# 90111, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. To normalize the protein abundance across several multiplex mixtures, common reference samples were prepared by combining small aliquots from every sample prior to TMT labeling. The common reference sample was included in every TMT batch and labeled with TMT10-130C. Protein abundance belonging to the 130C quan-channel was used to normalize the corresponding protein abundance across all multiplex sets. TMT-labeled peptide mixture was fractioned using a High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat# 84868, Waltham, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and resulting in eight fractions. Each fraction was dried and prepared in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse Mass Spectrometer coupled with a Vanquish Neo nano-UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) through a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry Pro interface. Peptides were separated on a DNV PepMap Neo column (1500 bar, 75 μm x 500 mm) using a 120-minute linear gradient of water (A) and 80% acetonitrile (B), both of which contained 0.1% formic acid. Data was collected using synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3-based TMT analysis and quantitation. MS2 spectra were acquired for peptide identification using a top-speed data-dependent scan, where a maximum number of MS2 spectra were collected in 3 seconds per cycle between adjacent survey scans (MS1). MS3 scan was also performed for relative quantitation by multi-notch MS3-based TMT method where SPS selected significant MS2 ions with the assistance of real-time database search (RTS) which were fragmented to generate reporter ion peaks. These MS2 and MS3 scans were repeated on precursor ion subsets isolated by high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry with compensation voltage set sequentially to -45 eV, -55 eV, and -65 eV. The dynamic exclusion option was enabled, which was set to 120 seconds.

DATA PROCESSING:
To identify proteins, spectra were searched against the UniProt mouse protein FASTA database (17,082 annotated entries, Oct 2021) using the Sequest HT search engine with the Proteome Discoverer v2.5 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Search parameters were as follows: FT-trap instrument; parent mass error tolerance, 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance, 0.6 Da (monoisotopic); enzyme, trypsin (full); # maximum missed cleavages, 2; variable modifications, +15.995 Da (oxidation) on methionine, +229.263 Da (TMT) on lysine and peptide N-term; static modification, +57.021 Da (carbamidomethyl) on cysteine.