PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Blood; B cell
instruments: orbitrap
modifications: acetylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label free sample; Spectrum counting
keywords: Sirtuins; Sirt7; Acetylation; Pax5; B cell progenitors; Pre-b cell; Hematopoiesis; Immunoaffinity

ABSTRACT:
B lymphopoiesis is a key developmental event orchestrated by a complex combinatorial action of lineage-specific transcription factors. In early B cell progenitors, lineage commitment is directly mediated by the master regulator PAX5, whose deficiency is commonly associated with B cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (B-ALL). Despite its essential role in mammalian immunity, the regulatory mechanisms that control PAX5 function remain largely unknown. Here we show that NAD+-dependent enzyme SIRT7 coordinates B cell development progression through PAX5. We have identified a SIRT7-dependent regulatory switch based on dynamic deacetylation of a single PAX5 residue, which controls its activity and thereby B cell fate. While a PAX5K198 acetylated mimic is incapable of inducing both B cell development and identity due to reduced protein stability and impaired binding to chromatin, deacetylation of this residue boosts PAX5 activity, leading to massive gene repression and in vivo restoration of B cell commitment but not differentiation. These findings suggest an unexpected uncoupling of hematopoietic differentiation and lineage commitment. Further supporting the functional relevance of the SIRT7-PAX5 axis, the interplay between both factors is conserved in human B-ALL, where high SIRT7 expression is an independent good prognostic factor. Our findings unveil a crucial mechanism in the regulation of B cell production based on the control of PAX5 function and underscore the key role of Sirtuins in the regulation of the immune system.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A SIRT7-dependent acetylation switch regulates early B-cell differentiation and lineage commitment through PAX5

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Total proteome Pre-B cells analysis: The cell pellets were extracted with 6M Urea/0.1M Tris pH 8.0 with the help of a bioruptor (10 cycles 30s ON 30s OFF). The resulting supernatants were quantified using the nanodrop at 280nm and the protein precipitated with TCA/Acetone. Finally, the pellets were resuspended in 6MUrea/0.1M Tris pH = 8 and the proteins digested with LysC/Trypsin. Briefly, 3.5 micrograms of each sample were reduced and alkylated with 10mM DTT for 30 minutes and 55mM CAA for an hour in the dark, respectively. Then, the samples were diluted with 0.1M Tris pH = 8 to reach a final concentration of urea of 2M and Lys-C was added at a 1:25 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio. The digestions were carried out for 16 hours at 30ºC. Then, the samples were diluted again with 0.1M Tris pH = 8 to reach 0.8M Urea and the trypsin was added at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:25. The digestion was performed for 8 houres at 30ºC. The reactions were stopped with 10% formic acid. Finally, the peptides were desalted with a C18 reverse-phase ultramicrospin column and desiccated in a speedvac. The peptides were reconstituted with 3% ACN and 0.1% FA aqueous solution at 100 ng/µL and 800 ng were loaded into 300 µm × 5 mm C18 PepMap100, 5m, 100Å (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (nanoEaseTM M/Z HSS C18 T3 (75 µm × 25 cm, 100Å, Waters) with a 180 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3% to 35 % B in 150 min, from 35 % to 50 % B in 5 min, from 50 % to 85% B in 2min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN) at 250 nL/min flow rate. The column outlets were directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap with the resolution (defined at 200 m/z) set to 120,000. The lock mass was user-defined at 445.12 m/z in each Orbitrap scan. The top speed (most intense) ions per scan were fragmented by HCD. The MSMS was detected in the Orbitrap (with the resolution set to 30,000). The ion count target value was 400,000 for the survey scan and 10,000 (HCD) for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5000 and activation Q was 0.250. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation. Data was acquired with Xcalibur software vs 4.0.27.10 (Thermo Scientific).   mPAX acetyl sites analysis: PAX5-containing beads were washed three times with 0.1M Tris pH = 8 and then resuspended in 6M Urea/0.1M Tris pH = 8. The reduction and the alkylation were then performed by using 10mM DTT (30 minutes at room temperature) and 55mM CAA (1h in the dark at room temperature), respectively. The digestion was done by adding 1 microgram of trypsin for 16 hours at 30ºC. Finally, the digestion was stopped with 10% Formic acid and the peptides desalted with a polyLC C18 pipette tip and dried in a speedvac. Tryptic peptides sample were reconstituted with 3% ACN and 0.1% FA aqueous solution at 100 ng/µL and 800 ng were loaded into the Evotip. Peptides were separated using an Evosep EV1000 column (150 μm × 150 mm, 1.9 μm) (Evosep) at a flow rate of 500nL/min with an 88 min run. The column outlet was directly connected to an EASY-Spray source (Thermo) fitted on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (350-1400 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2x105 resolution setting and automatic gain control (AGC) of 4x105). The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by HCD. HCD was performed with a collision energy of 28%, 0.25 activation Q, an AGC target of 1x104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms and turbo ion scan rate. Previously analyzed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 15 s. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation. Data was acquired with Xcalibur software vs 4.2.28.14 (Thermo Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Total proteome Pre-B cells analysis: The RAW thremo files were processed with MaxQuant 1.6.7.0 using a mouse database downloaded from https://www.uniprot.org/ (December, 2018). Only reviewed entries were included (16,997 entries). The search was performed using the following parameters: Trypsin was selected as enzyme and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation in cysteins were set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation in methionines and acetylation of proteins N-terminal were used as variable modifications. The iBAQ intensity was used to quantify the proteins. The FDR was assessed by using a decoy database and the final list of peptides and proteins were filtered at an FDR < 1%. The manipulation of the data as well as the statistical analysis was performed using the R (https://cran.r-project.org/) and R studio (https://www.rstudio.com/) software. The statistical analysis was performed by using the ‘limma’ package.   mPAX acetyl sites analysis: The RAW thermo files were processed with PEAKS X+ software using a mouse database downloaded from https://www.uniprot.org/ (November, 2019). Only reviewed entries were included (17,024 entries). The search was performed using the following parameters: Trypsin was selected as enzyme and a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation in cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation in methionines, acetylation at both lysines and the protein N-terminal, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, phosphorylation at serines, threonines and tyrosines and dehydration at aspartic acid, tyrosines, threonines, serines, glutamine and asparagine were used as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for the parental ion and MS/MS fragments were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da. The FDR was assessed by using a decoy database and the final list of peptides and proteins were filtered at an FDR < 1%. The manipulation of the data as well as the statistical analysis was performed using the R (https://cran.r-project.org/) and R studio (https://www.rstudio.com/) software. The resulting data matrix was filtered to remove common contaminants and the quantification values were log2-transformed. The peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were calculated for each peptide by using a homemade algorithm and the PEAKS’ output files “peptide.csv” and “DB search psm.csv”.