PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: M6a;mettl3;mitochondria;masld;ythdf1

ABSTRACT:
The N6-methyladenosine (m6A) mRNA modification and the mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) hold paramount importance in the advancement of MASLD. This study thoroughly investigates the relationship and impact of m6A mRNA modification and mitochondrial function in the progression of MASLD. Here we report that the mRNA and protein levels of mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) subunits showed inconsistent trends in vivo experiments. Abnormal m6A modification and mitochondrial dysfunction in MASLD were attributed to the upregulation of methyltransferase like 3 (Mettl3) and the downregulation of YTH N6-methyladenosine RNA binding protein 1 (YTHDF1) induced by high-fat foods. Mettl3 promoted the MRC's function. However, knockout of the reader protein YTHDF1, which plays a crucial role in the m6A modification process, counteracted the effect of Mettl3 and suppressed MRC. In MASLD, damage to the MRC may be regulated by the Mettl3-m6A-YTHDF1 complex axis, especially by the role of YTHDF1. Our research has offered a novel perspective on the involvement of m6A mRNA methylation in the pathogenesis of MASLD.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mettl3-m6A-YTHDF1 axis promotion of mitochondrial dysfunction in metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
1.Protein extraction, trypsin digestion, and malonylation peptide enrichment Samples were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g., 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM NH4HCO3 to a urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and a 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion. To enrich malonylation-modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with prewashed antibody beads (PTM-904, PTM Bio) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. Then, the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC–MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. LC–MS/MS analysis of differentially modified proteins The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and directly loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient comprised an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, an increase from 23% to 35% in 8 min, a ramp to 80% in 3 min and then a hold at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for the full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

DATA PROCESSING:
Statistical analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot human database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme with allowance of up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and malonylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The label-free quantification (LFQ) method was used, the FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation was performed via the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The GO annotations of proteins are divided into three major categories: biological process, cellular composition and molecular function. Fisher's exact two-terminal test was used to test the enrichment degrees of the differentially expressed proteins in each GO classification against the background of identified proteins. A corrected p value < 0.05 was considered to indicate significance.