PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
organism parts: Leaf; Plant cell
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Apoplast; Apf; Mass spectrometary; Proteomic; Apoplastic fluid

ABSTRACT:
The apoplastic space surrounding plant cells, encompassing the cell well matrix, extracellular spaces and xylem, is the least understood compartment within plant tissues due to its lack of limiting membranes and its unavoidable damage upon tissue homogenization.  Using a streamlined vacuum-infiltration/centrifugation protocol to enrich for the Arabidopsis apoplastic fluid (APF) combined with in-depth tandem mass spectrometry, we provide an improved view of its proteome that includes over 1,500 proteins possibly assigned to this compartment with minimized cytosolic contamination.  Included are large and varied collections of hydrolytic activities devoted to cell wall metabolism, oxido-reductase reactions, cell-cell signaling, proteolysis, and pathogen protection via basal defense pathways.  While numerous apoplast proteins were predicted to house N-terminal signal peptide sequences to direct extracellular secretion, a number did not, suggesting wide-spread use of non-classical export route(s).  Among APF constituents are numerous pathogenesis-related proteins, glycosidases, subtilisin-type serine and aspartyl proteases, and the complement of subunits that assembles the core particle of the 26S proteasome.  When this APF proteome is compared with those based on prior isolation methods, a consensus collection of 338 polypeptides emerges that offers a comprehensive view of the core APF proteome that manages the cell wall and interfaces with the environment.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
STREAMLINE PROTOCOL FOR ARABIDOPSIS APOPLASTIC FLUID ISOLATION ENABLES A DETAILED PROTEOMIC VIEW OF THE EXTRACELLULAR SPACE SURROUNDING PLANT CELLS

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The APF and total leaf lysate extracted from tissue from the same plants.  The lyophilized APF and total lysate samples were dissolved in 50 µL of 8 M urea, and measured for protein concentration using Pierce® BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific).  For trypsin digestion, 80 µg of protein from each sample was first reduced at room temperature for 1 hr in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hr in the dark. The reaction was quenched with 20 mM DTT, and the sample was diluted with 900 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration to below 1 M.  Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50.  The resulting peptides were lyophilized to a volume lower than 50 µL, acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid until the pH was below 3.0, and desalted and concentrated using Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Peptides were eluted in 50 µL of 75% acetonitrile and 0.1% acetic acid, lyophilized again, and resuspended in 15 µL of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Nano-scale LC separation of the tryptic peptides was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation system equipped with a 75 µm x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Scientific) in combination with a 2 hr linear 4–36% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid and a flow rate of 250 nL/min {McLoughlin, 2018 #20;Zand Karimi, 2025 #13}.  Eluted peptides were analyzed online by a Q-Exactive  Plus spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) in the positive electrospray ionization (ESI) mode.  Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans (mass range of 380–1500 m/z) at a resolution of 70,000 was collected, with the automatic gain control target set to 3 x 106 and the maximum fill time set to 200 ms.  High-energy collision-induced dissociation fragmentation of the 15 strongest peaks was performed with an intensity threshold of 4 x 104 counts and an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, and excluded precursors that had unassigned, + 1, + 7, + 8 or >+ 8 charge states.  Tandem MS scans were conducted at a resolution of 17,500, with an automatic gain control target of 2 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 100 msec.  Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 30 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering tandem MS was set to 4 x 103 counts.  Peptides from each method was assessed by LC-MS/MS using three biological replicates, each of which was analyzed by two technical replicates.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS/MS datasets were queried by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5; Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Arabidopsis thaliana Col-0 proteome database (Araport11_pep_20220914), downloaded from TAIR (http://www.tair.com/).  Pairs of raw MS2 files (one without an exclusion list and one with the exclusion list) were analyzed as fractions, resulting in two technical replicates per sample.  Peptides were assigned by SEQUEST HT, allowing a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.02 Da.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and oxidation of methionines were specified as static and dynamic modifications, respectively.  False discovery rates of 0.01 (high confidence) and 0.05 (medium confidence) were used to validate peptide spectral matches.  Label-free quantification based on MS1 precursor ion intensity was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a minimum Quan value threshold set to 0.0001 for unique peptides; the “3 Top N” peptides were used for area calculation.The proteomic data were normalized using the total MS1 ion intensity to equalize it across all injections {McLoughlin, 2018 #20}.  For each biological replicate, the two technical replicates were averaged; if the protein was detected in only one technical replicate, its value was used as is.  Proteins were considered for further analysis only if it was detected in all four biological replicates within a single dataset, to ensure high reliability