PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Lung; Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Functional genomics; Non-small-cell lung cancer; Mechanisms of disease

ABSTRACT:
Background:  The identification of cancer driver genes from sequencing data has been crucial in deepening our understanding of tumor biology and expanding targeted therapy options. However, apart from the most commonly altered genes, the mechanisms underlying the contribution of other mutations to cancer acquisition remain understudied. Leveraging on our whole-exome sequencing of the largest Asian lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cohort (n=302), we now functionally assess the mechanistic role of a novel driver, PARP4. Methods:  In vitro and in vivo tumorigenicity assays were used to study the functional effects of PARP4 loss and mutation in multiple lung cancer cell lines. Interactomics analysis by quantitative mass spectrometry was conducted to identify PARP4’s interaction partners. Transcriptomic data from cell lines and patient tumors were used to investigate splicing alterations. Results:  PARP4 depletion or mutation (I1039T) promotes the tumorigenicity of KRAS- or EGFR-driven lung cancer cells. Disruption of the vault complex, with which PARP4 is commonly associated, did not alter tumorigenicity, indicating that PARP4’s tumor suppressive activity is mediated independently. The splicing regulator hnRNPM is a potentially novel PARP4 interaction partner, the loss of which likewise promotes tumor formation. hnRNPM loss results in splicing perturbations, with a propensity for dysregulated intronic splicing that was similarly observed in PARP4 knockdown cells and in LUAD cohort patients with PARP4 copy number loss. Conclusions:  PARP4 is a novel modulator of lung adenocarcinoma, where its tumor suppressive activity is mediated not through the vault complex – unlike conventionally thought, but in association with its novel interaction partner hnRNPM, thus suggesting a role for splicing dysregulation in LUAD tumorigenesis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
PARP4 interacts with hnRNPM to regulate splicing during lung cancer progression

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Stable Isotope Labeling by Amino Acids in Cell Culture (SILAC) Cells were incubated in DMEM (-Arg, -Lys) containing 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 42 mg/l 13C615N4 L-arginine and 73 mg/l 13C615N2 L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope) or the corresponding non-labeled amino acids. Successful SILAC incorporation was verified by in-gel trypsin digestion and mass spectrometry analysis of heavy input samples to ensure an incorporation rate of >98%.   Immunoprecipitation Cells were lysed in ice-cold immunoprecipitation lysis buffer (co-IP buffer) (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% (v/v) NP-40, 0.25% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, and 0.5 mM EDTA (pH 8.0)) supplemented with 1X HaltTM Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 2 mM MgCl2, and 50 units/mL benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour and clarified by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined using the Coomassie PlusTM Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  1 mg total protein was pre-cleared for 1 hour using 50 μl of ChIP-grade Protein A/G Dynabeads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) before overnight incubation with 4 μg of the immunoprecipitating antibody (Additional file 1: Table S11). 50 μL of fresh Protein A/G Dynabeads were blocked overnight in 1% (v/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Hyclone) in co-IP buffer. The antibody-lysate mixtures were incubated with blocked Dynabeads for 90 minutes. Dynabeads were washed 3 times with co-IP buffer, and bound proteins were eluted in 2X Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad) at 95°C for 5 minutes.    Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were heated at 95°C prior to separation on a 12% NuPAGETM Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 10 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer, followed by gel fixation using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digestion was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source, and the temperature was controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 105-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (1) version 1.5.2.8 and searched against the human UniProt database (95,934 entries) with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples, and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed, and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.