PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Escherichia coli

ABSTRACT:
OmpA, a predominant outer membrane protein (OMP) in Gram-negative bacteria, plays a crucial role in maintaining the integrity and functionality of the bacterial outer membrane (OM). Despite its significance in virulence, adhesion, and OM stability, the specific role of OmpA has remained unclear since its discovery 50 years ago. In this study, we demonstrate that OmpA organizes the OMP lattice and mechanically connects it to the cell wall. Using atomic force microscopy, simulations, and microfluidics, we show that while the β-barrel domain of OmpA is essential for maintaining the permeability barrier, both the β-barrel and cell wall-binding domains are necessary to enhance the cell envelope's strength. We propose that OmpA integrates the compressive properties of the OMP lattice with the tensile strength of the cell wall, forming a mechanically robust composite that enhances overall envelope integrity. This coupling likely underpins the ability of the entire envelope to function as a cohesive and resilient structure, critical for the survival and pathogenicity of Gram-negative bacteria.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
OmpA controls order in the outer membrane and shares the mechanical load

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
each sample containing ~250 µg of total protein was lyophilized to remove water and then resuspended in 250 µL of lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 2% CTAB (hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide), 6 M GuHCl (guanidine hydrochloride), and 5 mM DTT. Cells were lysed by direct tip sonication for 10 cycles of 30 seconds each at 50% amplitude and further heating the lysate at 60 °C for 20 minutes. Lysate was then methanol-chloroform precipitated to extract proteins. Proteins were digested in a two-step LysC (Wako) + LysC/Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) protocol in 10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 with 2/0.5 M GuCl. The first digestion was performed at room temperature and the second at 37 °C. The digested samples were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature and taken up in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.0. The multiplexing TMTpro tags were added at a mass ratio of 5:1 tag/peptide to ~10 µg of peptide per condition and allowed to react for 2 hours at room temperature before quenching with 1% hydroxylamine (30 min, room temperature). Samples from all conditions were combined into one tube and acidified with 5% phosphoric acid (pH<2).  The samples were then ultracentrifuged at 100,000 g at 4 °C for an hour to pellet undigested proteins. The supernatants were dried using a vacuum evaporator at room temperature to remove acetonitrile. Dry samples were re-suspended in HPLC water and stage-tipping was performed to desalt the samples58.  For LC-MS analysis, samples were resuspended to 1 µg/µL in 1% FA and HPLC-grade water. Samples were analysed on a nLC-1200 HPLC coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora Series emitter column (25 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18, Ionopticks), held at 60 °C during separation by an in-house built column oven. Samples were eluted with a 12-24% acetonitrile gradient over 90 minutes.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide quantification was done with TMTproC using the Gygi Lab GFY software licensed from Harvard59. Briefly, the complement reporter ion cluster was located, and the observed intensities were extracted. Using the measured shape of the isolation window and measured TMTpro isotopic impurities, the relative abundance and composition of each isolated peak was determined and used in the deconvolution algorithm. Peptides with a total signal:Fourier transform noise less than 30 were discarded, and proteins with less than two peptides were discarded. Estimates of protein fold-change were calculated from the median ratios of peptides assigned uniquely to that protein sequence. Statistical significance was determined by performing a t-test without multiple hypothesis correction on triplicate measurements within the same plex.