PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; acetylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: 

ABSTRACT:
We performed BFP pulldowns with BFP-tagged NUDT5 in HAP1 harboring the MTHFD1 K56R mutation to find interactors of NUDT5. We performed the study under various medium conditions, including full IMDM medium (FULL), IMDM with dialysed FBS (DIA) and DIA supplemented with 50µM adenosine to investigate potential changes of interactors upon different medium conditions. Additionally, we performed Pulldowns with a catalytic inactive NUDT5 variant (E112Q), to check whether its catalytic activity has an influence in the interactome. As a control, we used HAP1 MTHFD1 K56R NUDT5 KO cells. Experiments were performed in duplicates

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
BFP pulldown of BFP-NUDT5 HAP1 MTHFD1-K56R cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein concentrations from BFP-IP samples were determined using BCA Protein Assay to normalize the input for FASP digestion. Peptides were cleaned up using SPE columns (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Digest was confirmed using CPA (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). TMT labeling of peptides was performed according to instructions of the manufacturer. Channels were pooled and adjusted after acquiring a TestMix. Final channel pool was cleaned up using SPE columns (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and fractionated into six fractions using high-pH off-line fractionation. Odd and even samples were pooled into six fractions and cleaned up using detergent removal kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) via a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) interface. Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (PepMap 100 C18, 5 μm, 5 × 0.3 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a C18 analytical column (2.0 µm particle size, 75µm IDx500mm, catalog number 164942, ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The column temperature was maintained at 50 °C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.4% formic acid in a mixture of 90% acetonitrile and 10% water. Separation was achieved using a three-step gradient over 30 min at a flow rate of 230 nL/min (increase of initial gradient from 6% to 9% solvent B within 30 seconds, 9% to 30% solvent B within 25.5 minutes, 30% to 65% solvent B within 4 minutes. Afterwards a wash and equilibration phase took place). In the liquid junction setup, electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 1.8 kV directly to the liquid being sprayed, and a non-coated silica emitter was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). For MS2 acquisition, we collected a 375–1650 m/z survey scan in the Orbitrap at 120 000 resolution (FTMS1), the AGC target was set to 'standard' and a maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms was applied. Precursor ions were filtered by charge state (2-6), dynamic exclusion (60 s with a ±10 ppm window), and monoisotopic precursor selection. Precursor ions for data-dependent MSn (ddMSn) analysis were selected using 20 dependent scans (TopN approach). DDA was focused using an additional targeted mass list generated for proteins of interest. The quadrupole isolation window was set to 0.5 Da and the high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation technique was used at a normalized collision energy of 38%. The normalized AGC target was set to 200% with a maximum IT of 55 ms. Xcalibur Version 4.3.73.11 and Tune 3.4.3072.18 were used to operate the instrument.

DATA PROCESSING:
Following data acquisition, the acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer v.2.4.1.15 platform, with a tandem mass tag (TMT)18plex quantification method selected. In the processing step, Sequest HT database search engine and the Percolator validation software node were used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1% at the peptide and protein level under stringent conditions. The search queried a full tryptic digestion against the human proteome (Canonical, reviewed, Uniprot) and appended known contaminants with a maximum of two allowable miscleavage sites. Methionine oxidation (+15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), as well as methionine loss (-131.040 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation with methionine loss (-89.030 Da) were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine residues and TMT18plex labeling of peptide N-termini and lysine residues (+304.207 Da) were set as fixed modifications. Data were searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.025 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Both unique and razor peptides were used for TMT quantification. For reporter quantification a co-isolation threshold of 50% and average reporter mass S/N threshold was set to 10. Correction of isotopic impurities was applied. Data were normalized to total peptide abundance to correct for experimental bias and scaled ‘on all average’. Protein ratios are directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances using an ANOVA hypothesis test.