PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Orbitrap Ascend; Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Chaperones; protein folding; dnak; trigger factor; co-translational folding; structural proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Many proteins require molecular chaperones to fold into their functional native forms. Previously we used limited proteolysis mass-spectrometry (LiP-MS) to find that ca. 40% of the E. coli proteome do not efficiently refold spontaneously following dilution from denaturation, a frequency that drops to ca. 15% once molecular chaperones like DnaK or GroEL are provided.  However, the roles of chaperones during primary biogenesis in vivo can differ from the functions they play during in vitro refolding experiments.  Here, we used LiP-MS to probe structural changes incurred by the E. coli proteome when two key chaperones, trigger factor and DnaKJ, are deleted.  While knocking out DnaKJ induces pervasive structural perturbations across the soluble E. coli proteome, trigger factor deletion only impacts a small number of proteins’ structures.  Overall, proteins which cannot spontaneously refold (or require chaperones to refold in vitro) are not more likely to be dependent on chaperones to fold in vivo.  For instance, the glycolytic enzyme, phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK), cannot refold to its native form in vitro following denaturation (even with chaperones), but by LiP-MS we find that its structure is unperturbed upon DnaKJ or Tig deletion, which we further demonstrate with biochemical and biophysical assays. Thus, PGK folds to its native structure most efficiently during co-translational folding and does so without chaperone assistance.  This behaviour is generally found among chaperone-nonrefolders (proteins that cannot refold even with chaperone assistance), strengthening the view that this class of proteins are obligate co-translational folders.  Hence, for some E. coli proteins, the vectorial nature of co-translational folding is the most important “chaperone.”

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Chaperone Dependency during Primary Protein Biogenesis Does Not Correlate with Chaperone Dependency during in vitro Refolding

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Culture and Cell Harvesting Biological triplicates of E. coli MC4100 wild-type, ∆DnaKJ, and ∆Tig strains were grown in LB media from overnight starter cultures. Each 100 mL culture was inoculated at OD₆₀₀ = 0.05 and incubated at either 30 °C or 37 °C with shaking at 220 rpm until mid-log phase (OD₆₀₀ ≈ 0.8). Cells were harvested by centrifugation (4,000 g, 15 min, 4 °C), and pellets were stored at −80 °C. Lysis and Clarification Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice and resuspended in 2 mL of native buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 8.2; 100 mM KCl; 2 mM MgCl₂) supplemented with 0.1 mg/mL DNase I and a protease inhibitor cocktail (500 µM PMSF, 15 µM E-64, 50 µM Bestatin). Cells were flash-frozen dropwise into liquid nitrogen and pulverized using a freezer mill for 8 cycles (1 min grind, 1 min cool). Lysates were thawed at room temperature for 20 min, transferred to 3 mL ultracentrifuge tubes, and clarified by ultracentrifugation at 33,300 rpm for 90 min at 4 °C using an SW55-Ti rotor, without a sucrose cushion to remove ribosomes. Supernatants were transferred to microcentrifuge tubes and protein concentrations were determined using a Rapid Gold BCA Assay in a 96-well plate format. Lysates were normalized to 3.3 mg/mL using native buffer. Limited Proteolysis (LiP) and Controls Aliquots of normalized lysates were diluted to 0.23 mg/mL in the same buffer (final: 20 mM Tris, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl₂). For LiP samples, 2 µL of Proteinase K stock (0.25 mg/mL in 1:1 buffer:glycerol) was pre-loaded into 1.5 mL tubes. Then, 200 µL of diluted lysate was added, mixed, and incubated for exactly 1 minute at 25 °C, followed by heat inactivation in mineral oil at 100 °C for 5 minutes. To each quenched sample, 200 mg of urea and 85 µL of buffer were added to reach 8 M urea in 415 µL total volume. Control samples followed the same procedure without Proteinase K addition. Reduction, Alkylation, and Digestion All samples (LiP and controls) were reduced with 10 mM DTT (6.24 µL of freshly prepared 500 mM DTT) for 30 minutes at 37 °C (700 rpm). Then, 17 µL of 750 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added (final: 40 mM) for 45 min at room temperature in the dark to alkylate cysteines. Samples were diluted with 1005 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate before adding 4 µL of trypsin (0.116 mg/mL). Proteins were digested overnight (16–24 h) at 25 °C. Peptide Cleanup Digestion was quenched with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges pre-conditioned with 80% ACN + 0.5% TFA, equilibrated with 0.5% TFA, and loaded slowly under vacuum. Columns were washed with 0.5% TFA and eluted with 1 mL of 80% ACN + 0.5% TFA. Eluates were spun (300 g, 5 min) and dried using a Vacufuge Plus concentrator. Dried peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL and stored at −80 °C for LC-MS/MS analysis. A Thermo Q-Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used to analyze protein digests.

DATA PROCESSING:
FragPipe v20.0, along with MSFragger v3.8, IonQuant v1.9.8, and Philosopher v5.0, were used to analyze raw mass spectra with label-free quantification with match between runs enabled. Default settings were used except the precursor mass tolerance was changed to -10 to 10 ppm, the peptide digest pattern was set to semi enzymatic, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a static modification. FragPipe outputs were then passed to FLiPPR v0.0.7. Output files from FLiPPR were then further processed in MS Excel and GraphPad Prism to create summaries and graphical representations of all data sets.