PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Embryo; Liver; Blood cell; Stem cell; Short term hematopoietic stem cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Peptide counting
keywords: Beclin 1; Mouse; Fetal liver

ABSTRACT:
Proper control of inflammatory responses is essential for embryonic development, but the underlying mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we show that under physiological conditions, inactivation of ISG15, an inflammation amplifier, is associated with the interaction of Beclin 1 (Becn1), via its ECD domain, with STAT3 in the major fetal hematopoietic organ of mice.  Conditional loss of Becn1 caused sequential dysfunction and exhaustion of fetal liver  hematopoietic stem cells, leading to lethal inflammatory cell-biased hematopoiesis in the fetus.  Molecularly, the absence of Becn1 resulted in the release of STAT3 from Becn1 tethering and  subsequent phosphorylation and translocation to the nucleus, which in turn directly activated the transcription of ISG15 in fetal liver hematopoietic cells, coupled with increased ISGylation and production of inflammatory cytokines, whereas inactivating STAT3 reduced ISG15 transcription and inflammation but improved hematopoiesis potential, and further silencing ISG15 mitigated the above collapse in the Becn1 null hematopoietic lineage. The Becn1-STAT3-ISG15 axis remains functional in Atg5/7-disrupted fetal hematopoietic organs. These results suggest that Becn1, in an autophagy-independent manner, secures hematopoiesis and survival of the fetus by directly inhibiting STAT3-ISG15 activation to prevent cytokine storms. Our findings highlight a previously undocumented role of Becn1 in governing ISG15 to safeguard the fetus.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Beclin 1 prevents ISG15-mediated cytokine storms to secure fetal hematopoiesis  and survival

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Add an appropriate amount of lysis buffer to the sample and shake using a grinder or sonicate for lysis. The lysed sample was centrifuged to obtain the supernatant for reduction and alkylation. Protein extraction quality control was subsequently performed, including Bradford quantification and SDSPAGE running gel. For the qualified samples, took 50 μg of protein solution for trypsin digestion, desalted after digestion, and separated to 20 components with High pH RP. Fractionated samples were separated by Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC. The sample first entered the trap column for enrichment and desalting, and was then connected in series with a self-packed C18 column and separated at a flow rate of 500 nl / min. The peptides separated by the liquid phase were ionized by the nanoESI source and entered the tandem mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion ™ Lumos ™ Tribrid ™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode detection. Lysis buffer was added to the sample, and the sample was lysed by sonication, then reduction and alkylation was performed, followed by trypsin digestion. Samples were separated by Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC. The sample first entered the trap column for enrichment and desalting, and was then connected in series with a self-packed C18 column and separated at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. The peptides separated by the liquid phase were ionized by the nanoESI source and entered the tandem mass spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion ™ Lumos ™ Tribrid ™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (data-dependent acquisition) mode detection.

DATA PROCESSING:
This procedure used MaxQuant to extract peak areas and calculate protein quantitation values. Then, according to the set comparison groups, the multiples of differences in the proteins in each comparison group were calculated, and the significance test was performed using Welch's t-test. Furthermore, screening was performed based on the multiple of difference>1.5 and P-value<0.05 as the criteria for determining significant differences. Finally, the enrichment analysis of the differential proteins was completed.

METHODS:
Methods
Sex as a biological variable.
Our study examined male and female animals, and similar findings are reported for both sexes.
Mice.
Becn1fl/fl mice were generated via gene targeting in this study, as described in Figure 1A. Vav-iCre transgenic mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Becn1-conditional-KO mice were generated by crossing of Becn1-floxed mice with Vav-iCre mice. Atg5fl/fl and Atg7fl/fl mice were provided by Noboru Mizushima (The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan) and Masaaki Komatsu (Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan). All the mice were bred on a C57BL/6 genetic background.
Cell lines.
293T and NIH 3T3 cells were purchased from ATCC. The murine BA/F3 cell line was a gift from Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Research Institute, Vancouver, Canada.
Chemicals and biological reagents.
Cells were treated with 0.25 μM Stattic for 7–9 days in the CFU assay or with 2.5 μM Stattic for 48 hours to inhibit STAT3 phosphorylation. To establish the MIA model, poly(I:C) (20 mg/kg) was intraperitoneally injected into pregnant mice.
Transplantation assay.
A total of 5 × 105 FLCs were injected into lethally irradiated (9 Gy) CD45.1+ recipients through the tail vein. The recipient mice were monitored for up to 30 days after transplantation, and the number of dead mice was recorded every day.
A total of 5 × 105 FLCs mixed with 5 × 105 competitive bone marrow cells were injected into lethally irradiated (9 Gy) CD45.1+ recipients through the tail vein.
RNA sequencing and proteomic analysis.
HSPCs were sorted from E14.5 FLCs. Total RNA was extracted from sorted HSPCs using TRIzol according to the manufacturer’s instructions and processed in a standard mRNA library construction pipeline. The final product was sequenced in paired-end 100 bp mode using the BGISEQ500 platform (BGI). After data quality control, differential expression gene identification was performed based on |log2(fold change)| ≥ 1 and a q value less than 0.05 as the criteria for statistically significant differences. The peptide samples from fetal livers were subjected to liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry via a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectrometry data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode. The raw data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.0) (https://www.maxquant.org) for feature detection. |log2(fold change)| ≥ log2(1.5) and P value less than 0.05 indicated significant differentially expressed proteins. Overrepresentation analysis was carried out using clusterProfiler. We constructed volcano plots and heatmaps via the Python library bioinfokit. GSEA was conducted on pre-ranked gene lists with log2(fold change) as the ranking metric, and GO terms or KEGG pathways were used as gene sets. The sequences for all the primers used in the real-time qPCR assays are shown in Supplemental Table 2.
Intracellular flow cytometric analysis.
FLCs were stained with various antibodies, fixed with paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with saponin, subsequently stained with ISG15, p-Tyr705-STAT3, or Hoechst 33342 antibodies, and then analyzed via Beckman Coulter Gallios or Imaging Flow Cytometer (Amnis, Merck Millipore). The information for all antibodies used in the staining is provided in Supplemental Table 1.
Isg15 knockdown and rescue experiments.
Control lentiviral LV3 vectors and LV3 vectors containing shRNA for mouse Isg15 were purchased from GenePharma. The 4 shRNA sequences of mouse Isg15 were shRNA-1 (5′-GCAGATTGCCCAGAAGATTGG-3′), shRNA-2 (5′-GCACAGTGATGCTAGTGGTAC-3′), shRNA-3 (5′-GCAGACTGTAGACACGCTTAA-3′), and shRNA-4 (5′-GCACAGTGATCAAGCATTTGC-3′). Viral particles were concentrated by ultracentrifugation. To achieve stable FLCs with Isg15 knockdown, Lin– cells were maintained in IMDM supplemented with IL-3 (20 ng/mL), IL-6 (20 ng/mL), thrombopoietin (TPO) (50 ng/mL), Flt3L (50 ng/mL), or SCF (100 ng/mL). Isg15 shRNA-2 (5′-GCACAGTGATGCTAGTGGTAC-3′) was used for screening (Supplemental Figure 8B). Lentiviral medium was added to infect Lin– cells in a 96-well plate coated with fibronectin. After transduction, the GFP+ cells were sorted and plated with MethoCult (STEMCELL Technologies). Colonies were counted and morphologically classified 6 days after plating.
ChIP-Seq library preparation and data analysis.
Cells were cross-linked with formaldehyde and quenched with glycine. The chromatin fragments were precleared and then immunoprecipitated with protein A+G magnetic beads coupled with anti–Tyr705-STAT3 antibodies. After reverse cross-linking, ChIP and input DNA fragments were end-repaired and A-tailed using the NEBNext End Repair/dA-Tailing Module (E7442, New England Biolabs) followed by adaptor ligation with the NEBNext Ultra Ligation Module (E7445, New England Biolabs). The DNA libraries were amplified and sequenced using an Illumina NovaSeq 6000. Raw reads were filtered to obtain high-quality clean reads using Cutadapt (v1.9.1) and Trimmomatic (v0.35). The clean reads were mapped to the mouse genome (assembly GRCm38) using Bowtie2 (v2.2.6) software. Peak detection was performed using Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS; v2.1.1). Annotation of peak sites to gene features was performed using the ChIPseeker R package.
Protein-protein interaction assays.
For endogenous co-IP, cell supernatants were added to protein A/G agarose after incubation with anti-Becn1. The bound proteins were boiled in loading buffer for further analysis. For exogenous co-IP, anti–c-Myc magnetic beads were added to equal amounts of total protein and incubated at 4°C overnight. Beads were washed and then boiled for 5 minutes before Western blotting. For in vitro binding assay, FLAG-tagged STAT3 proteins expressed in 293T cells were adsorbed onto anti-FLAG G1 affinity resin. Then the mixture was incubated overnight with purified His-Becn1 protein. After washing in 1× TBS buffer, the proteins were eluted by mixing with loading buffer, boiled for 5 minutes, and subjected to analysis.
Protein docking.
Protein sequences were obtained from the UniProt database (O88597 for mouse Becn1, P42227 for mouse STAT3; Q14457 for human Becn1, P40763 for human STAT3). AlphaFold2 was used to perform de novo modeling and generate a complete 3-dimensional structural model of the Becn1 and STAT3 proteins. We subsequently used HDOCK for protein docking between Becn1 and STAT3. The docking score was calculated based on the ITScore-PP or ITScore-PR iterative scoring function. We defined a confidence score dependent on the docking score to indicate the reliability of the binding: confidence_score = 1.0/[1.0+e0.02x(Docking_Score+150)]. The most likely interaction form of Becn1 and STAT3 was selected on the basis of the score. Structural analysis and figure panels were prepared via PyMOL (https://pymol.org).
Statistics.
The statistical significance of differences between 2 groups was examined using unpaired 2-tailed Student’s t test or paired 2-tailed Student’s t test. A 1-way ANOVA was conducted to assess the differences among multiple groups. Multiple-comparison analysis was used to adjust P values. Survival curves were compared using the log-rank test. Statistical significance is indicated by *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001. Graphs containing error bars show the mean ± SEM. All analyses were performed with GraphPad software (GraphPad Prism 8.3.0).
Study approval.
The animal experiments were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Committee on Animal Welfare Protection and Ethics of Soochow University.
Data availability.
Bulk RNA sequencing data were deposited in the NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive database under BioProject PRJNA1039573. Proteome profiles are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD057003. ChIP-Seq data were deposited in the NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database under accession number GSE280034. Non-omics data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article and supplemental material. The values for all the data points in the graphs can be found in the supplemental Supporting Data Values file, and all the unedited gels/blots are included in the supplemental material.

RESULTS:
Results
Hematopoietic loss of Becn1 causes severe inflammatory cell–biased hematopoiesis and complete perinatal lethality.
To define the role of Becn1 in fetal hematopoiesis, we generated Becn1fl/fl mice by gene targeting and mated them with Vav-iCre transgenic mice (Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure 1A; supplemental material available online with this article; https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI177375DS1). Following genotyping of the offspring mice with tail DNA, phenotyping of their fetuses at the transcriptional and translational levels indicated successful deletion of Becn1 in the lineage-negative (Lin–) hematopoietic cells of the liver, the major fetal hematopoietic organ (Figure 1B), but did not alter Becn1 levels in non-hematopoietic tissues (Supplemental Figure 1B). Exclusive deletion of biallelic Becn1 in hematopoietic lineages caused 100% perinatal death (Table 1).
E14.5 and E18.5 roughly represent the most active stage and the end of fetal liver hematopoiesis, respectively, in mice. Unlike Becn1–/– embryos, whose weight was unchanged at E14.5 but reduced at E18.5 (Supplemental Figure 1C), the embryos appeared paler and smaller at E14.5 and E18.5 (Figure 1C). At E14.5 and E18.5, despite the unchanged fetal liver weight of Becn1–/– mice (Supplemental Figure 1D), the fetal liver size was reduced (Figure 1D), and the total liver cell number was diminished (Figure 1E). Histological assays revealed a lack of erythroid cells in the blood vessels and focal necrosis in E18.5 Becn1–/– fetal livers (Figure 1F) and decreased blood cells in the E18.5 marrow cavity in Becn1–/– embryos (Supplemental Figure 1E). In addition, the fetal spleen and thymus, the other two extramedullary hematopoietic organs, decreased in weight in Becn1–/– embryos (Supplemental Figure 1F). In contrast, Becn1+/– embryos did not present an abnormal phenotype. These results indicate that all of the fetal hematopoietic organs were impaired in Becn1–/– but not Becn1+/– mice.
Analysis of peripheral blood from E18.5 embryos revealed that red blood cells, hemoglobin, and hematocrit in Becn1–/– embryos were decreased, but white blood cells, lymphocytes, and platelets were increased (Figure 1G). These results indicate that conditional deletion of biallelic Becn1 severely impairs fetal hematopoiesis, which is characterized by anemia and a dramatic increase in white blood cells, particularly lymphocytes and platelets. Decontrolled production of white blood cells and platelets is often connected to high inflammation. Therefore, increased inflammation may be responsible for hematopoiesis failure and perinatal death in Becn1–/– embryos.
The absence of Becn1 results in sequential dysfunction and exhaustion of fetal liver HSCs.
To explore the cause of fetal hematopoiesis failure by Becn1 deletion, we identified hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs; Lin–Sca1+c-Kit+CD48–CD150+) and hematopoietic progenitors in the fetal liver, the major hematopoietic organ of the fetus in mice. For this purpose, we harvested fetal liver cells (FLCs) from Becn1+/+ and Becn1–/– embryos via flow cytometry. Becn1–/– fetal livers at E12.5 presented no detectable changes in long-term HSCs (LT-HSCs; Lin–Sca1+c-Kit+CD48–CD150+), short-term HSCs (ST-HSCs; Lin–Sca1+c-Kit+CD48+CD150+), hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs; Lin–Sca1+c-Kit+), and major progenitors, including multipotent progenitors (MPs; Lin–Sca1–c-Kit+) and common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs; Lin–IL-7Rα+Sca1loc-Kitlo) (Supplemental Figure 2, A and B), but at E14.5, the number and percentage of HSCs and HSPCs were increased (Figure 2, A and B), associated with a slightly decreased number of MPs and common myeloid progenitors (CMPs; Lin–Sca1–c-Kit+CD34+CD16/32–) but slightly increased CLPs, suggesting lymphoid-biased fetal hematopoiesis (Supplemental Figure 2, C and D). At E16.5, the late stage of fetal liver hematopoiesis, the number of LT-HSCs and HSPCs dramatically decreased, but the percentage of ST-HSCs and HSPCs in total FLCs increased because of a significant reduction in total liver cells (Figure 2C), and most of the progenitor cells, including MPs, CMPs, granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMPs; Lin–Sca1–c-Kit+CD16/32+CD34+), and megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitors (MEPs; Lin–Sca1–c-Kit+CD16/32–CD34–), further decreased, with the exception of CLPs, suggesting lasting lymphoid-biased fetal hematopoiesis (Supplemental Figure 2E). Proliferation and cell cycle analysis revealed a marked shift from G0/G1 to S/G2/M, suggesting disrupted quiescence and increased cycling of Becn1–/– HSPCs in E14.5 fetal livers (Figure 2, D and E, and Supplemental Figure 2F), which is associated with downregulated expression of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, including p18, p19, p27, and p57, but upregulated expression of positive cell cycle regulators, such as Ccne1 and Ccne2 (Figure 2, F and G). In contrast to the lack of increased apoptosis at E14.5 (Supplemental Figure 2, G and H), apoptosis and oxidative reactive oxygen species levels were elevated in Becn1–/– HSPCs at E16.5 (Figure 2H and Supplemental Figure 2J), although Ki67 staining remained high (Supplemental Figure 2I). Overall, these results suggest that fetal HSCs and progenitor cells started dysplasia with abnormal self-renewal or proliferation at E14.5 and then quickly became exhausted at E16.5 in the hematopoietic Becn1–/– embryos because of faster proliferation and faster death. Consequently, erythropoiesis and myelopoiesis were impaired in the livers of Becn1–/– fetuses at E14.5 or E16.5 (Supplemental Figure 3).
To evaluate the damage to fetal hematopoiesis caused by Becn1 deletion, we performed colony formation assays. When cultured in methylcellulose medium containing IL-6, IL-3, SCF, and erythropoietin, the number of colonies formed by Becn1–/– FLCs was significantly lower than that formed by E14.5 Becn1+/+ or Becn1+/– FLCs (Supplemental Figure 4, A and B). In contrast to the fully rescued irradiated recipients resulting from the transplantation of Becn1+/+ FLCs, all the recipients died within 13 days after the transplantation of E14.5 Becn1–/– FLCs (Figure 3A). These results indicate that the loss of Becn1 severely impaired hematopoietic differentiation at E14.5.
To assess the impact of the absence of Becn1 on long-term hematopoietic reconstitution capacity, we performed competitive FLC transplantation by injecting CD45.2+ Becn1+/+, Becn1+/–, or Becn1–/– FLCs from E14.5 embryos mixed with the same number of CD45.1+ bone marrow cells into lethally irradiated CD45.1+ recipient mice and then analyzed donor-derived cells in peripheral blood and bone marrow (Figure 3B and Supplemental Figure 4C). Competitive transplantation assays revealed that CD45.2+ cells from E14.5 Becn1–/– FLCs were undetectable in the peripheral blood of the irradiated recipients (Figure 3C and Supplemental Figure 4D), and similarly, similarly, B cells (B220+ cells), T cells (CD3+ cells) and myeloid cells (Gr1+CD11b+ cells) derived from Becn1–/– FLCs were also undetectable at 4, 8, 12, and 16 weeks after transplantation (Figure 3, D–F). Similarly, at 16 weeks, no contribution of E14.5 Becn1–/– FLCs to HSCs and their downstream progenitors and differentiated lineages in the recipients’ bone marrow was detected (Figure 3G and Supplemental Figure 4D). These results indicate that loss of Becn1 impairs the function of HSCs at E14.5 and leads to HSC exhaustion at E16.5, indicating an indispensable role of Becn1 in the reconstitution of hematopoietic lineages of fetal liver HSCs.
Multiomics profiling reveals upregulated proinflammatory responses featuring high ISG15 expression in fetal hematopoietic organs due to Becn1 deletion.
To understand the mechanism by which Becn1 regulates fetal hematopoiesis, we performed transcriptomics and proteomics on sorted LSK HSPCs (Lin–Sca1+c-Kit+) from E14.5 Becn1+/+ and Becn1–/– fetal livers. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the transcriptome revealed that functions related to the innate immune response were significantly enriched (Figure 4A). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed the upregulation of numerous innate immune and inflammation-related processes, such as positive regulation of the inflammatory response, cytokine production involved in the immune response, regulation of the innate immune response, and the JAK/STAT signaling pathway (Figure 4B and Supplemental Figure 5, A and B). Moreover, GSEA revealed that processes associated with the cell response to IFN-α, -β, and -γ were significantly upregulated (Supplemental Figure 5C). Gene expression analysis revealed obvious activation of IFN signaling (Supplemental Figure 5D). The increased expression of inflammatory factors and IFN-related genes (selected from Supplemental Figure 5D) in E14.5 Becn1–/– FLCs was confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) (Figure 4, C and D). These results suggest that the absence of Becn1 caused an overactivated innate immune response and inflammation, which may be responsible for fetal hematopoiesis failure and perinatal death.
Proteomic profiling further revealed a highly upregulated innate immune response and inflammatory signaling, which was consistent with the transcriptomic disclosure (Supplemental Figure 6A). To further dissect the molecular mechanism responsible for this destruction, we performed a combinatory transcriptomics and proteomics analysis. Volcano plots revealed 5,128 downregulated and 1,865 upregulated differentially expressed genes in the E14.5 liver HSPC transcriptome, with 67 downregulated and 244 upregulated differentially expressed proteins in the E14.5 liver HSPC proteome (Figure 4E, top), whereas in the E16.5 proteome, there were 79 downregulated and 274 upregulated differentially expressed proteins (Supplemental Figure 6B). Analysis of the differentially expressed genes and proteins of the E14.5 transcriptome and proteome revealed 16 upregulated proteins or genes (in red) and 4 downregulated proteins or genes (in blue) (Figure 4E, bottom). Heatmap analysis revealed 4 co-downregulated genes or proteins and 16 co-upregulated genes or proteins (Figure 4, F and G). STRING analysis revealed that most of the co-upregulated proteins strongly interacted with one another, and GO enrichment analysis suggested that these proteins participated in the innate immune response together (Figure 4H). Similarly, GO enrichment analysis of correlated genes or proteins from E14.5 transcriptomics and proteomics also revealed enriched processes related to innate immunity and inflammation (Supplemental Figure 6C).
To explore the target molecules of Becn1 in regulation of fetal hematopoiesis, we analyzed the intersection of differentially expressed genes from the E14.5 transcriptome and differentially expressed proteins from the E14.5 and E16.5 proteomes, which revealed 11 genes or proteins sharing common changes (Figure 4I). Among the 11 intersecting proteins, 9 were upregulated, and 2 were downregulated. Notably, we observed that ISG15, a 15 kDa ubiquitin protein, exhibited a 17-fold change in the E14.5 proteome and a 43-fold change in the E16.5 proteome due to the loss of Becn1 (Figure 4J). Multicolor cytometric analysis of E14.5 FLCs revealed that LSK HSPCs constituted the major cell population that expressed inflammatory cytokines, particularly ISG15, and that CD11b+ myeloid cells also expressed cytokines, excluding ISG15, when Becn1 was deleted (Supplemental Figure 7).
Becn1 deficiency causes ISG15 activation, and disruption of ISG15 rescues hematopoiesis and reduces inflammation in fetal hematopoietic organs.
As a ubiquitin-like protein, ISG15 can ISGylate a long array of proteins to upregulate innate immune responses and inflammation. Given that Becn1 deletion significantly increased inflammatory immune cells and caused hematopoiesis failure (Figures 1–3), together with the multiomics information revealing the activation of ISG15 (Figure 4), we hypothesized that ISG15 is a potential target of Becn1 in regulation of fetal hematopoiesis. To address this, we validated the increased expression of ISG15 in E14.5 HSPCs by flow cytometry (Figure 5A). Western blotting further revealed increases in the levels of ISG15, including its monomeric form and ISGylation, in E14.5 and E16.5 Becn1–/– FLCs (Figure 5B and Supplemental Figure 8A). Consistent with the above observations, image flow cytometry analysis revealed a visual and quantified increase in ISG15 in E14.5 Becn1–/– Lin– FLCs (Figure 5C).
To determine whether upregulated ISG15 is responsible for the activation of the innate immune response and inflammation, which contributes to hematopoietic failure, we sought to rescue the function of hematopoietic progenitor cells via ISG15 knockdown in Becn1–/– fetal livers. We performed lentiviral transduction of Becn1–/– Lin– FLCs with ISG15 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) or control shRNA to test their colony-forming ability (Figure 5D). ISG15 was effectively knocked down, as shown by real-time qPCR (Figure 5E and Supplemental Figure 8B). ISG15 knockdown partially but significantly rescued colony formation in Becn1–/– Lin– FLCs (Figure 5, F and G).
To determine whether ISG15 knockdown could alleviate the innate immune response and inflammation, we first analyzed the putative ISG15 pull-down proteins, which are ISG15-targeting proteins suggested by documented proteomics data, together with differentially expressed genes in the E14.5 Becn1–/– fetal liver HSPC transcriptome of our analysis, which revealed the intersecting differentially expressed genes by cluster analysis (Supplemental Figure 9A and Supplemental Table 3). GO enrichment analysis revealed that most biological functions related to the innate immune response and inflammation were significantly enriched and upregulated (Supplemental Figure 9B, orange). We noted the genes that participate in enriched biological functions on the heatmap by red dots (Supplemental Figure 9A). We found that most of these upregulated genes can positively regulate the innate immune response and inflammation. Next, we detected some of these upregulated genes from Supplemental Figure 9A (Supplemental Figure 9A, blue dots) after ISG15 knockdown in Becn1–/– fetal liver Lin– cells by real-time qPCR, and the results revealed decreased expression of these proinflammatory genes, thereby suggesting a partially alleviated innate immune response and inflammation (Figure 5H).
Loss of Becn1 prompts STAT3 to transcriptionally activate ISG15, contributing to inflammation and fetal hematopoiesis failure.
Flow cytometric analysis revealed an increase in ISG15 in Becn1-deleted fetal liver hematopoietic cells. To understand how Becn1 regulates the upregulation of ISG15, we performed real-time qPCR and observed an approximately 100-fold increase in the transcription of Isg15 in E14.5 FLCs (Figure 6A), indicating that loss of Becn1 causes dramatic transcriptional activation of Isg15. To determine whether Becn1 may directly promote the transcription of Isg15, we examined the subcellular localization of Becn1 in FLCs via nuclear-cytoplasmic separation and immunofluorescence. The results revealed that Becn1 is located in the cytoplasm (Figure 6, B and C), excluding the possibility that Becn1 directly regulates Isg15 transcription in the nucleus of FLCs.
To screen tentative factors that may act as transcription factors for ISG15 expression, we searched the GeneCards database, which discloses CREB, δCREB, MyoD, P53, and STAT3 as putative transcription factors of ISG15 in humans. The activity of STAT3 is controlled mainly by its phosphorylation at tyrosine 705 (Y705) and/or serine 727 (S727), which leads to its subsequent translocation to the nucleus, where phosphorylated STAT3 (p-STAT3) regulates the transcriptional activation of its downstream genes. STAT3 has a critical role in inflammation and immunity. In our present study, the innate immune response and inflammatory signaling were increased, and cytokines were increased in Becn1–/– fetal hematopoietic cells (Figures 4 and 5), which suggests that a cytokine storm develops after the loss of Becn1.
We therefore postulated that STAT3 is able to transcriptionally activate ISG15 in FLCs. To test this hypothesis, we first performed Western blotting with antibodies against p-STAT3 to detect STAT3 activity. In E14.5 Becn1–/– fetal livers, STAT3 was activated very significantly at Y705 and slightly at S727 (Figure 6D). Analysis of the flow cytometric data further revealed the activation of STAT3 at Y705 in E14.5 Becn1–/– HSPCs (Figure 6E). As expected, p-STAT3 (Y705) entered the nucleus in Becn1-deleted E14.5 FLCs (Figure 6F). With E14.5 Lin– liver cells, which represent fetal hematopoietic cells, p-STAT3 (Y705) also increased in localization in the nucleus, as shown by image flow cytometry analysis (Figure 6G). Together, these results suggest that STAT3 is activated and translocated to the nucleus when Becn1 is deleted in fetal liver hematopoietic cells.
To establish a functional link between STAT3 and ISG15 in the context of Becn1 deletion in fetal hematopoietic organs, we blunted the activity of STAT3 in Becn1–/– E12.5 liver Lin– cells with Stattic, a compound that can effectively inhibit STAT3 activation and nuclear translocation (Figure 7A). Colony formation assays revealed that inhibition of STAT3 activity could partially rescue the function of fetal hematopoietic progenitor cells (Lin–) impaired by Becn1 deletion (Figure 7B), and Isg15 transcription was significantly decreased in E12.5 liver Lin– cells after 48 hours of inhibitor treatment (Figure 7C), suggesting that activated STAT3 may promote the transcriptional activation of ISG15.
Next, to determine whether STAT3 can possibly act as a transcription factor of Isg15, we performed ChIP sequencing (ChIP-Seq) on E14.5 Becn1–/– FLCs. The ChIP-Seq results revealed that p-STAT3 binding was enriched at gene transcription start sites (Figure 7D), further suggesting that p-STAT3, as a transcription regulator, may bind to its downstream target genes, such as Isg15. In accordance with the above observations, a heatmap of the peak center read density of the ChIP-Seq signals suggested enriched binding of p-STAT3 to the DNA sequences of its downstream targets (Figure 7E). We analyzed the peaks from 2 independent ChIP-Seq events via a Venn diagram, which displayed 10,141 overlapping peaks (Supplemental Figure 10A). A pie plot further revealed that the overlapping peaks from 2 independent ChIP-Seq datasets were distributed mainly in the promoter region (Supplemental Figure 10B). Importantly, we observed that p-STAT3 could interact with the Isg15 gene via the Integrative Genomics Viewer (Figure 7F). Overall, our data suggest that loss of Becn1 can lead to activation of STAT3 and subsequent translocation of p-STAT3 to the nucleus, where p-STAT3 promotes the transcription of Isg15, thus triggering downstream inflammation cascades and leading to fetal hematopoietic failure.
Becn1 binds to STAT3 to suppress STAT3/ISG15 activation.
In mice, when Becn1 is intact in wild-type embryos, STAT3 is virtually not phosphorylated in the cytoplasmic compartment. Once STAT3 is phosphorylated as a result of Becn1 deletion, its translocation occurs, which in turn promotes Isg15 transcription, followed by extensive ISGylation of its downstream targets to trigger inflammatory cytokine production (Figures 4–7). The question now is how cytoplasmic STAT3 is controlled in fetal hematopoietic organs under physiological conditions. We speculated that Becn1 may regulate STAT3 in the cytoplasm since the loss of Becn1 leads to the activation of STAT3. Given that the absence of Becn1 caused the upregulation of ISG15 at the transcriptional, translational, and posttranslational levels in liver cells (Figures 4–6) and Lin– liver cells (Figure 8A, right) but did not increase STAT3 at the mRNA or protein level (Figure 6D and Figure 8A, left), we further speculated that Becn1 may regulate STAT3 in the posttranslational state, such as via phosphorylation or physical interaction. To this end, we lysed E14.5 FLCs and conducted immunoprecipitation with Becn1 as bait and STAT3 as prey. Western blotting with an anti-Becn1 antibody revealed that Becn1 and STAT3 were in the same protein complex (Figure 8B). To confirm whether Becn1 directly interacts with STAT3, we quantified the binding affinity via ELISA with a documented protocol, and the results revealed that the binding affinity for the Becn1-STAT3 interaction was estimated at a dissociation constant of approximately 0.12 ± 0.08 μM (Figure 8C), suggesting robust binding affinity. Furthermore, pull-down assays with ectopically overexpressed and purified Becn1 and STAT3 proteins indicated that Becn1 directly bound to STAT3 (Figure 8D).
To predict the binding region and interaction mode between Becn1 and STAT3, we used HDOCK for protein-protein docking. We obtained complete 3-dimensional structural models of the mouse proteins Becn1 and STAT3 by using AlphaFold2 (Figure 8E). After protein-protein docking, we chose the structure with the highest docking score as the benchmark result for subsequent interaction analysis. According to the docking model of the 2 proteins, the evolutionarily conserved domain (ECD) of Becn1 is bound to the N-terminal domain (NTD) and coiled-coil domain (CCD) of STAT3, resulting in a relatively stable interaction between the 2 proteins (Figure 8E). Analysis of the interaction patterns between Becn1 and STAT3 in the binding region revealed a total of 6 hydrogen bond interactions and 3 salt bridge interactions between the 2 proteins. The main amino acids involved in forming hydrogen bonds in Becn1 were Asn269, His273, His334, Ser344, Glu346, Ser352, Arg356, Lys362, and Lys435, whereas the main amino acids in STAT3 participating in hydrogen bonding were Gln32, Glu74, Asn76, Glu145, Gln146, Asp150, Arg152, and Gln156. Furthermore, Becn1 was projected to form numerous hydrophobic interactions with STAT3, which presumably enhances the binding between Becn1 and STAT3 (Figure 8, F and G). Therefore, the results of protein-protein docking support a direct and robust interaction between Becn1 and STAT3, suggesting that Becn1 tethers STAT3 to prevent its activation and nuclear translocation.
To validate the results of the molecular docking prediction, we constructed stable 293T cells overexpressing full-length Becn1 and Becn1 mutant proteins by removing either of the 2 structural domains of Becn1, a central CCD domain (amino acids 144–269) or an ECD domain (amino acids 243–448) (Figure 8H). The plasmid expressing Myc-tagged STAT3 was then transiently expressed in these cells. We next examined the interaction between Becn1 (full length, ΔECD or ΔCCD) and STAT3 via co-IP. The results showed that Becn1 lacking the ECD domain was unable to interact with STAT3, whereas full-length Becn1 and Becn1 lacking the CCD domain could interact with STAT3, indicating that the ECD of Becn1 is the binding domain to STAT3 (Figure 8I).
To test whether the ECD domain of Becn1 identified by an in vitro biochemical assay using exogenous expressed Becn1 and STAT3 functions in binding to STAT3 in cells, we conducted an in vitro cellular assay with BA/F3 cells (a mouse pro–B cell line) and NIH 3T3 cells (an embryonic mouse fibroblast cell line) by overexpressing FLAG-Becn1 (either full-length or ECD-deleted Becn1). The results showed that the overexpression of full-length Becn1 reduced p-STAT3, and the loss of the ECD domain in Becn1 increased p-STAT3 levels, which was more pronounced in BA/F3 cells than in NIH 3T3 cells (Figure 8J), suggesting that Becn1 preferentially binds to STAT3 in hematopoietic-lineage cells. These findings, together with the above results (Figures 4–7), indicate that Becn1, via its ECD domain, binds STAT3 to prevent ISG15 activation and cytokine storms in fetal hematopoietic organs.
Additionally, HDOCK prediction suggested that the ECD domain of human Becn1 binds to the NTD domain, CCD domain, and DNA-binding domain (DBD) of human STAT3 and revealed a total of 6 hydrogen bond interactions and 4 salt bridge interactions between the 2 proteins. The main amino acids involved in forming hydrogen bonds in human Becn1 were Ser279, Gly334, Asn335, His336, Ser346, Glu348, Arg358, Lys364, and Lys437, whereas the main amino acids in human STAT3 participating in hydrogen bonding were Asn5, Glu74, Glu145, Asp150, Arg152, Gln156, Asn265, and Asn401 (Supplemental Figure 11), and the prediction excluded a direct interaction between Becn1 and STAT1/2 (Supplemental Figure 12). These results suggest that the inhibition of STAT3/ISG15 activation may be a conserved mechanism in which Becn1 restrains STAT3 to secure fetal hematopoiesis and survival in mammalian species.
Becn1-mediated inhibition of the STAT3/ISG15 axis does not rely on autophagy.
To examine whether autophagy in fetal hematopoietic organs is influenced by conditional Becn1 deletion, we measured the expression of autophagic markers, and the results revealed in vivo accumulation of the LC3-II and P62 proteins in Becn1–/– FLCs (Figure 9A). Treatment with rapamycin, an autophagy inducer, did not enhance LC3 transformation in Becn1–/– FLCs (Figure 9B), suggesting that functional autophagy was likely impaired by Becn1 deletion. We also compared the protein levels of autolysosomal markers between Becn1+/+ and Becn1–/– mice, which revealed no accumulation in Becn1–/– FLCs (Figure 9C), apparently owing to the absence of Becn1 deletion-caused inability to form autolysosomes, since Becn1 is indispensable for the membrane trafficking essential for the formation of autolysosomes. In addition, brief examination via transcriptomic profiling did not reveal apparent changes in the expression of autophagy-related genes after Becn1 deletion (Figure 9D), excluding compensatory expression of other autophagy-related genes, which may lead to compensatory or alternative autophagy. Taken together, these data suggest that autophagy is impaired in Becn1-deleted fetal hematopoietic organs.
To investigate the impact of autophagy on the Becn1/STAT3/ISG15 axis, we used 2 autophagy-null mouse models (Atg7–/– and Atg5–/–, exclusively in the hematopoietic system) (Figure 9, E and F) to test whether the Becn1/STAT3/ISG15 axis relies on autophagy. Unlike embryonic lethality caused by deletion of Becn1 (Figure 1), deletion of Atg5 or Atg7 in hematopoietic cells did not cause fetal mortality, and these mice survived several months after birth (Figure 9, G and H). Furthermore, Becn1, STAT3, and p-STAT3 protein levels were not altered in the Atg7-deleted mice (Figure 9I). ISG15 transcription was virtually unchanged in the Atg7-deleted mice compared with the Becn1-deleted mice (Figure 9J). Similarly, ISGylation did not occur in the Atg5- or Atg7-deleted mice (Figure 9, K and L), which is in sharp contrast to the outcomes in the Becn1-deleted mice (Figure 5B and Figure 6A). This genetic evidence suggests that the Becn1/STAT3/ISG15 pathway operates independently of autophagy.
Finally, to investigate the pathophysiological significance of Becn1-mediated ISG15 signaling in fetal hematopoiesis and development, we evaluated whether Becn1 is involved in governing maternal immune activation (MIA), a major immune risk to embryos during pregnancy. We generated an MIA mouse model via the injection of pIpC into pregnant mice, which revealed that at E14.5, Becn1 expression in FLCs was reduced (Supplemental Figure 13, A and B), and concurrently, STAT3 was phosphorylated/activated (Supplemental Figure 13C), along with elevated transcriptional levels of ISG15 and the cytokine IFN-α (Supplemental Figure 13, D and E). As a result, HSPCs of fetal liver abnormally proliferated (Supplemental Figure 13F), indicating that hematopoietic function was impaired by MIA. Notably, the reduction in Becn1 levels and the activation of STAT3/ISG15 were coupled in MIA mice, mimicking the activation of this axis by Becn1 deletion in fetal hematopoietic organs. These findings suggest that the fetal Becn1/STAT3/ISG15 axis may function to prevent MIA during pregnancy.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Mammalian fetal hematopoiesis initiates in the yolk sac, known as primitive hematopoiesis, which is rapidly replaced by definitive hematopoiesis in aorta-gonad-mesonephros commencing at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) in mice. Soon after, hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) generated in aorta-gonad-mesonephros migrate to the fetal liver for massive expansion and gradual maturation, with the most active stage of fetal liver hematopoiesis on E14.5. The liver remains the major organ of fetal hematopoiesis until HSCs start settling to the bone marrow on E16.5 to E17.5. The bone marrow becomes the main fetal hematopoietic organ from E18.5 to birth. In human embryos between 7 and 17 weeks after conception, the liver serves as the predominant organ of fetal hematopoiesis, covering the second trimester of human embryonic development.
Interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15), a ubiquitin-like protein and an amplifier of inflammation, can be induced by interferon (IFN), viral and bacterial infections, or certain genotoxic stressors, indicating that the expression of ISG15 represents a host response to pathogenic insults. Mechanistically, type I IFN activates IFN regulatory factor 9, which subsequently interacts with 2 members of the phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription family (STAT1 and STAT2) and forms the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex, which binds, via an IFN-sensitive response element, to the promoter of ISG15 and its conjugation enzymes to initiate their expression. ISG15 can be covalently conjugated onto hundreds of target proteins via an enzymatic cascade to enhance numerous biological responses, including cytokine expression and the inflammatory response against invading pathogens. ISG15 in its unconjugated free form has also been reported to function as a cytokine. For example, extracellularly unconjugated ISG15 can act as a cytokine to exacerbate SARS-CoV-2–triggered cytokine storms and inflammation. However, how ISG15 expression and activation are tightly controlled to prevent intrinsic and extrinsic cytokine storms awaits exploration.
Beclin 1 (Becn1), the first identified autophagy protein in mammals, plays a key role in mammalian autophagy. In launching autophagy, Becn1 binds Vps34, UVRAG, AMBRA-1, and Barkor to form the PI3KC3 complex, a core assembly of the mammalian autophagy machinery. Becn1 has been reported to play an important role in many physiological or pathological processes, such as tumorigenesis, anti-aging, and AMPK activation, almost all via the autophagy pathway, with the exceptions of its ability to uncouple autophagy in endocytic trafficking, hormone secretion, and receptor recycling. In addition, Becn1 functions as a negative regulator in the execution of necroptosis by suppressing MLKL oligomerization. With respect to blood function in adults, mice with myeloid-specific loss of Becn1 exhibited neutrophilia, suggesting that Becn1 can act as a neutrophil-specific immune checkpoint. Becn1 in mice was also found to maintain the quiescence of tissue-resident macrophages to resist Listeria monocytogenes infection. However, the role of Becn1 in fetal hematopoiesis has not been examined.
Here, we generated a conditional mouse with hematopoietic-lineage deletion of Becn1 and report that Becn1 is essential for fetal hematopoiesis and survival by tightly controlling inflammatory cytokine production in the fetal hematopoietic organ.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Copyright: © 2024, Wei et al. This is an open access article published under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2025;135(3):e177375.https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI177375.
11/26/2024
In-Press Preview
02/03/2025
Electronic publication