PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Epigenetic regulation; Zfta-rela ependymoma; Cancer neuroscience; Developmental transcription factor

ABSTRACT:
Bidirectional communication between tumors and neurons has emerged as a key facet of the tumor microenvironment that drives malignancy. Another hallmark feature of cancer is epigenomic dysregulation, where alterations in gene expression influences cell states and interactions with the tumor microenvironment. Using the pediatric brain tumor ependymoma (EPN) as a model, we found that inhibition of histone serotonylation blocks EPN tumorigenesis and regulates expression of a core set of developmental transcription factors (TFs). High-throughput, in vivo screening of these TFs revealed that ETV5 promotes EPN tumorigenesis and functions by enhancing repressive chromatin states. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is amongst the genes repressed by ETV5 and its overexpression suppresses EPN tumor progression and tumor-associated network hyperactivity via synaptic remodeling. Collectively, these studies identify histone serotonylation as a key driver of EPN tumorigenesis, while further revealing how neuronal signaling, neuro-epigenomics, and developmental programs are intertwined to drive malignancy in brain cancer.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Histone serotonylation regulates ependymoma tumorigenesis through neurodevelopmental pathways

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
3mg of nuclear extracts were immuno-precipitated with anti-ETV5 antibody for 1 hour at 4oC. The protein complex was ran on SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested using trypsin protease. The LC-MS analysis was carried out on a nanoLC1000 system coupled to Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA).

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS raw data was searched against the mus musculus protein database from NCBI refseq (updated 2020_03_24). The ZFTA-Rela fusion protein and human ETV5 protein sequence was added to the database as well. The raw data processing, label-free based quantification and differential analysis was carried out as described before [PMID: 35858326].

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Bidirectional communication between tumours and neurons has emerged as a key facet of the tumour microenvironment that drives malignancy<sup>1,2</sup>. Another hallmark feature of cancer is epigenomic dysregulation, in which alterations in gene expression influence cell states and interactions with the tumour microenvironment<sup>3</sup>. Ependymoma (EPN) is a paediatric brain tumour that relies on epigenomic remodelling to engender malignancy<sup>4,5</sup>; however, how these epigenetic mechanisms intersect with extrinsic neuronal signalling during EPN tumour progression is unknown. Here we show that the activity of serotonergic neurons regulates EPN tumorigenesis, and that serotonin itself also serves as an activating modification on histones. We found that inhibiting histone serotonylation blocks EPN tumorigenesis and regulates the expression of a core set of developmental transcription factors. High-throughput, in vivo screening of these transcription factors revealed that ETV5 promotes EPN tumorigenesis and functions by enhancing repressive chromatin states. Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is one of the genes repressed by ETV5, and its overexpression suppresses EPN tumour progression and tumour-associated network hyperactivity through synaptic remodelling. Collectively, this study identifies histone serotonylation as a key driver of EPN tumorigenesis, and also reveals how neuronal signalling, neuro-epigenomics and developmental programs are intertwined to drive malignancy in brain cancer.