PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Macrophage
diseases: Human immunodeficiency virus infectious disease
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Hiv-associated neurocognitive disorders; cb2r; jwh-133; secretome; lc/ms/ms; tmt; proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Although antiviral therapy has improved quality of life, around 50% of people with HIV (PWH) experience neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. This is prompted in part by migration of HIV-infected monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) to the brain, leading to neuronal death. Previous studies in our lab have shown that HIV-infected MDM secrete cathepsin B (CATB), which is a pro-inflammatory neurotoxic enzyme that is reduced by the addition of cannabinoid receptor-2 (CB2R) agonist JWH-133 to cell cultures. In this study, we aimed to identify the secreted proteins (secretome) by HIV-infected macro-phages exposed to JWH-133 and quantify them using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) mass spectrometry. Frozen 13-day MDM supernatants from: (1) MDM negative control; (2) HIV-MDM; and (3) MDM-HIV-JWH-133, were compared in triplicates by mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) and analyzed for protein identification. Subsequently, the same samples were labeled by TMT labeling and quantified by LC/MS/MS. After database search, 528 proteins were identified from all groups. Thereafter, proteins with more than 3 unique peptides and more than 10% coverage were selected for protein ID. Venn diagrams revealed 1 unique protein secreted by MDM-HIV, 10 unique proteins in MDM-HIV JWH-133, and 15 common proteins in the three groups. CATB was unique to MDM-HIV. MDM-HIV exposed to JWH-133 showed proteins related to metabolism, cell organization, anti-viral activity, and stress response. TMT analysis revealed 1,454 proteins with abundance for statistical analysis based on FC ≥ |1.5| and p-value ≤ 0.05, of which Ruvb-like 1 and Hornerin decreased significantly with JWH-133 treatment. Both proteins stimulate HIV replication. In addition, HIV infection upregulated proteins associated with pathways of HIV latency that were inhibited by JWH-133. In conclusion, JWH-133 treatment in HIV-infected macrophages leads to the secretion of antiviral host factors and decreases the secretion of proviral, inflammatory, and neurotoxic host factors.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cannabinoid Receptor Type 2 Agonist JWH-133 Stimulates Antiviral Factors and Decreases Proviral, Inflammatory, and Neurotoxic Proteins in HIV-Infected Macrophage Secretome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Preparation of samples was performed as previously described with some modifications [15,76,77]. In a sample tube with approximately 30 μg of cell supernatants, 50 μL of 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were added to initiate the acetone precipitation. Thereafter, it was heated for 15 min at 70 °C, and cold acetone (~ 1 mL) added to the sample until a final dilution of 15%. Samples were incubated overnight at −20 °C. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 10,000× g for 10 min, and following removal of supernatants, a sample buffer containing 2X Laemmli buffer + β-mercaptoethanol (Bio-Rad, USA) was added. Proteins were rehydrated with sample buffer, heated for 10 min at 70 °C, and run at 150 volts for 20 min in a pre-made gel (Mini-PROTEAN TGX 12%). Gels were stained using Biosafe Coomassie G-250 staining and documented using Chemi-Doc XRS + (Bio-Rad, La Jolla, CA). Coomassie-stained proteome bands were cut manually in 1mm3 cubes. For destain, a mixture of 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, thereafter proteins were reduced using 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 55 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min in the dark. Samples were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin: protein) overnight at a temperature of 37 °C for a maximum of 16 h. The peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using 150 μL of a mixture of 50% acetonitrile and 2.5% formic acid in water and 150 μL of 100% acetonitrile. Digests were dried for subsequent TMT labelling.  TMT Labelling were performed as previously described [15,76,77]. TMT labeling of supernatants was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, IL, USA). A total of 9 samples (30 ug each) were delivered into one TMT10-plex platform, accommodating three donors with their conditions in each platform. TMT reagents are reconstituted in acetonitrile the same day of use. As specified by the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried extracted samples were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate) which is the dissolution buffer and labeled with the TMT 10plex labelling reagents (41 μL, 0.8 mg). The TMT labels were added followed by one-hour incubation with occasional vortexing and a quenching step of 15 min. Finally, all the labelled samples were mixed to generate a final pool that was later submided to fractionation. The specific TMT tags used for each sample are described in Supplementary Table S8. Fractionation was performed using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (REF 89875) and following manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the column was conditioned twice using 300 μL of acetonitrile, centrifuged at 5000× g for 2 min, and the steps were repeated using 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The TMT labeled pool was reconstituted in 300 μL of 0.1% TFA, loaded onto the column and washed with water and 5% acetonitrile/0.1% Triethylamine (TEA). Thereafter, the sample was eluted 8 times into 8 different vials using a series of elution solutions with different acetonitrile/0.1% TEA percentages as suggested by the manufacturer. Fractions were dried and stored for mass spectrometric analysis. All 8 fractions generated were run in the mass spectrometer instrument.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS/MS raw data files were searched using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5. (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a SEQUEST HT algorithm and proteins were identified using human protein database from the same software’s protein knowledgebase. Trypsin was included in the search as an enzyme for proteolysis with a range of 6-144 in peptide length. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and 0.02 Da for the fragment mass tolerance. Oxidation +15.995 Da (M) was included as a dynamic modification. The static modifications included were carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da (C), Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents +229.163 Da (Any N-terminal end, K). The false discovery rate was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The raw protein files obtained were exported from the Proteome Discoverer software to .xls format using Microsoft Excel Program 2016 (CA, USA) for further bioinformatic analyses. Quantitative proteomics analysis was performed using TMT–based LC-MS/MS to identify and quantify proteins secreted by HIV-infected macrophages exposed to the CB2R agonist JWH-133.  Following an already developed protocol at the Translational Proteomics Center [15,76,77], we used the MetaboAnalyst 5.0 for protein statistical analysis. MetaboAnalyst is a user-friendly, streamlined metabolomics data analysis platform (hdps://www.metaboanalyst.ca/home.xhtml) [78–80] that is also used for statistical analyses of proteomics data [25,78–82]. We determined the statistically differential protein abundance using a single-channel analyses between: HIV+ JWH-133 vs HIV+ Vehicle and HIV+ Vehicle vs. Uninfected Vehicle. Differentially expressed proteins were considered significant with a fold change cutoff of 1.5 (|Log2 FC| ≥ 0.58) and p-value < 0.05. (i.e., p- value ≤ 0.05, 95% confidence). We used normalized abundances [25] provided by Yadira Cantres from the Translational Proteomics Center (File name: TMT_Analysis_Alana_Mera_26Nov2024_ Exp26Nov2024.xlsx). 2D Principal Component Analyses (PCA) were performed for both comparisons using the protein concentration as the evaluating variable (PERMANOVA p-value (based on 999 permutations) = 0.2, 95% of confidence). For the volcano plot, the threshold was set as –log10 p-Value ≥ 1.30 (or p-value ≤ 0.05) and a fold change cutoff of 1.5 (|Log2 FC| ≥ 0.58).  Differentially expressed proteins identified by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) based quantitative proteomics were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; QIAGEN Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA) to investigate canonical pathways, molecular functions, and networks modulated by HIV infection and CB2R activation. A total of seven dysregulated proteins (fold change ≥ |1.5|, p ≤ 0.05) identified from the comparisons HIV + Vehicle vs. Control and HIV + JWH-133 vs. HIV + Vehicle were included. Each protein was annotated for subcellular localization (nucleus, cytoplasm, plasma membrane, or other) and molecular type (enzyme, transporter, peptidase, or transcription regulator). Analyses were performed using the Ingenuity Knowledge Base (Genes Only) restricted to Homo sapiens and immune/macrophage tissues. Canonical pathway overlays were generated through Comparison Analysis to identify shared and unique pathways between conditions. Statistical significance of pathway enrichment was determined by a right-tailed Fisher’s exact test, and pathways were ranked by –log(p) values.

METHODS:
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Macrophage Isolation, HIV-1ADA Infection, Treatments with JWH-133 Agonist, and Collection of Serum-Free Supernatants
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from healthy female donors over 21 years of age in a previous study. The study was managed under the approval of the University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus Institutional Review Board (IRB) (Protocol #0720116). Informed consent was obtained from each donor according to the Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association and institutional guidelines and regulations. Blood mononuclear cells were cultured in T25 flasks at a concentration of 10 × 106 cells/flask for the isolation of monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) after seven days in culture with fetal bovine serum 10% (FBS), human serum 1%, RPMI, and 100 U/mL pen/strep (Sigma; St. Louis, MO, USA). After media were exchanged every three days, on day 7, HIV-1ADA was added to the T25 flasks at an MOI of 0.1, and MDMs were incubated overnight at 37 °C in 5% CO2. After cells were washed with media and treated with CB2R agonist JWH-133 at 0.5 µM, half of the medium was exchanged with fresh medium containing JWH-133 every three days. This concentration of JWH-133 was selected based on our previous study, which demonstrated that this was the minimum concentration that induced a significant effect in reducing HIV-1 replication and CATB secretion from HIV-infected MDMs. Supernatants were removed on day 12 post-infection and replaced with serum-free media. After overnight culture, MDM serum-free supernatants from 13 dpi were collected, aliquoted, and frozen at −80 °C (Figure 4).
4.2. Preparation of MDM Serum-Free Supernatants for Protein ID and TMT Labeling
The preparation of samples was performed as previously described, with some modifications. In a sample tube with approximately 30 µg of cell supernatant, 50 µL of 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added to initiate acetone precipitation. Thereafter, it was heated for 15 min at 70 °C, and cold acetone (~1 mL) was added to the sample up to a final dilution of 15%. Samples were incubated overnight at −20 °C. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 10,000× g for 10 min, and, following the removal of supernatants, a sample buffer containing 2X Laemmli buffer + β-mercaptoethanol (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) was added. Proteins were rehydrated with sample buffer, heated for 10 min at 70 °C, and run at 150 volts for 20 min in a pre-made gel (Mini-PROTEAN TGX 12%). Gels were stained using Biosafe Coomassie G-250 staining and documented using Chemi-Doc XRS + (Bio-Rad, La Jolla, CA, USA). Coomassie-stained proteome bands were cut manually in 1 mm3 cubes. For destaining, a mixture of 50% acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added; thereafter, proteins were reduced using 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 55 °C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min in the dark. Samples were digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at a ratio of 1:50 (trypsin–protein) overnight at a temperature of 37 °C for a maximum of 16 h. The peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using 150 µL of a mixture of 50% acetonitrile and 2.5% formic acid in water and 150 µL of 100% acetonitrile. Digests were dried for subsequent TMT labeling.
4.3. Protein ID and TMT Labeling
Protein ID and TMT labeling were performed as previously described. The TMT labeling of supernatants was performed following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). A total of 9 samples (30 μg each) were delivered into one TMT10-plex platform, accommodating three donors with their conditions in each platform. TMT reagents were reconstituted in acetonitrile on the same day of use. As specified by the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific), dried extracted samples were reconstituted in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), which was the dissolution buffer, and labeled with the TMT10-plex labeling reagents (41 μL, 0.8 mg). The TMT labels were added, followed by one-hour incubation with occasional vortexing and a quenching step of 15 min. Finally, all labeled samples were mixed to generate a final pool that was later subjected to fractionation. The specific TMT tags used for each sample are described in Supplementary Table S8. Fractionation was performed using the Pierce High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (REF 89875) and following the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the column was conditioned twice using 300 μL of acetonitrile and centrifuged at 5000× g for 2 min, and the steps were repeated using 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The TMT-labeled pool was reconstituted in 300 μL of 0.1% TFA, loaded onto the column, and washed with water and 5% acetonitrile/0.1% triethylamine (TEA). Thereafter, the sample was eluted 8 times into 8 different vials using a series of elution solutions with different acetonitrile/0.1% TEA percentages, as suggested by the manufacturer. Fractions were dried and stored for mass-spectrometric analysis. All 8 fractions generated were run in the mass spectrometer instrument.
4.4. Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry analyses were performed as previously described. A HPLC system (Easy nLC 1200) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide separation. First, the peptides were loaded onto a Pico Chip H354 REPROSIL-Pur C18-AQ 3 µM 120 A (75 µm × 105 mm) chromatographic column (New Objective, Littleton, MA, USA) with a gradient time of 128 min. Separation was obtained at a rate of 300 nL/min as follows: 7–25% 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (Buffer B) for 102 min, 25–60% Buffer B for 20 min and 60–95% for 6 min. After separation, the peptides were sprayed and analyzed using a mass spectrometer operated in positive polarity mode and data-dependent mode using a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS1 (full scan) was measured in the range of 375 to 1400 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000. To select the ten most intense ions for HCD fragmentation and MS2 (MS/MS) analysis with a resolution of 35,000, a dynamic exclusion parameter was created in 30.0 s with a repeat count of three.
4.5. Protein Identification and Quantitative Analyses
MS/MS raw data files were searched using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the SEQUEST HT algorithm, and proteins were identified using the human protein database from the same software’s protein knowledge base. Trypsin was included in the search as an enzyme for proteolysis, with a range of 6–144 in peptide length. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, with 0.02 Da as the fragment mass tolerance. Oxidation +15.995 Da (M) was included as a dynamic modification. The static modifications included were carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da (C) and tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents +229.163 Da (any N-terminal end, K). The false discovery rate was set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The raw protein files obtained were exported from the Proteome Discoverer software to .xls format using Microsoft Excel 2016 (CA, USA) for further bioinformatic analysis. Quantitative proteomics analysis was performed using TMT-based LC-MS/MS to identify and quantify proteins secreted by HIV-infected macrophages exposed to the CB2R agonist JWH-133.
4.6. Bioinformatics and Statistical Analyses
Following an already developed protocol at the Translational Proteomics Center, we used MetaboAnalyst 5.0 for protein statistical analysis. MetaboAnalyst is a user-friendly, streamlined metabolomics data analysis platform (, accessed on 3 September 2025) that is also used for statistical analyses of proteomics data. We determined the statistically differential protein abundance using a single-channel analysis of HIV+MDM-JWH-133 vs. HIV+MDM-vehicle and HIV + vehicle vs. uninfected vehicle. Differentially expressed proteins were considered significant with a fold change cutoff of 1.5 (|Log2 FC| ≥ 0.58) and p-value < 0.05. (i.e., p-value ≤ 0.05, 95% confidence). We used normalized abundances provided by Yadira Cantres from the Translational Proteomics Center (File name: TMT_Analy-sis_Alana_Mera_26Nov2024_Exp26Nov2024.xlsx). Then, 2D principal component analyses (PCAs) were performed for both comparisons, using the protein concentration as the evaluating variable (PERMANOVA p-value (based on 999 permutations) = 0.2, 95% confidence). For the volcano plot, the threshold was set as −log10 p-value ≥ 1.30 (or p-value ≤ 0.05) and a fold change cutoff of 1.5 (|Log2 FC| ≥ 0.58).
4.7. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
Differentially expressed proteins identified by tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; QIAGEN Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA) to investigate canonical pathways, molecular functions, and networks modulated by HIV infection and CB2R activation. A total of seven dysregulated proteins (fold change ≥ |1.5|, p ≤ 0.05) identified from the comparisons of HIV + vehicle vs. control and HIV + JWH-133 vs. HIV + vehicle were included. Each protein was annotated for subcellular localization (nucleus, cytoplasm, plasma membrane, or other) and the molecular type (enzyme, transporter, peptidase, or transcription regulator). Analyses were performed using the Ingenuity Knowledge Base (Genes Only) restricted to Homo sapiens and immune/macrophage tissues. Canonical pathway overlays were generated through comparison analysis to identify shared and unique pathways between conditions. The statistical significance of pathway enrichment was determined by a right-tailed Fisher’s exact test, and pathways were ranked by −log(p) values.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

RESULTS:
2. Results
2.1. HIV Stimulates the Secretion of CATB by HIV-MDM, While JWH-133 Stimulates the Secretion of Proteins Related to Metabolism, Cell Organization, and Antiviral and Stress Responses
In our previous studies, we have demonstrated that macrophages with increased CATB secretion after HIV infection exert CATB-mediated neurotoxicity, while macrophages with decreased CATB secretion after HIV infection are unable to promote neurotoxicity. Subsequently, we demonstrated that JWH-133 treatment decreased CATB levels in HIV-infected MDMs. In a representative number of HIV-infected MDM cells (n = 3) with increased CATB secretion and treated with JWH-133, we showed that this CB2R agonist caused the downregulation of intracellular pathways involving oxidative stress, lysosomal exocytosis, and NF-κB signaling. In this study, we further analyzed the secretome of representative HIV-infected MDMs exposed to JWH-133 compared to controls in triplicate and identified 528 total proteins in the three groups. Those with more than three unique peptides and more than 10% sequence coverage were included for protein identification (Supplementary Tables S1–S3). Only proteins found common to each triplicate group were selected for comparison between the groups (Supplementary Figures S1–S3). Of these, only one unique protein was found in HIV-infected MDMs (Figure 1). This was CATB, which has been consistently demonstrated to be secreted in our previous studies and to induce neurotoxicity (Table 1; Supplementary Tables S2, S4 and S5). Eleven (11) unique proteins were found in HIV-infected MDMs exposed to the CB2R agonist JWH-133 (Figure 1). Most of these proteins identified were beneficial for cell protection during glycolysis (PGK1, GAPDH), lipid production (PGD), cytoskeletal rearrangement (MSN, ACTN1, ACTR3), protection from oxidative stress (HSPA8), and neuronal regeneration (CTSS) (Table 2; Supplementary Tables S3–S5). Thirteen (13) proteins were found common to the three groups (Figure 2; Supplementary Tables S3–S5). To determine if these or additional proteins were differentially expressed between the groups, we proceeded with tandem mass tag (TMT) quantitative proteomics.
2.2. HIV Infection and JWH−133 Treatment in HIV-Infected MDMs Lead to a Unique Profile of Differentially Expressed Proteins in Supernatants
To identify differentially expressed proteins secreted by MDMs exposed to CB2R, we applied TMT quantitative proteomics. A total of 1527 proteins were processed before the statistical analysis. Of these, we analyzed 1454 proteins with abundance values available for bioinformatics analyses. The statistical analysis performed was a one-factor analysis between experimental samples and controls. Statistical analysis revealed differentially abundant proteins between groups based on FC ≥ |1.5| and p-value ≤ 0.05. We used normalized abundances derived from Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). No data imputation was performed with MetaboAnalyst, as the input data had no missing values. No data transformation, normalization, or scaling was performed in MetaboAnalyst, as the input data were previously scaled in Proteome Discoverer (Supplementary Table S6).
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a crucial asset in proteomics analyses, serving as an invaluable tool for streamlining complex datasets through dimensionality reduction and pattern recognition. In proteomics investigations, where the data intricacy and volume are notably high, the significance of PCA lies in its capacity to distinguish pertinent information and reveal latent trends. This methodology becomes indispensable in extracting meaningful insights from the extensive data generated by mass spectrometry and other advanced techniques. By condensing the dataset into a concise array of orthogonal components, PCA facilitates the visual representation of protein relationships and assists in pinpointing pivotal features influencing biological variations. This analytical approach proves instrumental in navigating the intricacies of proteomic landscapes, offering a clearer perspective and contributing to a greater understanding of underlying biological mechanisms. The PCA analysis of MDM-HIV-vehicle vs. MDM controls revealed similarities within replicates of the same group and differences between the two groups (Figure 2A). Likewise, similarities within the replicates and differences between the two groups of MDM-HIV-vehicle and HIV-JWH-133 were observed (Figure 2B).
Volcano plots were prepared with the data that met the significance criteria of fold change ≥ |1.5| and p-value ≤ 0.05 to visualize the number of differentially expressed proteins between MDM-HIV-vehicle and MDM controls (Figure 2C) and between MDM-HIV vehicle and HIV-JWH-133 (Figure 2D). Nine (n = 9) differentially abundant proteins were found between all groups (Table 3). In the HIV+ vehicle vs. control group, five proteins were more abundant, while two were less abundant. In the supernatants of HIV-infected MDMs exposed to JWH-133, only two proteins were differentially less abundant.
An analysis of the differentially abundant proteins in HIV+MDM vs. MDM control supernatants revealed that the five more abundant proteins in HIV+MDM were associated with inflammatory processes (Q96S97), glutamine–glutamate circulation, the synthesis of proteins and cell growth (Q96QD8), antigen processing and presentation (Q6P179), sugar metabolism (Q961J6), and calcium-dependent vesicle fusion (O75923). Meanwhile, the two differentially less abundant proteins in HIV+MDM were associated with the Src signaling pathway, B cell and macrophage adhesion, cytoskeletal organization (O75563), and the dynein transport machinery for microtubule motility and cellular trafficking (Q5VUJ9) (Table 4).
Two differentially expressed proteins secreted by HIV-infected macrophages exposed to JHW-133 were less abundant compared to unexposed HIV+MDM. These included two important proteins for antimicrobial activity that were both downregulated. The first, RVBL1, is a component of several important host protein complexes involved in DNA repair and gene regulation. RVBL1/2 is indispensable for the pro-inflammatory response and the antimicrobial activity of macrophages. The other protein, Hornerin (HRNR), an S100 protein, is involved in calcium binding and pathological cell functions (Table 5).
2.3. Proteomics Pathway Analysis of Differentially Expressed Proteins Reveals That HIV Infection Upregulated the Secretion of Inflammatory and Neurotoxic Pathways (e.g., NF-κB, MHC Class I Processing), Whereas JWH-133 Treatment Downregulated These Responses
Canonical pathway overlay using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; QIAGEN Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA) revealed key signaling pathways modulated by HIV infection and CB2R activation in macrophages (Figure 3). A total of seven dysregulated proteins were included in the analysis. In the HIV+MDM vehicle vs. control comparison (Figure 3A), upregulated pathways involved NF-κB inhibitor epsilon (IκBε), a key inhibitor of NF-κB pathway signaling, GABAergic and glutaminergic receptor signaling, and class I MHC-mediated antigen processing and presentation. Conversely, treatment with JWH-133 (Figure 3B) attenuated these same pathways. IPA functional annotation further categorized the seven dysregulated proteins according to their cellular localization and molecular function (Table 6). In HIV+MDM vehicle vs. control, most proteins were localized to the cytoplasm or plasma membrane, participating in membrane dynamics, protein processing, and immune signaling, including DYSF, SLC38A2, and SKAP2. Cytoplasmic enzymes such as ERAP2 and GMPPA were linked to antigen processing and glycoprotein biosynthesis, while MYADM (nuclear) was associated with myeloid differentiation. In contrast, the HIV+MDM-JWH-133 vs. HIV+MDM vehicle comparison identified only two significant abundant proteins: HRNR (cytoplasmic; stress response/structural) and RUVBL1 (nuclear; transcriptional regulator), suggesting a transition toward transcriptional regulation and structural stabilization following CB2R activation. Collectively, these findings indicate that HIV infection primarily affects cytoplasmic and membrane-associated inflammatory and metabolic pathways, whereas JWH-133 treatment modulates nuclear and regulatory proteins, contributing to cellular protection and homeostatic balance.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
Approximately 40.8 million people were living with HIV worldwide in 2024. Even though new infections have decreased by 61% since the peak in 1996, comorbidities such as HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) remain prevalent in approximately 50% of people with HIV (PWH) receiving combined antiretroviral therapy (cART). HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND) encompass a spectrum of cognitive dysfunction that ranges from asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment (ANI) to mild neurocognitive disorder (MND) and HIV-associated dementia (HAD). These neuropathological manifestations impact episodic and working memory, attention/concentration, executive functioning, language processing, and visuospatial/perceptual–motor skills. As the severity progresses, deficits extend to impairments in activities of daily living. Behavioral changes, confusion, depression, anxiety, and movement disorders are some of the symptoms of HAND. HAND are characterized by neurodegeneration that is triggered by early HIV infection of the brain and chronic inflammation due to continuous low-level viral replication.
The HIV-1 replication cycle in immune cells is classically divided into two distinct phases: the early (pre-integration) and late (post-integration) stages. The early phase involves molecular events initiating with virion attachment to host cell surface receptors, primarily CD4 and co-receptors such as CCR5 or CXCR4, followed by membrane fusion and viral entry. Subsequent steps include the reverse transcription of the single-stranded viral RNA genome into double-stranded DNA via the viral reverse transcriptase, disassembly of the viral capsid (uncoating), translocation of the pre-integration complex into the nucleus, and integration of the proviral DNA into the host chromatin, mediated by the viral integrase enzyme.
The late phase consists of proviral transcription and culminates in the production of infectious progeny virions. This includes the transcription of integrated proviral DNA by host RNA polymerase II, nuclear export of spliced and unspliced viral transcripts, and translation of these RNAs into structural (Gag, Gag-Pol), envelope (Env), and regulatory/accessory proteins. The Gag and Gag-Pol polyproteins, along with Env glycoproteins, are trafficked to the plasma membrane, where virion assembly occurs. Genomic RNA is selectively packaged into assembling particles via Gag-mediated encapsulation. Env incorporation and membrane curvature lead to the budding of immature virions, which subsequently undergo protease-mediated maturation to yield infectious HIV-1 particles. However, HIV-1 replication in macrophage reservoirs is mostly initiated and sustained by R5-tropic viral strains, as X4-tropic strains promote the depletion of macrophages. HIV-infected myeloid cells and T cells enter the CNS during HIV infection and become a source of viral replication in the brain. These cells, including resident HIV-infected microglia, can secrete viral proteins or cellular toxins that can affect the neurons, causing toxicity. One of the secreted proteins by macrophages and microglia is cathepsin B (CATB), a lysosomal enzyme that can induce neurotoxicity and inflammation.
Our group has previously reported increased secretion and neurotoxicity by HIV-infected macrophages in culture, which can both be reduced by exposure to cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB2R) agonist JWH-133. In addition, we demonstrated that CB2R activation decreases HIV-1 replication, supporting several studies. At the intracellular level, HIV-infected macrophages treated with JWH-133 downregulated the expression of CATB and proteins associated with NF-κB signaling, the Nrf2-mediated oxidative stress response, and lysosomal exocytosis. Cannabinoid receptor-2 has shown therapeutic potential as a target against HAND and other CNS disorders, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson’s disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS), Huntington’s disease (HD), neuropathic pain, and migraine. In this study, we hypothesized that the secretome of JWH-133-exposed HIV-infected macrophages contained protective factors against infection, inflammation, and neurotoxicity. We first identified the proteins present in the secretome from monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) infected with HIV-1 and exposed to the CB2R agonist compared to controls by LC MS/MS. Thereafter, we applied TMT quantitative proteomics and found that CB2R activation by JWH-133 reduced the secretion of inflammatory proteins including CATB and proteins related to HIV replication, while it stimulated the secretion of proteins involved in cell metabolism, which are beneficial for cell protection in HIV-MDM. Therefore, CB2R agonists could benefit the surrounding cells and tissues, making them potential supplements to antiretroviral therapy.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: .
Data Availability Statement
Most of the data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article. All proteomics raw datasets generated in the current study have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE, a partner repository, with the following dataset identifier: Project Name: Cannabinoid Receptor Type 2 Agonist JWH-133 Stimulates Antiviral Factors and Decreases Proviral, Inflammatory, and Neurotoxic Proteins in HIV-Infected Macrophage Secretome; Project accession: PXD069890; Project DOI: 10.6019/PXD069890.