PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Permanent cell line cell; Cell culture
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: adenosine diphosphoribosyl (ADP-ribosyl) modified residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Parg inhibitor; Dna replication; Adp-ribosylation dda; Ethcd; Hgsoc; Replication stress; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
A subset of cancer cells are intrinsically sensitive to inhibitors targeting PARG, the poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase that degrades PAR chains. Sensitivity is accompanied by persistent DNA replication stress, and can be induced by inhibition of TIMELESS, a replisome accelerator. However, the nature of the oncogenic vulnerability responsible for intrinsic sensitivity remains undetermined. To understand PARG activity dependency, we analyzed Timeless model systems and intrinsically sensitive ovarian cancer cells. We show that nucleoside supplementation rescues all phenotypes associated with PARG inhibitor sensitivity, including replisome speed and fork-restart ability, S-phase completion and mitotic entry, proliferation dynamics and clonogenic potential, in both a TIMELESShaploinsufficient model and intrinsically sensitive cells. Importantly nucleoside supplementation restores PARG inhibitor resistance without reverting PAR chain accumulation, indicating that sensitivity correlates with PAR chain intolerance. We show that inhibition of thymidylate synthase, an enzyme required for dNTP homeostasis, induces PARG-dependency, and, using label-free, quantitative proteomics, we show that PKMYT1, a negative regulator of CDK1, is overexpressed in PARG inhibitor-sensitive cells. Together, these observations suggest that PARG inhibitor sensitivity reflects an inability to control replisome speed and/or maintain helicase-polymerase coupling in response to nucleotide imbalances, in turn applying selective pressure on mitotic entry controls to maintain genome integrity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
TIMELESS haploinsufficiency induces a PARG-dependency that is rescued by nucleoside supplementation, thus mimicking intrinsic PARG inhibitor sensitivity of ovarian cancer cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cultured cells were washed 2 x with ice-cold PBS, followed by cell scraping into 2 mL ice-cold PBS per 15 cm dish. Once the lysate was collected, cells were pelleted by centrifuging at 500 g for 3 min at 4°C, with delayed deceleration. Cells were lysed with 12 mL of lysis buffer per 15 cm dish (6 M Guanidine-HCl, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5), followed by vigorously vortexing and shaking in alternating 5 s intervals for a total of 30 s. Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80oC.  ADP-ribosylated peptides were enriched for mass spectrometry as previously described (Larsen et al., 2017; Hendriks et al., 2019; Anagho et al., 2023). Briefly, lysates were thawed at room temperature, treated with 5 mM TCEP and 5 mM CAA (both Sigma Aldrich) for reduction and alkylation, and sonicated on ice for 45 s at 70% amplitude. Proteins were digested with Lys-C endopeptidase (1:400 w/w; Wako Chemicals) for 3 hr, diluted to 1.5 M guanidine-HCl with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated overnight with modified sequencing-grade Trypsin (1:400 w/w; Sigma Aldrich). Lys-C and Trypsin were inactivated with trifluoroacetic acid (final concentration 0.5% v/v) before centrifugation at high speed to remove precipitates. Peptides were purified using reverse-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) according to the manufacturer’s instructions,  eluted in 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and 5% of each sample was set aside for proteome analysis. The remaining 95% of peptides were  frozen at least overnight at -80 °C and lyophilized for 96 hr. Peptides were reconstituted in AP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 250 µM dithiothreitol) and 4.6 mg peptides aliquoted before ADPr enrichment. ADP-ribose polymers were reduced to monomeric form by overnight incubation with recombinant hPARG (a kind gift from Prof. Michael O. Höttiger) 1:10,000 w/w and gentle shaking, and precipitates removed by centrifuging at 4 °C for 30 min at 4250 × g. Peptides were incubated with GST-tagged Af1521 macrodomain beads at 100 µL dry beads per 10 mg sample and incubated in a head-over-tail mixer at 4 °C for 3 hr. Beads were washed twice with ice-cold AP buffer, twice with ice-cold PBS with 250 µM dithiothreitol, and twice with ice-cold water. ADP-ribosylated peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid and centrifuged through 0.45 µM spin filters, followed by centrifugation through 100 kDa cut-off spin filters (Vivacon). Peptides were desalted and fractionated on stage tips at high pH and eluted in 2 fractions with 10% or 15% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium hydroxide. Fractionated peptides were vacuum-dried at 60 °C and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis. ADPr mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation. Samples were analyzed on 15–20 cm analytical columns (internal diameter 75 µm), packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch) connected to a nanoscale EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted from the analytical column heated to 40 °C in a column oven, with a gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). For high pH fractions, the primary gradient ranged from 3–38% buffer B over 38 min, then an increase to 90% buffer B over 2 min, constant 90% buffer B for 4 min, decrease to 5% buffer B over 3 min, and 5% buffer B for 3 min. Electrospray ionization was achieved using a NanoSpray Flex NG ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific; spray voltage 2 kV, capillary temperature  275 °C, radio frequency level 40%). Full scans were performed at 120,000 resolution, with a scan range of 300–1750 m/z and maximum injection time at auto. The normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target was 50. Precursor isolation was performed at a width of 1.3 m/z, normalized AGC target of “400”, and fragmentation using electron transfer disassociation with supplemental higher-collisional disassociation with a normalized collision energy of 20. Top 3 precursors with charge state 3–5 were isolated for MS/MS analysis, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with a maximum precursor injection time of 1000 ms and at 60,000 scan resolution.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw mass spectrometry data was analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.30 with default settings unless indicated. The maximum missed cleavages was set to 6. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and ADP-ribosylation on cysteine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid, histidine, lysine, arginine, serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were set as variable modifications  . The maximum number of modifications per peptide was set to 5. Label-free quantification (LFQ) by fast LFQ was enabled (Cox et al., 2014) and normalization type set to none. Match between runs was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window of 20 min. After MaxQuant processing, data were manually filtered with Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016) (MaxQuant) and Microsoft Excel to properly identify and localize ADP-ribosylation sites as follows: peptide-spectrum matches with more than one ADPr modification were excluded, and only ADPr site assignments with localization probability above 0.9 were included for site identification and above 0.75 for quantification. Because default MaxQuant intensity assignments to modification sites also include intensities from unlocalized or poorly localized evidence, intensity values were manually mapped from the evidence.txt to the sites table based on localized peptide-spectrum matches only.