PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: complex glycosylation
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Mucin; Glycoproteomics; O-glycosylation; Glycosylation; N-glycosylation

ABSTRACT:
Protein glycosylation is a complex post-translational modification that is generally classified as N- or O-linked. Site-specific analysis of glycopeptides is accomplished with a variety of fragmentation methods, depending on the type of glycosylation being investigated and the instrumentation available. For instance, collisional dissociation methods are frequently used for N-glycoproteomic analysis with the assumption that one N-sequon exists per tryptic peptide. Alternatively, electron-based methods are indispensable for O-glycosite localization. However, the presence of simultaneously N- and O-glycosylated peptides could suggest the necessity of electron-based fragmentation methods for N-glycoproteomics, which is not commonly performed. Thus, we quantified the prevalence of N- and O-glycopeptides in mucins and other glycoproteins. A much higher frequency of co-occupancy within mucins was detected whereas only a negligible occurrence occurred within non-mucin glycoproteins. This was demonstrated from analyses of recombinant and/or purified proteins, as well as more complex samples. Where co-occupancy occurred, O-glycosites were frequently localized to the Ser/Thr within the N-sequon. Additionally, we found that O-glycans in close proximity to the occupied Asn were predominantly unelaborated core 1 structures, while those further away were more extended. Overall, we demonstrate electron-based methods are required for robust site-specific analysis of mucins, wherein co-occupancy is more prevalent. Conversely, collisional methods are generally sufficient for analyses of other types of glycoproteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Quantification and site-specific analysis of co-occupied N- and O-glycopeptides

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
All reactions were quenched with 200 µL of 0.5% formic acid prior to desalting. Desalting was performed using 10 mg Strata-X 33 µm polymeric reversed phase SPE columns (Phenomenex, 8B-S100-AAK). Each column was activated with 1000 µL ACN followed by 1000 µL of 0.1% formic acid, and 1000 µL of 40% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. The column was equilibrated with 1000 µL of 0.1% formic acid. After equilibration, the samples were vortexed, centrifuged, and added to the column. The sample tube was rinsed with 200 µL of 0.1% formic acid, vortexed, and centrifuged then added to the column. The column was additionally rinsed with 200 µL of 0.1% formic acid. The columns were then transferred to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and glycopeptides were eluted by twice with 150 µL of 0.1% formic acid in 40% ACN each time. The eluent was collected into one Eppendorf tube and dried using a vacuum concentrator (LabConco) prior to reconstitution in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each analysis, 2 to 4 µL was injected onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 column packed with 2 cm of 5 µm C18 material (Thermo Fisher, 164564) using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A). Peptides were then separated on a 15 cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray C18 column packed with 2 µm C18 material (Thermo Fisher, ES904) using a gradient from 0-35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid with 80% acetonitrile) in 60 minutes. Full scan MS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 60,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e5, and a mass range from 300 to 1500 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 7 s, and exclusion duration of 7 s. Only charge states 2 to 6 were selected for fragmentation. MS2s were generated at top speed for 3 s. HCD was performed on all selected precursor masses with the following parameters: isolation window of 2 m/z, 30% normalized collision energy, orbitrap detection (resolution of 7,500), maximum inject time of 50 ms, and a standard AGC target. An additional ETD fragmentation of the same precursor was triggered if 1) 3 of 8 HexNAc or NeuAc fingerprint ions (126.055, 138.055, 144.07, 168.065, 186.076, 204.086, 274.092, and 292.103) were present at ± 0.1 m/z and greater than 5% relative intensity, 2) the precursors were present at a sufficient abundance for localization using ETD. If the precursor was between 300-850 m/z and over 3e4 intensity, an ETD scan was triggered and read out using the ion trap at a normal scan rate. For precursors between 850-1500 m/z with an intensity greater than 1e5, supplemental activation (EThcD) was also applied at 15% nCE and read out in the Orbitrap at 7500 resolution. Both used charge-calibrated ETD reaction times, 150 ms maximum injection time, and 200% standard injection targets.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files were searched using Byonic against directed databases containing the relevant protein sequence or proteome. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for MS1’s and 20 ppm for MS2’s. For EndoH and EndoF2-treated samples, carbamidomethyl Cys was set as a fixed modification and N1 and N1F1 were added as rare N-glycan modifications. Asn deamidation was added as a variable modification for PNGaseF-treated samples. For most samples, we used the default O-glycan database containing 9 common structures without H1N1A3 and N2. For analysis of mucin-domain glycoproteins, three glycans were allowed as a common modification while 2 glycans were allowed as a common modification for analysis of glycoproteins. H2N2 was added as an additional O-glycan structure in all searches. For analysis of podocalyxin, NeuGc structures (H1N1G1, H1N1G2, and H1N1A1G1) were included. Files generated using an O-glycoprotease and additional GluC or trypsin digestion were searched with fully specific cleavage N-terminal to Ser and Thr and C-terminal to Arg and Lys and 6 allowed missed cleavages. Samples treated with only GluC and/or trypsin were searched with fully specific cleavage C-terminal to Arg or Lys and 2 missed cleavages. The results were filtered to a score of >200. All glycopeptide identities were manually validated using Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Protein glycosylation is a complex post-translational modification that is generally classified as N- or O-linked. Site-specific analysis of glycopeptides is accomplished with a variety of fragmentation methods, depending on the type of glycosylation being investigated and the instrumentation available. For instance, collisional dissociation methods are frequently used for N-glycoproteomic analysis with the assumption that one N-sequon exists per tryptic peptide. Alternatively, electron-based methods are preferable for O-glycosite localization. However, the presence of simultaneously N- and O-glycosylated peptides could suggest the necessity of electron-based fragmentation methods for N-glycoproteomics, which is not commonly performed. Thus, we quantified the prevalence of N- and O-glycopeptides in mucins and other glycoproteins. A much higher frequency of co-occupancy within mucins was detected whereas only a negligible occurrence occurred within nonmucin glycoproteins. This was demonstrated from analyses of recombinant and/or purified proteins, as well as more complex samples. Where co-occupancy occurred, O-glycosites were frequently localized to the Ser/Thr within the N-sequon. Additionally, we found that O-glycans in close proximity to the occupied Asn were predominantly unelaborated core 1 structures, while those further away were more extended. Overall, we demonstrate electron-based methods are required for robust site-specific analysis of mucins, wherein co-occupancy is more prevalent. Conversely, collisional methods are generally sufficient for analyses of other types of glycoproteins.