PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture; Fibroblast
diseases: Malignant neoplasm of ovary; Disease free
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; timsTOF Ultra
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification; SILAC
keywords: Aneuploidy; Quantitative proteomics; Protein turnover; Dia; Drug resistance; Multiplex-dia; Pulse silac

ABSTRACT:
Measuring protein turnover is essential for understanding cellular biological processes and advancing drug discovery. The multiplex-DIA mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) approach, combined with dynamic SILAC labeling (pulse-SILAC, or pSILAC), has proven to be a reliable method for analyzing protein turnover and degradation kinetics. Previous multiplex-DIA-MS workflows have employed various strategies, including leveraging the highest isotopic labeling channels of peptides to enhance the detection of isotopic MS signal pairs or clusters. In this study, we introduce an improved workflow that integrates a novel machine learning strategy and channel-specific statistical filtering, enabling dynamic adaptation to systematic variations in channel ratios throughout pSILAC and SILAC experiments. These functions were evaluated to significantly improve both the comprehensiveness and accuracy of protein turnover profiling. In addition, we developed Our integrative workflow was benchmarked on both 2-channel and 3-channel standard DIA datasets and across two mass spectrometry platforms, demonstrating its broad applicability. Applying this workflow to an aneuploid cancer cell model before and after developing cisplatin resistance, we discovered a remarkable negative correlation between transcript regulation and protein degradation for major protein complex subunits elucidating the proteome buffering mechanism in genome aneuploidy.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A Robust Multiplex-DIA Workflow Profiles Protein Turnover Regulations Associated with Cisplatin Resistance and Aneuploidy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample sets Fibroblast pSILAC sample set (2-channel pSILAC). The skin fibroblast cell lines were purchased from the Coriell Institute for Medical Research. The two cell lines are referred as cell line #54 and cell line #55 in the current manuscript, respectively. The cells were cultured at 37 ℃, and humidified 5% CO2 in complete MEM medium supplemented with L-glutamine, 15% fetal bovine serum, and penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were seeded on 6-well dishes in a complete growth medium at a density of 15,000 cells per cm2, and after 24 hours, the cells were washed and subjected to pulse SILAC labeling for 1, 4, 8, 12, and 24 hours. The SILAC MEM medium was supplemented with 15% of dialyzed FBS, penicillin-streptomycin, L-proline (200 mg/L), and 13C615N4-Arg and 13C615N2-Lys. The dishes were washed with PBS, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and the cells were scraped into 100 µL of cell lysis buffer containing 10 M urea/ 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail and the Halt phosphatase inhibitors. The collected samples were snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C before further processing. Parental and cisplatin-resistant A2780 cell sample set (2-channel pSILAC). The A2780 (parental cell line) and A2780Cis (cisplatin-resistant cell line) were cultured in the RPMI media supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 10% FBS, and penicillin-streptomycin. Additionally, the A2780Cis cell line was cultured in the presence of 1 µM cisplatin. After switching to SILAC heavy medium (13C615N4-Arg and 13C615N2-Lys) 17, both cell lines were harvested in a triplicate experiment at 1, 4, 8, and 12 hours of labeling. Additionally, a triplicate sample was harvested at time point 0 to analyze the total proteomes. The dishes were washed with PBS, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and the cells were scraped into 200 µL of cell lysis buffer containing 10 M urea/ 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate cOmplete™ protease inhibitor cocktail and the Halt phosphatase inhibitors. The collected samples were snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C before further processing.  Protein extraction and digestion Cell pellets in lysis buffer (the above two 2-channel pSILAC sample sets) were thawed and sonicated at 4°C for 1 minute twice using a VialTweeter device (Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) 13. Afterward, the samples were centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 1 hour to separate insoluble materials. Protein concentrations in the resulting supernatant were measured using the Bio-Rad protein assay. Each protein sample was diluted to a final concentration of 2 μg/μl, reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 1 hour, and alkylated with 20 mM IAA in the dark at room temperature for 1 hour. Reduced and alkylated proteins underwent precipitation-based digestion (for parental and cisplatin-resistant A2780 cell sample set) or in-solution digestion  (for fibroblast pSILAC sample set), with respective protocols described previously 13, 23. For the precipitation-based digestion, five volumes of a cold precipitation solution (50% acetone, 50% ethanol, and 0.1% acetic acid) were added to the protein mixture, and the samples were stored at −20°C overnight. The precipitated proteins were collected by centrifugation at 20,000 × g for 40 minutes, washed with cold 100% acetone, and centrifuged again under the same conditions. Following acetone removal, residual acetone was evaporated in a SpeedVac. The proteins were then digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing-grade porcine trypsin at a 1:20 enzyme-to-substrate ratio in 300 μl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. For the in-solution digestion, the protein samples were diluted five times with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate prior to the addition of trypsin in 1:20 enzyme-to-substrate ratio. The final peptide mixture was acidified with formic acid and desalted using C18 columns (MarocoSpin Columns, NEST Group INC.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide yield was quantified using a Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Label-free DIA-MS data analysis. The label-free data analysis was performed in Spectronaut v19 using directDIA+ 26 by searching against the human SwissProt sequence database (N = 20,399 entries, downloaded in September 2022) and the default Spectronaut settings 29. Briefly, the Trypsin/P was used as a cleavage rule with up to 2 missed cleavages; “Carbamidomethyl(C)” was set as a fixed modification, and “Acetyl (Protein N-term)” and “Oxidation(M)” were set as variable modifications; Top3-6 Best N Fragments per peptide were enabled. The precursor Q-value and the experiment-wide protein Q-value were set to 0.01, and the run-wise protein Q-value was set to 0.05. The quantification was performed on the MS2 level, and the cross-run normalization was enabled. The peptide and protein quantification were performed using max Top 3 precursors and max Top 3 stripped peptide sequences, respectively. The “Minimum Log2 Precursor Quantity” was set to 3.   Multiplex-DIA data analysis using the “Labeled workflow” (LBL). The multiplex-DIA data analysis was performed in Spectronaut v19 using the library-free “Labeled” workflow. The analysis was performed using directDIA+ against a human SwissProt sequence database (N = 20,399 entries, downloaded in September 2022) using the default settings with modifications as described below. The search parameters were kept the same in all datasets across MS platforms. In the Pulsar Search: the Trypsin/P was used as a cleavage rule with up to 2 missed cleavages; the labeling was set to two channels with no labels specified in Channel 1 and “Arg10” and “Lys8” specified in Channel 2; “Carbamidomethyl(C)” was set as a fixed modification, and “Acetyl(Protein N-term)” and “Oxidation(M)” were set as variable modifications; in the Workflow tab, the “In-Silico Generate Missing Channels” option was enabled with “label” as a Workflow; in the Result Filters tab, Top3-6 Best N Fragments per Peptide were used, and the “Overlapping between Channels” was enabled to exclude fragments shared between channels for the accurate estimation of channel-specific FDR.  In the DIA Analysis: in the Identification tab, the precursor Q-value and the experiment-wide protein Q-value were set to 0.01, the run-wise protein Q-value was set to 0.05; in the Quantification tab, the Multi-Channel Q-value filter was either set to “Group Q-value”, “Max Q-value”, or “Min Q-value” to evaluate channel-specific Q-value filtering options. The quantification was performed on MS2 level, and the cross-run normalization was enabled. The “Exclude All Multi-Channel Interferences” option was enabled. The peptide and protein quantification were performed using max Top 3 precursors and Top 3 stripped peptide sequences, respectively. The “Minimum Log2 Precursor Quantity” was set to 3. In the Workflow tab, the “Multi-Channel Workflow Definition” was set to “Labeled”. Multiplex-DIA data analysis using the “Inverted Spike-In” workflow (ISW). For the “Inverted Spike-In analysis, the “Multi-Channel Workflow Definition” was set to “Spike-In”, and both “Inverted” and “Reference-based Identification” were enabled in Spectronaut v19. Other parameters were kept as described in the section above. Multiplex-DIA-MS data analysis using DIA-NN. To benchmark the multiplex-DIA-MS analysis in Spectronaut, we additionally analyzed the data using DIA-NN (version 1.9) 21 using the plexDIA recommended workflow 7 and largely followed the parameters used previously to analyze the 3-channel HeLa standard sample experiment 22. A predicted spectral library was generated using the default settings from the same FASTA file used for Spectronaut searches and the same fixed and variable modifications. For the raw data analysis, the default settings were used, along with additional commands necessary to analyze a plexDIA experiment (https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN). Specifically, the SILAC channels were registered, depending on the 2- or 3-channel experiment, corresponding to Lysine and Arginine mass shifts: Lys (+4.025107 Da), Lys8 (+8.014199 Da), Arg6 (+6.020129 Da), Arg10 (+10.008269 Da). Retention time translation between peptides within the same elution group was enabled. Both the first 13C-isotopic and monoisotopic peaks were included for quantification, with MS1 deconvolution level set to 2. Peptide lengths ranged from 7 to 30 amino acids, precursor charge states ranged from 1 to 4, and the precursor mass-to-charge (m/z) range was set between 300 and 1800, with fragment ion m/z range from 200 to 1800. The precursor false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Precursor matrix output tables were filtered for FDR < 0.01, as well as for channel-specific (--matrix-ch-qvalue). The match-between-runs (MBR) function in DIA-NN was enabled. The precursor-level matrices were used for the downstream analyses (“report.pr_matrix_channels.tsv”).