PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11b
diseases: B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; methylthiolated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Leukemia; Patient-derived xenograft; Mixed lineage leukemia; Target; B cell; Immunotherapy; Pdx; Biotinylation; Bcp-all; Surfaceome

ABSTRACT:
B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL) is caused by abnormal expansion of immature B cells. Genetic alterations can be identified in most of the BCP-ALL cases, however, some specific lesions including rearrangements of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene encoding lysine methyltransferase 2A (KMT2A) are associated with particularly poor prognosis. This MLL-rearranged subtype of leukemia poorly responds to conventional treatment and frequently undergoes a lymphoid-to-myeloid lineage switch in response to CD19-directed immunotherapy with consequent loss of B cell-specific targets for immunotherapy. Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify new targets for treatment of relapsed/refractory MLLr-BCP-ALL. Attractive targets may be found in a cell surfaceome, as membrane proteins are often expressed abnormally on cancer cells and are more accessible for therapeutics. Membrane proteins also play key roles in mediating external signaling and interactions with the microenvironment, thus being essential for cancer cell survival. RNA-based data may not always correlate with plasma membrane protein levels. Therefore, we performed the analysis of the BCP-ALL cell surfaceome by biotin labeling of plasma membrane proteins followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This method requires high cell input and therefore was previously applied mainly to cell lines. However, the cell lines often do not fully represent primary samples due to genetic modifications and culture conditions. We have optimized the protocol of plasma membrane protein isolation and LC-MS/MS identification of patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) BCP-ALL cells. We confirmed the LC-MS/MS results by flow cytometry. Additionally, we compared the surfaceomes of PDXs BCP-ALL cells with BCP-ALL cell lines. We profiled six BCP-ALL PDXs and one cell line SEM, all with MLL translocations. In BCP-ALL PDXs we identified 1409 membrane-associated proteins, 945 of which were present in at least 3 samples. Tissue specificity analysis demonstrated that 93 of these proteins are specific for lymphoid cells, including already reported promising immunotherapeutic targets CD19, CD22, CD38, CD70, CD72, CD79A, and CD79B. The expression of selected proteins was confirmed by flow cytometry and compared to the expression on B-ALL cell lines with MLL translocation. Moreover, we identified an additional subset of proteins with potential therapeutic significance, including CD48, IL7R, ITGB7, LAIR1, LILRB1. Importantly, we observed profound differences between surfaceomes of BCP-ALL cell lines and PDX cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Optimized Method for Cell Surface Protein Identification on Primary B-Cell Precursor Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cryopreserved MLLr BCP-ALL PDX were thawed and injected intravenously to 4-8 weeks old NSG mice (Charles River Laboratories) via tail vein injections (2.0 –5.0 × 106 cells/mouse). The whole blood staining with anti‐mCD45 (clone 30-F11, eBioscience, Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 17-0451-82), anti‐hCD45 (clone HI30, eBioscience, Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 12-0459-42), anti‐hCD19 (clone HIB19, eBioscience, Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 11-0199-42) antibodies was performed to evaluate the engraftment of leukemic cells by flow cytometry. The mice were humanely killed when percentage of human blasts in peripheral blood reached around 100% when compared to mouse CD45+ cells. B-ALL PDX cells were isolated from spleens of leukemic mice and subjected to further processing ex vivo. Prior to the cell surface protein labeling of B-ALL PDX cells, red blood cell lysis was performed using ACK Lysing Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. A1049201). Prior the biotinylation procedure, the percentage of human cells was determined in each PDX by flow cytometry (human CD45+ and human CD19+ cells among murine CD45+ cells). The samples used in the further steps of the protocol consisted of at least 90% human cells. Next, 90 × 106 cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS followed by incubation with 0,5 mg/ml EZ-Link™ Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 21335) in ice-cold PBS on a rocking platform for 2h at 4°C. The cells used as non-biotinylated controls were incubated in the same conditions with PBS only. The cells were then centrifuged at 300 × g for 5 minutes, and the pellet was resuspended in 100 mM glycine solution. Next, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and pelleted by centrifugation. The cells were lysed using the Lysis buffer (2% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol in PBS) containing EDTA free protease inhibitors (Roche, cat. no. 04693159001) for 30 minutes on ice with intermittent vortexing. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 2 minutes at 4°C, the clarified supernatant was transferred to a new tube and the BCA test was performed to determine protein concentration in the samples. The clarified supernatant was used for purification of biotinylated proteins on NeutrAvidin Agarose resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 29201). Before use, 75 µl of NeutrAvidin Agarose resin was washed twice with the Lysis buffer. The clarified supernatant containing 300 µg of protein was added to the resin and incubated on a rocking platform for 2h at RT. Unbound proteins were removed by centrifugation for 1 minute at 1000 × g and repetitive washing: 3 times with 800µL of Lysis Buffer, then 5 times with 800 µL of Wash Buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 in high-grade ultrapure H2O), then 5 times with 800 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in in high-grade ultrapure H2O. Next, the NeutrAvidin Agarose resin was suspended in 50 µL of ABC buffer. Before on-bead digestion, cysteines were reduced by 1 h incubation with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 60°C followed by 15 min incubation at a room temperature with 20 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). On-bead digestion was performed overnight at 37°C with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega, cat. no. V5111). Peptide solutions were transferred to the new tubes and the resin was further rinsed with 50 µl of ABC buffer. Pulled eluates were dried in SpeedVac and reconstituted in 20 µl of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water by 15 min sonication. Peptides were cleaned from the detergents using a modified single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol [10.1038/s41596-018-0082-x]. Peptides were dried in SpeedVac and resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1% TFA in water. Samples were analyzed using LC-MS system composed of Evosep One (Evosep Biosystems) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 20 µl of each sample was loaded onto Evotips C18 trap columns (Evosep Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Chromatography was performed using the 88 min (15 samples per day) method on the EV1106 analytical column (Dr Maisch C18 AQ, 1.9 µm beads, 150 µm ID, 15 cm long, Evosep Biosystems) with a flow rate of 220 nl/min. Data was acquired in a positive mode data-dependent manner and up to 40 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation. MS1 resolution was set at 60000 with a normalized AGC target of 300%, an Auto maximum inject time, and a scan range of 300 to 1600 m/z. For MS2, a resolution was set at 15000 with a Standard normalized AGC target and an Auto maximum inject time. Dynamic exclusion was set at 20 s with an allowed mass tolerance of ±10 ppm and the precursor intensity threshold at 5e3. Precursors within 1.6 m/z window were fragmented in HCD mode with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The spray voltage was set to 2.1 kV, the funnel RF level at 40, and the heated capillary temperature at 275 °C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (version 2.1.1) using canonical Homo sapiens database derived from Swissprot (version 2021_01, 20396 sequences) with fixed modification – Methylthio (C) and variable modification – Oxidation (M), enzyme – Trypsin and 2 missed cleavages. LFQ quantification was performed with classic normalization. Further analysis was performed in Perseus (version 1.6.15). Potential contaminants, proteins from the reverse database and identified only by site were removed. At least 2 valid values in at least one group  were required to a protein to be considered identified and pass for further analysis stages. Proteins described in Gene Ontology: Cellular Component with selected group of membrane-related terms (GO:0031012 “extracellular matrix”, GO:0005886 ”plasma membrane”, GO:0005576 “extracellular region”, GO:0005615 “extracellular space”, GO:0009986 “cell surface”, GO:0070062 “extracellular exosome”) were marked in categorical column (is_membrane). For each PDX, missing value replacement from normal distribution and t-test with permutation-based FDR was performed to find proteins significantly enriched relative to controls (non-biotinylated counterparts), with q-value threshold of 0.05. Proteins absent in non-biotinylated controls but present in at least 2 out of 4 biotinylated replicates were treated separately in categorical terms. For the following protein selection, the list of proteins identified in biotinylated samples only and the list of proteins observed to be significantly enriched in biotinylated samples compared to non-biotinylated controls were combined. From this group, 1409 proteins were selected as membrane-associated according to the UniProt database. Next, 935 membrane-associated proteins were identified as present in a minimum of 3 out of 6 analyzed PDX.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell surface protein labeling
PDX generation is described in the Supplementary Methods. Prior to cell surface protein labeling of B-ALL PDX cells, red blood cell lysis was performed on splenocyte suspensions using ACK Lysing Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. A1049201). The samples used for subsequent steps contained at least 90% of human cells. Next, 90 × 106 cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and incubated with 0.5 mg/ml EZ-Link™ Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 21335) in ice-cold PBS on a rocking platform for 2 h at 4 °C. Non-biotinylated control cells were incubated with PBS under the same conditions. After centrifugation at 300 × g for 5 min, the pellet was resuspended in 100 mM glycine to quench the biotinylating reaction. Next, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, pelleted, and lysed in the Lysis buffer (2% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol in PBS) containing EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Roche, cat. no. 04693159001) for 30 min on ice with intermittent vortexing. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 2 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and used for purification of biotinylated proteins on NeutrAvidin Agarose resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. no. 29201). For each PDX, the biotinylated samples for MS analysis were prepared in 4 technical replicates, while non-biotinylated control samples were prepared in duplicates. Before use, 75 µl of NeutrAvidin Agarose resin was washed twice with the Lysis buffer. The clarified supernatant containing 300 µg of protein was added to the resin and incubated on a rocking platform for 2 h at RT. Unbound proteins were removed by centrifugation for 1 min at 1000 × g and repetitive washing: 3 times with 800 µL of Lysis Buffer, then 5 times with 800 µL of Wash Buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 in high-grade ultrapure H2O), then 5 times with 800 µL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in high-grade ultrapure H2O.
CAR constructs
The cloning of CAR constructs was performed as previously described. Briefly, sequencing of two mouse anti-LILRB1 antibodies (clone HP-F1 and clone #292305) was performed by Rapid Novor (Kitchener, Ontario, Canada). Two anti-LILRB1 scFv were ordered as DNA fragments (Eurofins) encoding for the variable domains of the heavy and light chains joined by linkers. Anti-LILRB1 scFv DNAs were cloned into a vector containing a CD8 hinge, a CD8 transmembrane domain, a 41BB co-signaling, and a CD3ζ signaling domain, linked by a 2 A ribosome skipping peptide to a truncated CD34 protein to enable verification of transduction efficiency. LILRB1 CARs were expressed from a pMP71 retroviral vector. Anti-CD19 (fmc63-based) and anti-CD33 scFv-containing CAR constructs’ design was already described. Overall, both constructs hold the same structure as LILRB1 CAR with CD8 hinge, CD8 transmembrane, 41BB co-signaling, and CD3ζ signaling domains.
Animal studies testing CAR-T cells activity
All performed animal experiments complied with the EU Directive 2010/63/EU and the Polish legislation for animal experiments of the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education (February 26, 2015). The 2nd Local Ethical Committee for Experiments on Animals in Warsaw accessed the project and approved the use of animals in this study (WAW2/042/2023 and WAW2/077/2024). Pre-defined exclusion criteria were applied according to the ARRIVE guidelines. The NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA, USA) were in-house bred and maintained in a controlled specific pathogen-free animal facility with IVC systems. All experiments were performed using female mice aged 8–12 weeks. The sample size was calculated using the resource equation approach or power analysis. For the evaluation of CAR-T cells efficacy against B-ALL, each mouse was injected via tail vein with 3 × 106 RS4;11 cells stably expressing luciferase (RS4;11-luc). In vivo, bioluminescence was evaluated three days after cancer cells engraftment, and the mice were randomly allocated to control and treatment groups (5–7 mice per group). On the same day, the mice were injected via tail vein with 5.0 × 106 unmodified T cells (MOCK), CD19 CAR-T cells, or LILRB1 CAR-T cells depending on the group. The second dose of MOCK or CAR-T cells was administered on day 6 post-engaftment. The in vivo imaging was performed twice a week. For the evaluation of CAR-T cells efficacy against AML, the mice were injected via tail vein with 0.5 × 106 U937 cells stably expressing luciferase (U937-luc). In vivo bioluminescence was evaluated one day after cancer cells engraftment, and the mice were randomly allocated to control and treatment groups (6–7 mice per group). On the same day, depending on the group, the mice were injected with 5.0 × 106 MOCK T cells, CD19 CAR-T cells, or LILRB1 CAR-T cells via the tail vein. The second dose of MOCK or CAR-T cells was administered on day 4 post engraftment. No blinding was applied during the outcome assessment (analysis of bioluminescence). The in vivo imaging was performed three times per week. In both experiments, in addition to bioluminescence detection, the mice were controlled for other signs of illness, including body weight loss, ruffled fur, hind paw reflex loss, reduced movement, and lethargy. The mice were sacrificed when they reached predefined humane endpoint criteria. The organs (spleens and bone marrow) were collected and analyzed on the same day.
The detailed description of other methods is provided in Supplementary Information.

RESULTS:
Results
Cell surface proteomics of B-ALL PDX identifies LILRB1 as a putative immunotherapy target
To identify novel targets, we first optimized a method for surfaceome identification using cell surface biotinylation of B-ALL PDX cells, followed by enrichment of biotinylated proteins and quantitative MS (Fig. 1A). This proteomic approach was chosen over transcriptomic methods, as it provides direct evidence of surface protein expression, reducing the likelihood of false positive results from RNA data. We profiled six PDX samples from B-ALL patients with KMT2A rearrangements (KMT2A-r PDX) (Supplementary Table 1), a high-risk subtype often showing lineage switch or CD19 loss following CD19-targeted immunotherapy. PDX samples were analyzed in quadruplicate, alongside nonbiotinylated controls. Utilizing label-free quantification in MaxQuant followed by Perseus analysis and filtering for membrane-associated proteins in Uniprot, we identified 1409 membrane proteins (Fig. 1B). Of these, 945 proteins detected in at least three PDX samples were examined for tissue specificity using the Human Protein Atlas and the Genotype-Tissue Expression databases, revealing 93 lymphoid tissue-specific proteins. Following manual curation, we identified 18 potential CAR therapy targets (Fig. 1B, Supplementary Table 2). In particular, we discovered previously unexplored surface proteins as potential CAR targets, such as CD48, IL7R, ITGB7, LAIR1, LILRB1 (Fig. 1C). Notably, this set also included known CAR targets, such as CD19, CD22, CD38, CD70, CD72, CD79A, CD79B, and LILRB4 (Fig. 1C), thus validating our approach. Further literature review of the potential CAR targets excluded proteins expressed in granulocytes and T cells, notably selecting LILRB1, which expression is restricted to monocytes and B cells. LILRB1 was present in 5/6 PDX used for proteomic analysis (Fig. 1D), which was further confirmed by flow cytometry (Fig. 1E). In conclusion, our method identified LILRB1 as a new CAR-T target.
LILRB1 expression in normal tissues
To validate safety of LILRB1 as a CAR-T target, we first analyzed its expression in normal tissues and across multiple organs using a single-cell human cell atlas from the Tabula Sapiens Consortium. Consistent with previous analyses in the Human Protein Atlas and the Genotype-Tissue Expression databases, LILRB1 expression was detected by single-cell RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) in lymphoid tissues such as bone marrow, spleen, blood, and additionally in lungs and liver (Fig. 2A, left panel). However, the detailed analysis revealed LILRB1 expression exclusively in the immune cell compartment (Fig. 2A, middle panel), primarily in various subpopulations of monocytes, macrophages, and B cells, and the lack of expression in major subpopulations of T cells or hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) (Fig. 2A, right panel, Supplementary Fig. 1). Notably, the LILRB1 expression in the lungs and liver exclusively stemmed from tissue-resident macrophages and monocytes (Supplementary Table 3). We subsequently confirmed LILRB1 protein presence on healthy donors’ peripheral blood leukocytes, demonstrating the highest expression levels in monocytes and B cells, with much lower expression in NK cells and T cells (Fig. 2B left panel, Supplementary Fig. 2), similarly to already available data. Primary macrophages differentiated in vitro from human peripheral blood monocytes displayed high LILRB1 surface levels (Fig. 2B, right panel). Following transcriptomic data, low LILRB1 protein levels were observed in HSC (CD19−CD33−CD34+CD38−) and lineage-restricted progenitors (CD19−CD33−CD34+CD38+) from two different sources, namely normal regenerating bone marrow and stem cell apheresis. On average, not more than 10% of HSC and lineage-restricted progenitors expressed LILRB1 (Fig. 2C), suggesting that LILRB1 CAR-T cells and LILRB1-targeted therapy will not ablate normal human hematopoiesis. Given that LILRB1 surface expression in T cells potentially poses a risk of fratricide killing in CAR-T cell manufacturing, we evaluated LILRB1 levels in human T cells activated by CD3/CD28 stimulation. LILRB1 expression was higher in CD8+ than in CD4+ T cells, decreasing upon stimulation (Fig. 2D). Furthermore, LILRB1 expression remained low and roughly unchanged in CD19 CAR-T cells upon their contact with CD19-positive target cells (Fig. 2E). The pattern of LILRB1 expression was consistent across various CD8+ CAR-T cell subsets (naïve, central memory, effector memory, and terminally differentiated T cells, Supplementary Fig. 3). In summary, these analyses indicate that targeting LILRB1 with CAR-T cells is likely to eliminate B-cell and monocyte compartments only and suggest the feasibility of LILRB1 CAR-T manufacturing.
LILRB1 is expressed in B-cell-derived malignancies
To explore the utility of LILRB1 for the elimination of tumor cells, we further analyzed its mRNA expression in various pediatric B-cell malignancies from the St. Jude’s B-ALL RNA-seq dataset and lymphoma patients' microarrays data deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE31312, GSE93291, GSE93261). In all B-cell-derived malignancies, LILRB1 expression was lower than that of other B-cell-specific markers such as CD19 and CD22 but higher than CD33 (negative control) (Fig. 3A, B). Subsequently, we evaluated LILRB1 surface protein levels in B-ALL PDX. Notably, LILRB1 was expressed in 24/26 tested PDX samples representing high-risk B-ALL subtypes including KMT2A-r, BCR-ABL1, BCR-ABL1-like and hypodiploid, with typically moderate but uniform expression levels across cell population (Fig. 3C). Additionally, we assessed LILRB1 protein levels in freshly isolated primary samples at diagnosis and relapse in pediatric and adult patients with various B-cell malignancies. In the pediatric cohort, we observed moderate expression in most diagnostic and relapsed B-ALL cells (Fig. 3D, Supplementary Table 4). In adult patients, the prominent expression of LILRB1 was found in most B-ALL and various B-NHL malignant cells (Fig. 3E, Supplementary Table 5). These findings underscore the substantial expression of LILRB1 across various B-cell malignancies, emphasizing its potential as a viable target for immunotherapy.
LILRB1 is stably expressed in malignant B-cells resistant to previous lines of immunotherapy
Antigen escape or downregulation are established mechanisms of resistance to various immunotherapies. Therefore, we utilized models resistant to previous lines of immunotherapy in B-NHL cell lines that were LILRB1-positive (surprisingly, LILRB1 was expressed only in 2 out of 8 analyzed B-ALL cell lines and 4 out of 6 B-NHL cell lines) (Supplementary Fig. 4A, B). In lymphoma models resistant to rituximab (RTX), an anti-CD20 antibody, LILRB1 levels tended to increase, while CD20 was downregulated, and CD22 and CD19 remained largely unchanged (Fig. 4A). We also assessed the level of selected markers in in vitro-generated lymphoma Raji cells resistant to CD19 CAR-T cells. We observed a loss of CD19 expression accompanied by only partial downregulation of CD22, CD20, and LILRB1 (Fig. 4B). In RNA-seq data from B-ALL patients who lost surface CD19 following CD19 CAR-T therapy, post-therapy samples showed increased LILRB1 mRNA levels, while CD22 and MS4A1 (codes for CD20) levels were reduced (Fig. 4C). Although CD19 transcript levels also slightly increased (Fig. 4C), they corresponded to transcripts encoding truncated, nonfunctional CD19 as reported by Orlando et al.. Next, in the retrospective analysis comparing B-ALL paired samples (before/after anti-CD19 immunotherapy), we observed loss or significant CD19 downregulation in blasts isolated from 16 patients (Supplementary Fig. 4C). Furthermore, in 10/16 cases, CD22 exhibited a concurrent decrease alongside CD19, while CD20 levels were either low or absent in most cases, already prior to immunotherapy (Supplementary Fig. 4C), demonstrating the disadvantages of these targets for next-line treatments. Notably, in our cohort of 16 patients, one patient with CD19-negative relapse after CD19 CAR-T cell therapy was examined for LILRB1 expression and demonstrated a robust increase in LILRB1 levels (Fig. 4D). Furthermore, we analyzed a sample from a patient who relapsed after blinatumomab treatment and displayed a mixed CD19−/+ phenotype. Importantly, in this sample robust LILRB1 expression was detected, with stable levels even in the CD19-negative subpopulation of leukemic cells (Fig. 4E). Altogether, these findings further reinforce the critical necessity for the identification of non-B-cell-specific targets to serve as substitutes in patients experiencing CD19-negative relapses and support LILRB1 CAR-T cells as a valid next-line treatment.
Development of LILRB1-directed CAR-T cells
To generate LILRB1 CAR-T cells and select LILRB1-specific single-chain variable fragments (scFv), we screened various clones of murine anti-LILRB1 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) in B-ALL cell lines exhibiting various levels of LILRB1, ultimately choosing two clones: HP-F1 and #292305 (Supplementary Fig. 5A). We utilized de novo antibody sequencing via LC-MS/MS to derive the antibodies variable domains. They were subsequently used to design the antigen-binding domains, the single-chain variable fragments (scFv), which were then integrated into a second-generation CAR backbone (CD8 hinge, CD8 transmembrane domain, 4-1BB-CD3z signaling), linked by 2 A ribosome-skipping peptide to a truncated CD34 protein, enabling transduced cells’ detection. The resulting CARs derived from HP-F1 and #292305 antibody clones were designated as constructs 2115 and 2116, respectively (Fig. 5A). Primary T cells from healthy donors were transduced with these CAR constructs, and the CD34 signal was observed in 70–90% of T cells, indicating robust transduction efficiency (Fig. 5B, left panel). Similarly, sufficient transduction efficiency and CAR expression were detected in CD19 CAR-T cells, as proved by high levels of murine antigen-binding fragment (Fig. 5B, right panel).
LILRB1 CAR-T cells exhibit activity against leukemia and lymphoma cells
We evaluated the killing potential of LILRB1 CAR-T cells generated using both 2115 and 2116 constructs. As target cells, we selected representative B-ALL (SD-1) and B-NHL (DHL-4) cell lines with the highest expression of LILRB1 among tested cells (Supplementary Fig. 4A, B). In both cell lines, 2116 LILRB1 CAR-T cells, but not 2115 LILRB1 CAR-T cells, exhibited potent killing efficacy comparable to CD19 CAR-T cells, as assessed by flow cytometry (Fig. 5C) and in bioluminescence-based killing assay (Fig. 5D). Importantly, 2116 LILRB1 CAR-T effectively killed RS4;11 B-ALL cells with moderate LILRB1 levels (Fig. 5D, Supplementary Fig. 4A, 5A). Subsequently, both 2116 LILRB1 and CD19 CAR-T cells killed B-ALL PDX cells expressing luciferase with similar efficacy, while 2115 LILRB1 CAR-T cells did not exhibit any advantage over MOCK T cells (Fig. 5E). Based on these findings, we concluded that the 2116 LILRB1 CAR construct surpassed the 2115 LILRB1 construct, warranting its selection for subsequent experiments. Hereafter, the 2116 LILRB1 CAR will be referred to as LILRB1 CAR.
LILRB1 CAR-T cells specifically kill LILRB1-expressing cells and induce potent cytokine production
To verify the specificity of LILRB1 CAR-T cells, we overexpressed LILRB1 in 697 cells (B-ALL) that were originally LILRB1-negative (Supplementary Fig. 5B). LILRB1 CAR-T cell killing activity was exclusively detected in 697 cells overexpressing LILRB1 (Fig. 6A). Furthermore, LILRB1 CAR-T cells exhibited no cytotoxic effects against LILRB1-negative B-NHL cells (Supplementary Fig. 5C) as well as non-hematologic LILRB1-negative cells, such as breast and hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines (Supplementary Fig. 5D, E). Subsequently, we compared the cytotoxic effects of LILRB1 CAR-T cells with CD19 CAR-T cells against KMT2A-r B-ALL PDX with varying LILRB1 levels. LILRB1 CAR-T cells exhibited cytotoxicity against four PDX samples (PDX#1-PDX#4), which was comparable to CD19 CAR-T cells cytotoxicity (Fig. 6B), consistent with their high LILRB1 and CD19 levels (Supplementary Fig. 5F). Conversely, lower cytotoxicity of LILRB1 CAR-T cells as compared to CD19 CAR-T cells was observed in samples PDX#5 and PDX#6 (Fig. 6B), which expressed low LILRB1 levels (Supplementary Fig. 5F). To evaluate the potential of LILRB1 CAR-T cells in targeting CD19-negative relapses, we developed CD19 knockout (CD19 KO) cell line models. Our analysis revealed that LILRB1 expression remained stable in CD19-negative cells (Supplementary Fig. 5G). While CD19 KO cells exhibited complete resistance to CD19 CAR therapy, they were effectively eliminated by LILRB1 CAR-T cells (Fig. 6C, D). Furthermore, LILRB1 CAR-T cells potently killed Raji cells resistant to CD19 CAR-T cells (Fig. 6E) that aligned with the preserved LILRB1 expression (Fig. 4B). Altogether, our findings confirm the specificity of LILRB1 CAR-T cells and demonstrate that their cytotoxicity corresponds with LILRB1 levels on target cells.
To validate the functionality of generated LILRB1 CAR-T cells, we tested their degranulation in the presence of cells expressing high LILRB1 levels (SD-1). LILRB1 CAR-T cells exhibited pronounced degranulation, comparable to CD19 CAR-T cells (Fig. 6F), and released significant amounts of IFNγ and TNFα (Fig. 6G). These findings collectively demonstrate target-specific degranulation and cytokine release by LILRB1 CAR-T cells.
LILRB1 CAR-T cells exhibit minimal toxicity against normal leukocytes apart from monocytes
To assess potential off-tumor toxicity across normal leukocytes, we conducted co-culture experiments with LILRB1 CAR-T cells and healthy donor peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Flow cytometry analysis of PBMC subtypes revealed specific depletion of monocytes by LILRB1 CAR-T cells, with no discernible effects on B cells, T cells or NK cells (Fig. 6H, Supplementary Fig. 6). Monocyte depletion was also observed for CD33 CAR-T cells, a therapy currently tested in clinical trials in AML patients. In contrast, CD19 CAR-T cells selectively eliminated CD19-expressing B cells (Fig. 6H, Supplementary Fig. 6). We next assessed the toxicity of LILRB1 CAR-T cells on normal hematopoiesis in comparison to CD33 CAR-T cells. CD33 CAR-T cells significantly reduced the number of colonies derived from erythroid and myeloid progenitors, whereas bone marrow treated with LILRB1 CAR-T cells produced a similar number of colonies as the MOCK-treated group (Fig. 6I). These findings suggest that targeting LILRB1 is likely to spare normal leukocytes, except for monocytes, and that LILRB1 CAR-T cells are less myelotoxic than CD33 CAR-T cells, which remains in accordance with LILRB1 expression profile (Fig. 2A, C).
LILRB1 CAR-T cells demonstrate anti-B-ALL activity in vivo
To assess the in vivo efficacy of the LILRB1 CAR, we utilized NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice implanted with RS4;11 B-ALL cells expressing GFP-luciferase (GFP-luc+) (Fig. 7A). Mice treated with two doses of either LILRB1 CAR-T cells or CD19 CAR-T cells exhibited a significant reduction in tumor burden, as measured by bioluminescent imaging (Fig. 7B, C), and had markedly prolonged survival compared to those receiving MOCK T cells (Fig. 7D). At the time of sacrifice, organ analysis showed that mice treated with LILRB1 CAR-T cells had significantly lower tumor burden in the spleens compared to the groups after MOCK and CD19 CAR-T cells, and significantly lower tumor burden in the bone marrow compared to the group treated with MOCK T cells (Fig. 7E, Supplementary Fig. 7). Additionally, a significant number of human CD3+ cells were detected among human cells in the spleens and bone marrow of the LILRB1 CAR-T cell-treated group (Fig. 7F). Importantly, RS4;11 tumor cells that relapsed following CD19 CAR-T treatment continued to express LILRB1 (Fig. 7G). These findings indicate that LILRB1 CAR-T cells are effective against B-ALL in vivo and their antitumor efficacy is comparable to that of CD19 CAR-T cells.
LILRB1 is expressed in monocytic AML, and LILRB1 CAR-T cells eliminate monocytic AML both in vitro and in vivo
Considering the abundant expression of LILRB1 in monocytes, we also checked LILRB1 mRNA levels in various AML subtypes from the BeatAML2 study deposited in the Genotype and Phenotype (dbGaP) database (study phs001657.v3.p1). We found LILRB1 expression generally lower than CD33 across subtypes, with the highest expression observed in monocytic/monoblastic/myelomonocytic AML and AML with chromosome 6 abnormalities (Fig. 8A, Supplementary Fig. 8A). Next, we evaluated LILRB1 surface protein levels in AML cell lines and monocytic AML primary cells. Consistent with mRNA data, the highest levels of LILRB1 protein were found in monocytic (U937) and bi-phenotypic B-myelomonocytic (MV4;11) cell lines (Fig. 8B) as well as in M5 AML primary cells (Fig. 8C, Supplementary Table 6). Accordingly, we observed potent in vitro killing of LILRB1-expressing AML cell line (U937) by LILRB1 CAR-T cells (Fig. 8D) and prominent cytokine release (Fig. 8E).
Finally, we investigated the in vivo efficacy of LILRB1 CAR-T cells in AML using an aggressive model of U937 cells in NSG mice. Mice treated with two doses of either LILRB1 CAR-T cells or CD33 CAR-T cells (Fig. 8F) exhibited a robust response, as evidenced by reduced leukemic burden observed through bioluminescent imaging (Fig. 8G, H) and significantly prolonged survival compared to MOCK T cells treatment (Fig. 8I). To assess LILRB1 levels on cancer cells post-CAR treatment, we isolated spleens from the mice at the time of sacrifice. Although LILRB1 levels in U937 cells were much lower in vivo than in vitro, they were stable across treatment groups (Supplementary Fig. 8B, C). Collectively, these results show that LILRB1 CAR-T cells effectively reduce leukemic burden and prolong survival in this aggressive AML model.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
CD19-targeting chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells (CD19 CAR-T cells) have emerged as a breakthrough therapy for relapsed/refractory (r/r) B-cell malignancies, establishing a new standard of care. However, CD19 loss, a well-described mechanism occurring in 30–70% of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) and in 20–30% of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) cases following CD19 CAR-T cell therapy, contributes to relapse and treatment failure. Alternative options are being developed for such patients, and several B-cell-specific antigens are already under investigation in preclinical studies as CAR-T targets, including CD22 and CD20 emerging as the most advanced ones. Strategies addressing CD19 antigen escape comprise CAR-T cell approaches simultaneously targeting CD19 along with CD20 and CD22. However, they are effective only when both antigens are sufficiently expressed. Accordingly, in cases where CD22 and CD20 expression is low or downregulated/lost together with CD19, these antigens may no longer be viable, underscoring the need for identification of novel therapeutic strategies and targets. Moreover, targeting B-cell-specific antigens is not effective when resistance to CD19 CAR-T therapy is caused by a transition of tumor cells from a lymphoid to a myeloid phenotype. In that case, targeting antigens present on cells of myeloid origin becomes more attractive. Several such targets have been already identified, including CD33, CD123, Lewis (Le)-Y, and FLT3, and CAR-T cells directed against these targets have been designed to recognize tumor cells of strictly myeloid origin. These CAR-T therapies demonstrated efficacy in eliminating acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cells in both in vitro and in vivo models, with some undergoing patient testing, but none have yet received clinical approval. Most myeloid cell-specific CARs currently under development target pan-myeloid markers, also expressed in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPC), leading to severe myelosuppression and significant toxicity. Consequently, the need for suitable myeloid targets remains unmet. Particularly pressing is the need for novel markers that can serve as alternatives following lineage switching and loss of the B-cell phenotype.
Identifying new targets for CAR-T cell therapy presents a multifaceted challenge. Ideal CAR-T target should be homogenously expressed on malignant cells but not on normal tissues to avoid on-target off-tumor toxicity. However, such antigens are limited, and even clinically validated targets such as CD19 or BCMA do not meet these stringent criteria. Also, methodology is a limitation. Recent advances in proteomic methods combining mass spectrometry (MS) and bioinformatics tools led to the identification of some novel targets that were employed for the generation of novel CAR-T cell therapies in B-ALL, AML, multiple myeloma, and even solid tumors. However, in B-ALL and AML studies, the surfaceome characterization was performed on cell lines, limiting the identification of targets that are not accurately represented by these models.
In this study, we developed a strategy for CAR-T target discovery using B-ALL patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cells as a model. Employing cell surface proteomics combined with MS identification of surface proteins in histone-lysine N-methyltransferase 2 A (KMT2A)-rearranged B-ALL PDX samples, followed by extensive tissue-specificity analyses, we identified LILRB1 (also known as CD85j) as a potential novel CAR target. Extensive validation of LILRB1 expression revealed its specific occurrence in B-cell-derived malignancies, including B-ALL and B-NHL. LILRB1 was present even in cases where malignant cells had lost CD19 expression post-CD19 CAR-T cell treatment, as well as in monocytic AML. We generated LILRB1-targeting CAR-T cells and confirmed their antitumor efficacy and safety in pre-clinical settings. Thus, LILRB1 represents an attractive target antigen for cell-based immunotherapy to treat different hematological malignancies, including challenging cases previously treated with other lines of treatment.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary information
B-cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Patient-Derived Xenograft
Chimeric Antigen Receptor
Mass Spectrometry
Mean Fluorescence Intensity
Antibody
White Blood Cell
Bone Marrow
Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor
Forward Scatter Height/ Forward Scatter Area
Forward Scatter Area/ Side Scatter Area
Fluorescence Minus One
European Genome-Phenome Archive
Gene Expression Omnibus
Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma
Mantle Cell Lymphoma
Follicular Lymphoma
B-Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Rituximab
Binary Alignment Map
Short Reads Archive
Single-Chain Fragment Variable
Monoclonal Antibody
Murine Antigen Binding Fragment
Standard Deviation
Cell Trace™ Violet
Effector : Target
Propidium Iodide
Knockout
Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay
Interferon Gamma
Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha
Standard Error Of The Mean
Primary Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell
Cell trace™ Carboxyfluorescein Succinimidyl Ester
Colony-Forming Unit–Erythroid
Burst-Forming Unit–Erythroid
Colony-Forming Unit–Granulocyte, Macrophage
Colony-Forming Unit–Granulocyte, Erythrocyte, Monocyte, Megakaryocyte
Bone Marrow Mononuclear Cell
Nonobese Diabetic (NOD) Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID) Gamma Mouse
Intravenously
In-Vivo Imaging System
Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
These authors contributed equally: Katsiaryna Marhelava, Klaudyna Fidyt, Magdalena Winiarska, Malgorzata Firczuk.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41375-025-02580-z.
Data availability
Proteomic MS data have been deposited to the PRIDE database and will be accessible upon manuscript publication under the accession number PXD058992. Data files will be made available upon reasonable request to the corresponding authors.