PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Normoxia; Mouse; Hyperoxia; Opc; Secretome lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Secretory proteins and extracellular vesicles (EVs) are increasingly recognized as important mediators of intercellular communication and stress response in the brain. Our analysis of the secretome from cell culture supernatants obtained after treating male and female derived primary mouse OPCs with hyperoxia (80% O2) for a 24 hours’ period, showed prominent sex-specific protein signatures.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Sex-specific extracellular protein composition derived from oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPC) under normoxic and hyperoxic conditions

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The cells from male and female derived OPCs were trypsinized and seeded in equal densities into 6-well plates for adherent cells. Subsequently, the plates were maintained at two different oxygen levels 80%O2 (hyperoxia) and 3%O2 (normoxia), and were incubated with 5%CO2 and at 37°C for 24 h. Supernatant was collected from each well without disturbing the cells and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm at 4℃ for 15mins. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (Biorad). We used an adapted bead based SP3 protocol (Brandenburg et al. 2019) for enrichment of proteins, removal of contaminants and proteolytic digestion. Resulting peptides were separated by LC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Electron) on a 25 cm Accucore column and eluted at a constant temperature of 40 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric data was recorded on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron).  The detection was carried out in DDA mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide and protein identification were carried out using MaxQuant software v1.6.2.10 with an Uniprot database limited to murine entries (04/2020). The search included carbamidomethylation at cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation at methionine and acetylation at protein N-termini as variable modifications. A PSM and protein FDR-value cut-off of 0.01 was applied.

METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Animals
Mouse protocols were approved by the Veterinary and Food Control Office, State Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Fisheries Mecklenburg‐Vorpommern, Germany (Permit Number: ZSF3936/11/17). Animal colonies were housed and maintained following the international FELASA, national GVsolas and local University of Greifswald animal research guidelines. Crl:CD‐1 (ICR) mice were received from Charles River Company and bred for maximal two generations at the facility to get the donor mice. This strain was used to generate oligodendrocyte precursor cells.
Isolation and Culture of Mouse OPCs
Mouse OPCs were isolated from enzymatically dissociated P2‐P4 old CD‐1 (wild type strain) mice brains. For each isolation, tissue from the mid‐brain region comprising the subventricular zone from three male and three female (from the same litter) brains was pooled separately. The sex of the pups was determined visually and by genotyping. All animal usage for cell isolation was performed according to the institutional regulations regarding animal ethics.
Isolated cells were cultured in serum free growth medium supplemented with B‐27 (w/o retinol), endothelial growth factor (EGF, Human Recombinant; Cat. No. GF144; Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) 0.02 µg/mL and fibroblast growth factor (FGF, Human FGF basic; Cat. No. 100–18B; Peprotech, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cranbury, NJ, USA) 0.005 µg/mL under 3% O2 conditions. After ∼5–6 days, when the neurospheres were approximately 100 µm in diameter, the neurosphere growth medium was gradually replaced with serum‐free B104CM (conditioned media) containing oligosphere medium every alternate day for 2 weeks. After this time period, the cells were trypsinized and used for experiments. A detailed protocol for the isolation and culture of mouse OPCs has been published in Nature Protocol Exchange (Sunny et al.).
To confirm the preservation of OPC identity post‐hyperoxia, the cells were subjected to O4 immunostaining along with O4 and CNPase immunoblotting to quantify protein level changes (Figure S2). Additionally, individual OPC marker protein intensities were separately analysed from the intracellular mass spectrometry data (Sunny et al.), as shown in Figure S2. In addition to these experiments, we also compared our intracellular proteomic dataset (Sunny et al.) with that of Chaerkady et al., who performed a quantitative temporal proteomic analysis during the differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into OPCs. This comparison revealed a high degree of overlap in OPC‐specific proteins (data not shown), further supporting the identity and purity of the OPCs used in our study.
Cell Lines
B104 Neuroblastoma cell line was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The cells were used only for preparing conditioned media for OPC culture as described previously (Sunny et al.).
ReNcell VM (mentioned as ReNcell throughout), a human neural progenitor cell line, was acquired from Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany. The cells were used to perform XTT assays and to test the effect of OPC supernatants. ReNcells were cultivated in laminin‐coated culture wares in ReNcell NSC maintenance medium (Cat. No. SCM005, Merck Millipore) supplemented with 20 ng/mL final concentration of EGF and bFGF at 21% O2, 5% CO2 and 37°C. To generate differentiated neurons, ReNcells were cultured for at least 7 days in NSC maintenance medium supplemented with 20 ng/mL brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and glial cell line‐derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), B27‐supplement, 1 µM dibutyryl cAMP and 200 µM ascorbic acid (neuronal differentiation media).
Treatment With Different Oxygen Concentrations and Supernatant Collection
The cells from male and female derived OPCs were trypsinized, counted and seeded in equal densities into 6‐well plates for adherent cells (without any coating; Cell+, Sarstedt; Nümbrecht, Germany) containing 1 mL DMEM/F12 + 50.6 mM glucose (666 µL 45% glucose stock solution for 50 mL DMEM/F12) medium per well. Subsequently, the plates were maintained at two different oxygen levels 80% O2 (hyperoxia), and 3% O2, (normoxia), and incubated with 5% CO2 and at 37°C for 24 h. Supernatant was collected from each well without disturbing the cells and was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min to remove cells and debris. This supernatant was frozen at –80°C and used for the functional assays.
Proteome Analysis by Mass Spectrometry
Concentration of extracellular proteins were determined in a Bradford assay using 200 µL of culture supernatants and DMEM medium as reference. The mean protein concentration was 0.04 ± 0.048 µg/µL.
Intracellular proteins of ReNcells (n = 4) were extracted with M‐PER lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer's protocol. Protein containing supernatant was collected by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 60 min, 4°C) and nucleic acid degraded enzymatically with universal nuclease (0.125 U/µg protein, (Pierce/Thermo, Rockford, IL, USA). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay (Pierce/Thermo).
Volumes corresponding to 4 µg protein per sample (supernatants: 90–100 µL; intracellular protein: 2.5–5.1 µL) were subjected to the magnetic bead based SP3 protocol (Blankenburg et al.; Sielaff et al.) including reduction and alkylation of proteins, tryptic digestion (16 h, trypsin to protein ratio 1:25) and separation of low molecular weight contaminants from the peptide solution. Peptides were analyzed by LC‐ESI tandem mass spectrometry on QExactive mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Mass spectra recorded in data‐dependent mode for peptides of extracellular proteins (n = 3) were analysed by MaxQuant software (v 1.6.2) and Analyst (Genedata, Basel, Switzerland). Mass spectra for peptides of intracellular proteins of ReNcells were recorded in data‐independent mode, which reduced missing values and allowed robust quantification of proteins. Analysis was conducted using Spectronaut v.18 (Biognosys, Zurich, Switzerland). Statistical analysis was carried out on the peptide level after exclusion of peptides with oxidized methionine using the algorithm ROPECA (Suomi and Elo). Only proteins that showed different abundance (adj. p value < 0.05 using Benjamini–Hochberg multiple test correction) were used for further considerations. Detailed information on MS data acquisition, database search and data analysis is provided in Table S4. Impact of sex, treatment and the interaction of the terms was tested in a two‐factorial design using the function aov implemented in the R stats package v4.4.0.
FGF‐2 ELISA
Enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for FGF‐2 was performed to quantify the amount of FGF‐2 present in the male and female OPC supernatants from different treatment conditions. ELISA was performed in accordance with the protocol stipulated in the Mouse FGF‐2 (bFGF) ELISA Kit (Cat # EMFGF2, Thermo Fisher). For the FGF‐2 ELISA, supernatants from four independent biological replicates were tested.
XTT Cell Viability Assay
The XTT reduction assay is commonly used for the measurement of cell viability. The assay relies on the cleavage of a yellow tetrazolium salt (XTT) to form an orange water‐soluble formazan product by metabolically active, viable cells. Assays were conducted in clear, flat‐bottomed, 96‐well plates with a total volume of 100 µL in each well.
ReNcells were seeded in 96‐well plates with a cell density of 250,000 cells per well. From the next day after seeding, the cells were cultivated in neuronal differentiation media for a period of seven days, during which time they were permitted to differentiate into neurons. Once the neurons were differentiated, they were kept untreated (Ctrl_N), subjected to the OPC supernatant and inhibitors/FGF‐2 for 24 h under normoxic conditions. Comparable hyperoxic controls (Ctrl_H) were generated by maintaining cells at 80%O2 for 24 h. After treatment, the viability of the cells was evaluated through the addition of XTT, after which the optical density was measured following a six‐hour incubation period. Absorbance at 555 nm was read with 655 nm as reference wavelength using a Spectra Max Plus plate reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA).
For the XTT assays, supernatants from five different biological replicates were tested.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Statistical parameters including the exact value of n, the definition of centre, dispersion and precision measures (mean ± SEM) and statistical significance are reported in the figures and figure legends. Data was judged to be statistically significant when p < 0.05 calculated by two‐tailed Student's t test, if not otherwise indicated.
Data and Software Availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride) with the dataset identifier numbers PXD060307 and PXD060285 for the OPC and ReNcell datasets, respectively.
Metascape, used to analyse part of the proteomic data is a free software available at https://metascape.org (Zhou et al.).
The Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software from Qiagen (Hilden, Germany) was utilized for the purpose of functional categorization of proteomic results from ReNcells.

RESULTS:
Results
Comparison of Protein Profiles of Male and Female Murine OPCs
In our model system, murine OPCs were plated for a duration of 24 h, under normoxic (3% O2) and hyperoxic conditions (80% O2), respectively. Thereafter, we isolated the total secreted proteins from male and female‐derived OPC supernatants. In the samples, we measured intensities of 3268 proteins. An initial analysis to identify the effect of sex as the main variable was performed by looking at the total number of significantly differentially abundant proteins, where comparisons were done between male and female under normoxia and hyperoxia separately (M vs. F_N and M vs. F_H). For the majority of detected proteins, no significant differences in levels were observed in both male and female supernatants. The number of proteins with significantly different intensities in the comparison groups was rather small (3%) in relation to the total number of identified proteins, and this was similar under normoxic (105 proteins) and hyperoxic (104 proteins) conditions.
Surprisingly, very little overlap was observed between the proteins identified in both comparisons (Figure 1A), as well as little functional overlap between the different proteins as determined by metascape analysis (Zhou et al.) (Figure 1B). Further, a greater number of proteins showed higher abundance in the male secretome as compared to the female secretome under normoxic conditions. However, this trend reversed upon hyperoxia, where a greater number of proteins were less abundant in the male secretome as compared to the female secretome (Figure 1C). Further functional analysis using Metascape showed enrichment of intracellular protein transport and pathways of neurodegeneration and multiple diseases in the differentially abundant proteins upon hyperoxia (Figure 1D). The evidence presented here indicates the presence of intrinsic sex‐specific differences in the secretome of male and female cells, which are visible under hyperoxic as well as normoxic conditions. Therefore, we conducted an analysis of the contribution of sex‐chromosome‐coded genes to the observed differences. Under normoxic conditions, 6.6% of the significantly different proteins (p value < 0.05) were linked to sex chromosomes, whereas none of the sex‐linked proteins were significantly different between males and females post hyperoxia (Table S1). Thus, hyperoxic treatment diminishes X‐linked differential protein levels, but at the same time, other sex‐specific alterations occur. Overall, the observed differences remained largely non‐overlapping.
Hyperoxia Alters the Secretome Profile of Male and Female OPCs
In order to further assess the effect of hyperoxia on the secretome profile, we looked at the sex‐specific response to hyperoxic conditions (M_H vs. N and F_H vs. N). The effect of the high oxygen concentration on the secretome was stronger (male 5.9% and female 6.3%) than the sex‐ specific differences (3%). Even though the significantly altered proteins in males and females showed very little overlap (Figure 2A), a quite high functional overlap was observed when considering multiple ontology terms, including structural, functional and gene ontology (Figure 2B). Next, we used Metascape functional analysis to identify the response‐related pathways and biological processes.
This revealed an enrichment of functions like small molecule catabolic process and protein maturation in the female group upon hyperoxia, whereas, in the male group, altered proteins were enriched in post‐translational protein phosphorylation, generation of precursor metabolites and energy, and mitochondrial protein degradation (Figure 2D). The overall effect of hyperoxia was a decreased level of a high number of proteins in the secretome of cells of both sexes (76.5% of all significantly altered proteins in the case of males and 57.9% in the case of females). However, a larger portion of proteins increased in abundance upon hyperoxia in the female secretome (42%) as compared to the male secretome (23.4%). However, the effects were stronger in the male secretome as observed by the ratio values and shown in the volcano plots. Moreover, a slightly higher number of X‐chromosome‐linked proteins were seen to be significantly regulated in the female secretome in response to hyperoxia (Figure 2C).
Despite the limited number of biological replicates (n = 3), we performed a two‐factor ANOVA analysis to assess the interaction between sex and oxygen treatment, and the resulting significance values are included in Table S1.
Next, we focused on the different fractions of proteins secreted by the male and female OPCs under normoxic and hyperoxic conditions, based on their gene ontology‐based cellular component by UNIPROT. Proteins were sorted according to their assigned cellular localization, and the numbers were counted for each specific group analyzed. Comparing the sex differences at normoxic and hyperoxic conditions, a higher number of mitochondrial proteins (normoxic: 22%; hyperoxic: 15%) showed sex‐specific levels under normal conditions, as compared to hyperoxic conditions (Figure 3A).
Proteins were quantified and counted based on at least three biological replicates. Proteins can have multiple UniProt annotations, for example, for plasma membrane, cytoplasm, nucleus, and so forth, and are thus grouped to more than one category. Cut off p value being 0.05.
But looking at the hyperoxia effect in the male and female groups separately, we saw approximately 17% more mitochondrial proteins being differentially regulated in the male secretome, along with approximately 4% more extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. In the female cells, higher numbers of vesicles (∼8%) and cytoplasmic proteins (∼12%) were differentially regulated (Figure 3B). The higher proportion of vesicle proteins in the female group could indicate increased release of membrane‐bound vesicles from female cells upon hyperoxic stress. In order to better understand the secretory pattern of these cells, we further analyzed the secretome in comparison to the intracellular proteome (Sunny et al.). The comparisons showed an overall similar pattern in the male and female cells. But it was interesting to see that the fraction of mitochondrial proteins that were altered in the secretome of male cells post hyperoxia was almost similar to the percentage of significantly altered mitochondrial protein fraction in the cells intracellularly (Figure 3C,D). This points to a certain susceptibility of mitochondria‐associated proteins to hyperoxic stress in the male cells. Therefore, we took a closer look at the regulation of these detected mitochondrial proteins in the male secretome. Upon hyperoxic stress, only a few proteins were strongly upregulated, which included endophilin‐B1 (Sh3glb1), carnitine O‐palmitoyltransferase 2 (Cpt2) and mitochondrial NAD kinase 2 (Nadk2). In contrast, the majority of the proteins showed a significant decrease in abundance post‐hyperoxia (Figure 3E). Endophilin‐B1, also known as Bax‐interacting factor 1 (Bif‐1), is a multifunctional protein that regulates apoptosis (Takahashi et al.), autophagic cell death and mitochondrial function (Takahashi et al.), which is also implicated in brain pathologies like Alzheimer's disease (Wang et al.). It was interesting to note that the intracellular Bif‐1 levels in male OPCs showed a slight decrease post‐hyperoxic treatment as observed from the proteomic data (data not shown). This might support an increased secretion of Bif‐1, leading to lower intracellular levels which could result in the eventual negative outcome on the survival of male OPCs post hyperoxia. Moreover, a recent study demonstrated a positive correlation of glutaredoxin‐1 (Glrx) protein with favourable neurodevelopmental outcomes in preterm infants (Zhao et al.). As a strong upregulation of Glrx protein was observed in the female secretome post hyperoxia, this might as well aid in providing a better antioxidant defence mechanism in the female brain.
To rule out the possibility of cell death and lysis as contributing factors to the observed mitochondrial proteins in the secretome, we performed a series of complementary assays, including cleaved caspase‐3 immunostaining followed by flow cytometry, Western blot using active caspase 3 antibody, phase contrast microscopy, LDH release and XTT assays. The results as shown in Figure S1, indicated no signs of cell death, extensive apoptosis or cytotoxicity after 24 h of hyperoxia treatment. Though XTT assay revealed a significant decrease in metabolic activity in both male and female cells following hyperoxia (Figure S1E), indicating metabolic stress but not necessarily cell death. Finally, the secretome analysis also did not show intracellular proteins in intensities correlating to that of the analyzed cell lysates, which would be expected in the event of substantial cell lysis.
ON/OFF Targets of Male and Female Secretomes Differ Extensively Post Hyperoxic Treatment
We further looked at the proteins that were present only either under normoxic condition or post hyperoxia (ON/OFF targets) in both male and female groups separately (full list in Table S2). We identified brain‐specific serine protease 4 (BSSP‐4) (Prss22) to be present only under normoxic conditions in both male and female secretome. In contrast, neurosecretory protein VGF (Vgf) and plasmolipin (plasma membrane proteolipid) (Pllp) were identified exclusively in the female secretome under normoxic conditions. However, hyperoxia triggered the secretion of distinct proteins in male and female cells. Female cells secreted fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF‐2), which is an important protein involved in a vast number of molecular pathways and a number of cellular functions including glial cell differentiation (Reuss et al.) and response to axon injury (Jungnickel et al.; Timmer et al.). Other proteins included vacuolar protein sorting‐associated protein 37C (Vps37c), aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator 2 (Arnt2), the extracellular histone H1.1 (H1a) and bisphosphoglycerate mutase (Bpgm) (Table 1). Hence, female OPCs appear to exhibit a proactive protective response to oxidative stress, characterized by neurotrophic support (FGF‐2, VGF), efficient vesicular trafficking (Vps37c, H1a), metabolic adaptation (Bpgm) and stress signaling regulation (Arnt2). Moreover, the baseline secretion of Vgf and Pllp under normoxia suggests that female OPCs maintain a homeostatic advantage even before stress exposure, potentially contributing to greater resilience compared to males.
In case of the male samples, we identified Ras association domain‐containing protein 2 (Rassf2), guanine nucleotide‐binding protein G(i) subunit alpha‐1 (Gnai1) as well as E3 ubiquitin‐protein ligase ARIH2, and polyglutamine‐binding protein 1 (Pqbp1) which is known to be associated with neurodegenerative disorders and brain inflammation (Jin et al.). Furthermore, misshapen‐like kinase 1 (Mink1) also associated with neurodegeneration (Larhammar et al.), was present only in the supernatant of male cells upon hyperoxia (Table 1). The presence of proteins linked to paediatric encephalopathy, neurodegeneration and inflammation suggests that male OPCs might be more vulnerable to oxidative stress. It also indicates a hyperoxia‐induced shift towards pro‐apoptotic, inflammatory and neurodegenerative pathways.
FGF‐2 in the Female Hyperoxia Treated OPC Derived Supernatant Increases Viability of Neuronal Cells
Even though FGF‐2 was the fourth‐ranking protein in abundance in our proteomic data comparison of the ON/OFF targets in the female OPC secretome (Table S2), it was the only protein with a specific annotation for ‘extracellular space’ and hence the most promising candidate from which paracrine effects could be assumed. Therefore, we focused our further experiments on FGF‐2.
Since secreted FGF‐2 could be a major factor that might influence the survival of the neighbouring cells under stress conditions, we performed an ELISA to determine the absolute amounts of FGF‐2 in the supernatant. The results showed a significantly higher amount of FGF‐2 in the supernatant of female cell culture upon hyperoxia as compared to male hyperoxia treated supernatant (Figure 4A). To further explore the functional effects of the secreted FGF‐2, we treated differentiated ReNcell neurons with the cell culture supernatants derived from male and female OPCs that were either treated with 80% O2 or were kept at normoxic conditions for 24 h. We subsequently performed an XTT assay to determine if the supernatants influenced the viability of the neuronal cells. The results demonstrate a substantial enhancement of neuronal viability when the neurons were exposed to female hyperoxia medium (Figure 4B). To determine if the observed enhancement in viability could be attributed to FGF‐2, XTT assays were performed where the neuronal cells were treated with female hyperoxia supernatant in combination with an FGF‐2 antibody and an FGF‐2 inhibitor, respectively. As shown in Figure 4C, treatment with either FGF‐2 antibody or FGF‐2 inhibitor significantly reduced the viability of the neuronal cells, which could be restored upon addition of FGF‐2‐containing medium.
Treatment With Female Hyperoxia Treated Supernatant Leads to Comparable Molecular Regulations in Neurons as by Addition of Pure FGF‐2
Further, a comparative proteomic analysis was performed on differentiated ReNcell neurons that were either used untreated as a reference sample or treated with female hyperoxia or normoxia supernatants or medium containing pure FGF‐2. The objective of this analysis was to see whether comparable proteomic changes and molecular regulations could be triggered. The measurement of the samples in data‐independent mode allowed the quantification of >6000 proteins, enabling a comprehensive analysis of the treatment effects on the intracellular proteome of the human ReNcells. A complete list of identified proteins is provided as Table S3. Principal component 1 revealed a clustering of the control samples together with the samples treated with supernatants from female normoxic samples on one side and the groups treated with FGF‐2 only and female hyperoxia supernatants on the other (Figure 5A). The majority of the proteins in the hyperoxia supernatant‐treated group were regulated in the same direction as by FGF‐2, as shown in the heatmap (Figure 5B). The overall significant protein changes showed a 70% overlap with those observed after treatment with hyperoxia supernatant, but only a 40% overlap when cells were incubated in the presence of normoxia supernatant (Figure 5C). Canonical pathway analysis using IPA revealed more similar pathways between groups treated with FGF‐2 and hyperoxia supernatant than those incubated with normoxia supernatant (Figure 5D). Looking at the pathway regulations, we observed an activation of Epithelial Adherens Junction Signaling, Granzyme A Signaling and Activation of gene expression by SREBF (SREBP) in the FGF‐2 and hyperoxia groups, which were inactivated or not regulated in the normoxic group. On the other hand, DNA Damage/Telomere Stress Induced Senescence and Amyloid Fiber Formation were seen to be activated in the normoxia group and inactive in the other two groups (Figure 5D).
We observed increased intracellular FGF‐2 levels in all three groups, but decreased FGFR. This might be due to ligand‐induced downregulation as a result of binding of extracellular and intracellular FGF‐2 to FGFRs, leading to receptor internalization and subsequent degradation to prevent overactivation of the signalling pathway, a mechanism similar to epidermal growth factor receptors (Ornitz and Itoh; Soubeyran et al.). Moreover, we see an increase in two of the Sprouty proteins (SPRY2 and SPRED1), which can modulate the activity of FGFRs and downstream signalling pathways (Guy et al.; Yusoff et al.).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Effective communication between the different cell types in the central nervous system (CNS) is important for proper neural development, maintenance and regeneration (Fruhbeis et al.). At the same time, cell‐cell communication might also play an important role under pathological and stress conditions (Fruhbeis et al.). This intercellular communication is achieved by secretory factors that are taken up by the neighbouring cells, where they either trigger specific signalling pathways and cellular responses or are utilized by the cells for the maintenance of the cellular machinery. These secretory factors may contain freely secreted proteins as well as proteins that are enclosed in extracellular vesicles (EVs).
During brain development, oligodendrocytes play a key role in generating large amounts of myelin membrane that wraps around axons, providing trophic support and the necessary electric insulation for neuronal signal transduction. EVs are known to be released by mature oligodendrocytes (OLs) and, owing to their intimate interaction with neurons, they are known to be taken up by neurons in response to different signalling and even exhibit neuroprotective properties (Kramer‐Albers). However, not much is known about EV secretion by the oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) during development. Moreover, EV secretion could also be associated with the secretion of soluble proteins that could also play an important role in signalling, especially under stress conditions. These secretory proteins may execute a broad spectrum of functions, which are not yet completely understood.
Especially during the early developmental phases of the brain where the progenitor population dominates, any insult involving oxidative stress which is common due to the use of oxygen in the neonatal intensive care treatment of preterm infants, has a tremendous impact on the developing brain and is a major factor contributing to white matter damage in the preterm brain (Reich et al.; van Tilborg et al.; van Westering‐Kroon et al.). This is associated with a clear distinction in the outcome between both sexes (Lauterbach et al.; Morsing et al.). Male sex has been identified as a major risk factor for poor neurological outcome across multiple studies in the most vulnerable patient population of preterm infants (Barnett et al.; Hintz et al.). Unfortunately, we still lack a clear view of the molecular mechanisms that lead to such profound sex‐based differences.
In our previous work on primary murine OPCs, we have shown that prominent sex based differences in the response of OPCs towards oxidative stress exist (Sunny et al.). This led to the hypothesis that these sex‐based differences might also be present in the extracellular signalling generated by these cells in response to oxidative stress.
In the current study, we characterized the differences between the secretomes of male and female‐derived murine OPCs. We demonstrate that the overall secretome profiles of male and female cells differ with very little overlap under normal conditions, as well as post‐hyperoxic treatment. This suggests the possible activation of differential pathways in male and female cells in response to oxidative stress that leads to the generation of differential extracellular signals. Moreover, we show that hyperoxic stress can trigger the secretion of specific growth factors, such as FGF‐2, in a sex‐specific manner. These factors exhibit neurotrophic activity by differentially affecting the survival and viability of cultured neuronal cells.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available in ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/, reference number PXD060307 and PXD060285.