PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: 786o shotud3 lc/msms

ABSTRACT:
After cell lysis, the global proteomes of wild-type 786O and OTUD3-knockdown (KD) 786O cell lines were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Label-free quantification (LFQ) was employed for comparative protein quantification, and tandem mass spectrometry data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to prioritize high-abundance precursor ions for fragmentation

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
OTUD3-Mediated Stabilization of SLC7A11 Drives Sunitinib Resistance by Suppressing Ferroptosis in Clear Cell Renal Cell Carcinoma

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
After lysing 786O cells with lysis buffer, the supernatant containing proteins was collected by centrifugation (12,000 ×g, 15 min, 4°C). Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay, followed by reduction and alkylation with 10 mM DTT (56°C, 30 min) and 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, room temperature in the dark, 30 min), respectively. Proteins were then precipitated by adding a five-fold volume of ice-cold acetone/methanol (v/v = 4:1) and incubated at -20°C overnight. The precipitated proteins were washed twice with 80% acetone to remove detergents and salts, then resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) for tryptic digestion (enzyme-to-substrate ratio 1:50, 37°C, 16 h). The digested peptides were desalted using a MonoSin desalting column, dried in a vacuum concentrator, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis

DATA PROCESSING:
After vacuum drying, reconstitute the sample by adding 0.1% formic acid (FA). Then, load 1–2 μg of the sample onto the instrument. Separation was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Scientific USA C18 column (1.9 μm particle size, 75 μm inner diameter, 20 cm length) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Mass spectrometric analysis was conducted on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 equipped with FAIMS Pro (Thermo Scientific, USA). Tandem mass spectrometry was acquired in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode, with a full scan resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) and an m/z range of 350–1600. In HCD fragmentation mode, the collision energy was set to 30%.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), as the main type of RCC was treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) at the late stage. While drug resistance is the main challenge for TKIs like sunitinib, and the underline mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we found that OTUD3 is over-expressed in ccRCC and promotes sunitinib resistance in tumor cells. OTUD3 deubiquitinates the cystine/glutamate transporter SLC7A11 and protect it from proteasome degradation, which promotes cystine transport into cells and reduces intracellular ROS levels, thereby inhibiting sunitinib-induced ferroptosis. Our findings suggest that targeting OTUD3 could be a potential strategy to enhance ferroptosis and improve the therapeutic efficacy of sunitinib in ccRCC.