PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Knee; Chondrocyte
diseases: Osteoarthritis
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion; LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: TMT; Spectrum counting
keywords: Human; Label free; Tmt; Chondrocytes; Osteoarthritis

ABSTRACT:
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease with a substantial health economic burden. There is no current treatment; instead, disease management targets the main symptoms (pain and stiffness) and culminates in joint replacement surgery. OA is a disease of cartilage degeneration, but the molecular changes leading to the development of OA are still poorly understood. In this study we compare methylation, gene transcription and protein abundance at the genome-wide level in individually-matched samples of chondrocytes extracted from affected and relatively healthy articular cartilage across 12 OA patients undergoing total knee replacement. Integration analysis highlights genes that are consistently affected at multiple levels, including AQP1, CLEC3B and COL1A1, and also relevant biological pathways such as extracellular matrix organization, collagen catabolism and proteolysis. Collectively these results provide a first view of the comprehensive molecular landscape underpinning OA development and point to potential therapeutic avenues.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Integrated molecular phenotyping in chondrocytes identifies genes and pathways disrupted in osteoarthritis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Extraction of chondrocytes from osteochondral tissue taken at knee replacement Osteochondral samples were transported in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM)/F-12 (1:1) (Life Technologies) supplemented with 2mM glutamine (Life Technologies), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Life Technologies), 2.5 µg/ml amphotericin B (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) (serum free media). Half of each sample was taken for chondrocyte extraction and the remaining tissue was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, decalcified in surgipath decalcifier (Leica) and embedded to paraffin wax for histological and immunohistochemical analysis. Chondrocytes were directly extracted from each paired macroscopic control and OA grade cartilage in order to remove the extracellular matrix allowing a higher yield of cells to be loaded onto the Qiagen column.  Cartilage was removed from the bone, dissected and washed twice in 1xPBS. Tissue was digested in 3 mg/ml collagenase type I (Sigma-Aldrich) in serum free media overnight at 37°C on a flatbed shaker. The resulting cell suspension was passed through a 70 µm cell strainer (Fisher Scientific) and centrifuged at 400g for 10 minutes; the cell pellet was then washed twice in serum free media, followed by centrifugation at 400g for 10 minutes. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in serum free media. Cells were counted and the viability checked using trypan blue exclusion and the Countess cell counter (Invitrogen). The optimal cell number for Qiagen column extraction from cells is between 4x106 and 1x107. Cells were pelleted at 400g for 10 minutes and homogenized in Qiagen RLT buffer containing β-Mercaptoethanol and using the QIAshredder column and DNA, RNA and protein extractions were performed as outlined for tissue extraction. RNA, DNA and protein were quantified using a Nanodrop.   Aliquots containing 30 μg of total protein were reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with MS grade trypsin (Pierce) at ratio 30:1. The resultant peptides were labeled with the TMT 6-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide mixture was fractionated with high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters, XBridge C18 column  over a 0.85% gradient for 35 minutes. Individual peptide fractions were subjected to LC-MS analysis on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation was performed on the Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 capillary column (Dionex) over a 0.42% gradient for 95 min. The ten most abundant multiply charged precursors per survey scan were isolated for HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 40 and 40 sec dynamic exclusion.   For a selection of four representative control and disease samples, peptide aliquots of 500 ng without TMT labeling were analyzed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer for label free quantification and validation. Tandem mass spectra were acquired over duplicate runs of 120 min with a top speed iontrap detection method and dynamic exclusion at 10 sec and MS R=120,000.

DATA PROCESSING:
TMT Analysis The acquired mass spectra were submitted to SequestHT search engine implemented on the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. TMT6plex at N-termimus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N,Q. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 based on Percolator q-value computed from decoy database search. All spectra were searched against a UniProt fasta file containing 20,190 Human reviewed entries. The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a custom TMT 6plex Quantification Method with integration window tolerance 20 ppm and integration method the Most Confident Centroid.   Label free Analysis Database search was performed on Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with the SequestHT engine and normalized spectral counts were computed based on the total number of peptide-spectrum matches attributed to each protein per sample divided by the maximum value along the different samples. With a minimum requirement of at least total 14 spectra per protein we found excellent agreement in the direction of change between isobaric labelling and label free quantification for at least 32 proteins which is approximately the 90% of the common proteins between the TMT changing list and the label free identified list

METHODS:
Methods
For full details of methods see Supplementary Methods.
Patients and samples
Osteochondral samples were collected from 38 patients undergoing total joint replacement for OA (discovery cohort: 12 knee OA patients; 2 separate replication cohorts: 17 knee OA patients, 9 hip OA patients). Cartilage was separated from bone and chondrocytes were extracted from each sample. DNA, RNA, and protein were extracted from the isolated chondrocytes of each sample. All patients provided full written informed consent prior to participation. We obtained two cartilage samples from each patient. Knee samples were scored using the OARSI cartilage classification system: one sample with high OARSI grade signifying high-grade degeneration (“degraded sample”), and one sample with low OARSI grade signifying healthy tissue or low-grade degeneration (“intact sample”) (Supplementary Fig. S1). Hip samples were classified macroscopically and visually as high-grade (“degraded”) or low-grade (“intact”), details see Supplementary Methods.
Proteomics (discovery cohort)
LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the high-resolution LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Proteins were defined as differentially abundant if the absolute median abundance ratio between degraded and intact samples was ≥ 0.75, the absolute median abundance ratio was greater than the standard deviation of abundance ratios, and the protein was detected in paired samples from at least 5 of 11 patients post-QC.
RNA-seq (discovery cohort)
Multiplexed libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 (75 bp paired-end read length) and individual indexed library BAM files were produced. Reads that passed quality control (QC) were re-aligned using tophat2, and reads aligning to each gene in each sample were counted using the HTSeq package. Absolute transcript abundance was calculated using the FPKM (fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped) measure across 15,418 genes post-QC. We used edgeR v3.0 to identify differentially expressed genes, applying a generalized linear model for tissue status (degraded or intact) with individual ID as covariate, and defined significance at 5% false-discovery rate (FDR).
Methylation (discovery cohort)
Methylation was assayed using the Illumina 450k BeadChip. Data were parsed and QCed using ChAMP; the probe beta values were quantile-normalized using the ‘dasen’ method from the wateRmelon package. Differential methylation on 425,694 probes post-QC was tested using the CpGassoc package, applying a linear model for tissue status at each probe, with individual ID as covariate.
Following previous analyses, differentially methylated regions (DMRs) were defined as regions of at least 3 probes with FDR ≤ 5% (DMPs) and no more than 3 non-significant probes, with no more than 1 kb between adjacent probes. We used bedtools to identify genes overlapping each DMR, extending gene boundaries to include likely promoter regions.
For a promoter-level analysis, we used the probe annotations from ChAMP to assign promoter probes to each gene. After computing the mean beta value in the promoter of each gene in each sample, we used a paired t-test to identify genes with differential promoter-region methylation between degraded and intact samples. Significance was set at 5% FDR.
Replication of gene expression and methylation changes
Gene expression and DNA methylation in both replication cohorts were measured using the same procedure as for the discovery data. We considered the expression of 14,762 genes that passed QC across all datasets; this included 332 of 349 genes with FDR ≤ 5% in the knee discovery data.
We considered 416,437 probes that passed QC across all datasets; this included 9,723 of 9,867 probes with FDR ≤ 5% in the knee discovery data (“DMPs”).
In silico replication
We carried out an additional replication analysis for gene expression changes using an available published dataset from the ongoing Research Arthritis and Articular Cartilage (RAAK) study. This dataset comprised a comparison of affected and macroscopically preserved OA cartilage from 33 patients undergoing total joint replacement surgery (22 with hip OA, 11 with knee OA), measured using the Illumina HumanHT-12 v3 microarrays.
Gene set analyses
We tested whether particular biological gene sets were enriched among significant genes from each of the RNA-seq, methylation, and proteomics datasets. We used KEGG, Reactome, and, separately, Gene Ontology (GO) annotations. Genes annotated to the same term were treated as a “pathway”. Enrichment was assessed using a 1-sided hypergeometric test, with significance at 5% FDR. Empirical p-values for the enrichments were obtained from randomisations.
For each gene set, we asked whether the association across the three –omics datasets (calculated as geometric mean of the p-values) was higher than expected by chance, obtaining empirical p-values from 100,000 randomisations.
Ethical approval information
The study was approved by Oxford NHS REC C (10/H0606/20). Tissue samples were collected under National Research Ethics approval reference 15/SC/0132, South Yorkshire and North Derbyshire Musculoskeletal Biobank, University of Sheffield; and under National Research Ethics approval reference 11/EE/0011, Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre Human Research Tissue Bank, Cambridge University Hospitals, UK. All participants provided written informed consent. All methods were carried out in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
Data availability
All genome-wide summary statistics generated in the discovery component of this study are available as Supplementary Tables. All discovery RNA sequencing data are available in the EGA repository, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/studies/EGAS00001001203. All discovery methylation data are available in the EGA repository, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ega/studies/EGAS00001001213. The discovery proteomics data has been deposited in the PRIDE archive under study ID PXD002014 [publication in process].

RESULTS:
Results
We compared the degraded and intact tissue across patient-matched samples.
We identified 209 proteins with evidence of differential abundance (Supplementary Table S1): 90 at higher and 119 at lower abundance in the degraded samples. We confirmed the quality of the data using an orthogonal label-free approach and, separately, Western blotting (see Supplementary Note).
We identified 349 differentially expressed genes: 296 genes showed higher and 53 lower expression levels in the degraded samples (Supplementary Table S2). One of the most strongly down-regulated genes in degraded cartilage was CHRDL2. The corresponding protein was also found at lower abundance in degraded cartilage and we confirmed its expression in cartilage by immunohistochemistry (Supplementary Fig. S2). CHRDL2 is a bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) inhibitor that has been reported to be lost from chondrocytes of the superficial zone and shifted to the middle zone in OA cartilage in a targeted study.
We identified 9,896 differentially methylated probes (DMPs) (Supplementary Table S3), and 271 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) composed of multiple differentially methylated CpG sites, overlapping 296 unique genes (Supplementary Table S4).
Integration across multiple –omics levels
Methylation, RNA sequencing, and proteomics
We identified 49 genes with evidence of differential regulation from at least two of the –omics analyses (Supplementary Table S5). Three genes demonstrated significant evidence for involvement in OA progression across all three levels: AQP1, COL1A1 and CLEC3B (Fig. 1b). All three genes were up-regulated in degraded tissue in both the RNA-seq and proteomics analyses (Fig. 2a). AQP1 and COL1A1 showed a consistent decrease in methylation of all CpG probes in their associated DMRs (commensurate with an increase in transcription), while the DMR associated with CLEC3B showed evidence of increased methylation. Using IHC we independently confirmed the presence of AQP1, COL1A1 and CLEC3B in articular cartilage chondrocytes (Supplementary Fig. S2). We also replicated the direction of gene expression change for all three genes in independent data (see below and Supplementary Table S6). 
Of the 49 genes with evidence of differential regulation on at least two molecular levels, 33 add substantive evidence to genes previously reported and 16 genes (33%) have not previously been implicated in OA (Supplementary Table S5).
Proteomics and RNA sequencing
Among the 209 proteins with evidence of differential abundance in the proteomics data, 31 were also differentially expressed between degraded and intact samples at the RNA level (hypergeometric p = 5.3 × 10−7, Fig. 1b). Twenty-six of these 31 genes showed concordant directions of changes at both the protein and RNA level (binomial p = 0.0002). Five genes were over-expressed at the RNA level and less abundant at the protein level in the degraded tissue (COL4A2, CXCL12, FGF10, HTRA3 and WNT5B); all five are annotated as secreted proteins in the Human Protein Atlas (see Supplementary Note).
Using all samples irrespective of tissue status, we found a significant correlation between gene expression levels and protein abundance (Spearman’s rho = 0.29, p < 2.2 × 10−16, Supplementary Note and Supplementary Fig. S3). Considering the RNA and protein changes in degraded compared to intact samples (Fig. 2a), we also identified a significant positive correlation (Pearson’s r = 0.17, p < 2.2 × 10−16). This correlation became substantially higher when we only considered the 31 genes that were differentially expressed in both datasets (Pearson’s r = 0.43, p = 0.01).
Methylation and RNA sequencing
Sixteen of the genes overlapping a DMR were also differentially transcribed (Fig. 1b). In the direct comparison of methylation and gene expression using all samples irrespective of tissue status, we found the expected negative correlation between promoter region methylation and gene expression (Spearman’s rho = −0.43, p < 2.2 × 10−16, Supplementary Fig. S3). Based on the comparison of intact to degraded cartilage, the log-fold-changes in RNA expression and the differences in mean promoter region methylation values demonstrated a small but highly significant correlation (Pearson’s r = −0.08, p < 2.2 × 10−16, Fig. 2b, Supplementary Table S7). The correlation became substantially higher when we considered the 39 genes with significant differences at both the promoter methylation and transcription levels (Pearson’s r = −0.48, p = 0.002).
Replication of gene expression and methylation changes
We found good correlation between the global gene expression log-fold changes and the methylation log-fold changes estimated in the discovery and in the knee and, separately, hip replication data (Fig. 3a,b, Pearson r 0.5–0.9, p < 10−15) and excellent replication rates for differentially expressed genes and probes with differential methylation (Fig. 3c,d, over 90% have same direction of change in replication data and at least 47% reach nominal significance, Supplementary Table S8). 
We specifically considered the 49 genes with evidence from at least two –omics levels. Of these, 47 had gene expression data in the discovery and both replication datasets; the direction of change replicated at nominal significance for 36 genes in the knee and for 26 genes in the hip replication data (Supplementary Table S6). Notably, the direction of change replicated in at least one of the knee and hip replication datasets at nominal significance for 13 of the 16 genes that have not previously been associated with OA (Supplementary Table S6).
We additionally pursued replication in a further independent, published microarray gene expression dataset from the RAAK study. This study used pooled knee and hip samples, as they found good agreement between the pooled and joint-stratified analyses; to increase power, we also used the pooled data as in silico replication. Despite the difference in genomics technology (RNA-seq in discovery, microarray in RAAK), we again found good agreement of the log-fold-changes for the differentially expressed genes from the discovery data (over 60% have same direction of effect, Pearson r in 0.24–0.43 at p ≤ 0.003, see Supplementary Note).
Pathways involved in OA progression
We identified biological processes with consistent evidence of involvement in OA progression at multiple levels (Fig. 4, Supplementary Fig. S4, Supplementary Tables S9–S10). A strong theme is cartilage matrix regulation, degeneration, and disassembly. 
Positive regulation of ERK1/2 cascade, heparin-binding and platelet activation were also enriched at multiple molecular levels and are interconnected through common genes (Supplementary Note). We also found enrichment of genes involved in the regulation of angiogenesis at multiple levels, implicating pathways involved in blood vessel and nervous system formation (NCAM signaling for neurite outgrowth and PDGF signaling). The growth of blood vessels and nerves are closely linked processes that share regulatory mechanisms, including the ERK cascade and heparin-binding proteins. Indeed, histological examination of the samples we investigated showed greater blood vessel ingrowth in tissues with more advanced OA (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Drug repurposing potential
To identify existing drugs that could be repurposed for OA, we searched Drugbank for the 49 genes differentially regulated across at least two –omics levels. We identified ten agents with investigational or established actions on nine of the dysregulated proteins, which already have Food and Drug Administration Marketing Authorization for use in humans (Table 1). Among them are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents active against prostacyclin synthase (NSAIDs), which already have marketing authorisation for the symptomatic treatment of OA. Our search also identified phylloquinone (vitamin K1), an agonist of osteocalcin (BGLAP gene). Periostin (POSTN gene), a protein with elevated expression in OA in this study and others, is a vitamin K-dependent protein that induces cartilage degeneration. A recent study has associated sub-clinical vitamin K deficiency with knee OA incidence, adding evidence that this compound could be a disease-modifying agent in OA. 

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Osteoarthritis (OA) affects in excess of 40% of individuals over the age of 70 years, and is a leading cause of pain and loss of physical function. The molecular mechanisms underlying OA remain incompletely understood and there is no curative therapy for OA; disease progression culminates in joint replacement surgery. OA is a complex disease, with both heritable and environmental factors contributing to susceptibility.
Cartilage degeneration is one of the key features of OA. Cartilage tissue is readily accessible at joint replacement surgery, providing an opportunity to characterize the molecular processes underpinning disease development in the right tissue, both to improve our fundamental understanding of disease biology and to identify novel therapeutic opportunities. In recent years, –omics studies in OA have expanded our understanding of disease pathogenesis, reviewed in refs. Here we apply integrated multi-omics (DNA CpG methylation, RNA sequencing and quantitative proteomics) in knee OA tissue to obtain a comprehensive molecular portrait of cartilage degeneration (Fig. 1a). The fundamental question here addresses the biological processes underpinning disease progression within the OA joint, which is of direct clinical relevance to patients suffering from OA. To achieve this, we collected individually-matched pairs of cartilage tissue from patients undergoing joint replacement surgery, with one sample demonstrating advanced degenerative change and the other demonstrating little or no evidence of cartilage degeneration. The findings were then replicated in several independent populations of patients undergoing joint replacement. By integrating all three of methylation, gene expression, and protein abundance data, we discover disease processes with involvement across multiple levels, and reveal novel and robustly replicating molecular players with translational potential. 

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Julia Steinberg, Graham R. S. Ritchie, J. Mark Wilkinson and Eleftheria Zeggini contributed equally to this work.
Electronic supplementary material
 Supplementary information accompanies this paper at doi:10.1038/s41598-017-09335-6 
 Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.