PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: SWATH MS; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free; SILAC
keywords: Erlin2; Tmub1; Drms; Endoplasmic reticulum; Hereditary spastic paraplegia; Erlin1; Lipid rafts

ABSTRACT:
Complexes of ERLIN1 and ERLIN2 form large ring-like cup shaped structures on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane and serve as platform to bind cholesterol and E3-ubiquitin ligases, potentially defining functional nanodomains. Here, we show that ERLIN scaffolds mediate the interaction between the full-length isoform of TMUB1 and RNF170. We identify a luminal N-terminal conserved region in TMUB1 and RNF170 required for the interaction. Three-dimensional modelling using Alpha Fold Multimer shows that this conserved motif binds the SPFH domain of two adjacent ERLIN subunits at different interfaces. ERLIN1 and ERLIN2 variants that preclude these interactions are unstable and have been previously linked to hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP), a progressive neurological disorder. Using HeLa cells that lack both ERLINs, we uncovered novel processes dependent on these scaffolds. Proteomics and lipidomics approaches demonstrated a role of ERLINs in cell adhesion, vesicular secretion, and cholesterol and sphingomyelin metabolism. Cells lacking ERLINs displayed collapsed tubular ER, a fragmented Golgi apparatus, and impaired post-Golgi trafficking. Moreover, they accumulated cholesterol esters and triacylglycerols in larger lipid droplets. We found that inhibition of sterol-O-acyltransferase 1 with avasimibe suppressed lipid droplet accumulation, Golgi fragmentation and SREBP activation. We conclude that ERLIN scaffolds maintain cholesterol levels at the ER in check by favouring trafficking to the Golgi over esterification, thereby regulating the secretory pathway.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ERLIN1 and ERLIN2 scaffolds bridge TMUB1 and RNF170 and restrict cholesterol esterification to regulate the secretory pathway

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM containing 4.5 g/L of glucose, 2 mM glutamine, 10,000 u/ml penicillin, 10,000 µg/ml streptomycin and 10% FetalClone. For SILAC labelling, cells were grown in arginine and lysine free DMEM with 4.5 g/L glucose (containing dialyzed FCS penicillin-streptomycin-glutamine and different isotopes of arginine and lysine. We used medium isotopes (Arg-6, Lys-4) for the WT, light (Arg-0, Lys-0) for the DKO and heavy (Arg10, Lys 8) for the DKO+E1/E2. The medium was changed every 2 days and cells were kept 8 days in medium containing the desired isotope of arginine and lysine, before proceeding to use the cells for further experiments. The IP was performed starting from 20 million cells seeded on a 15 cm dish the day before the lysis. After one wash PBS 1X at room temperature, cells were harvested with a cell scraper, pellet at 60 g for 3 minutes and resuspended in IP buffer (Tris-HCl pH 7,4 50 mM, KCl 50 mM, Triton X-100 0,5%, Protease inhibitors 1X). After physical disruption passing through an insulin syringe for 6 times, cells were incubated for 30 minutes on ice and later centrifugated at 20 000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentration was performed and 500 µg of proteins were transferred in a new Eppendorf and the volume was brought to 250 ul with IP buffer. 0.5 µg of indicated antibody was added to the proteins and incubated overnight at +4°C on the rotor. The day after 20 ul of Dynabeads™ Protein G were washed three times in IP buffer with the magnetic rack and added to the proteins for 3 h. After the incubation, the magnetic rack was used to exclude the beads from the flow through (containing all the unbounded proteins), and the beads were washed three times. Depending to the application the elution was performed in 30 ul of Laemmli buffer 3x, for WB, or in SP3 buffer (5% SDS in PBS1x) for proteomics. The beads in the elution solution were vortexed for one minute and boiled for five. The beads were later removed with the magnetic rack.   Detergent resistant membrane isolation DRMs were isolated according to the protocol from George et al (Biotechniques. 49:837-838 George et al., 2010). Importantly, the lipid-protein crosslinking step was not performed and the Triton X-100 concentration of the isolation buffer was increased to 0.5 %. 15 million cells per sample were washed twice with cold PBS + 5 mM EDTA. Cells were harvested and centrifuged for 10 min at 11200 x g at 4 °C. Cell pellets were kept O/N at -80°C. Samples were washed once with TBS and lysed in raft isolation buffer (0.5% Triton X 100, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 50 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.4). Following lysis, cell lysate was centrifuged for 15 min at 112 x g at 4 °C. Equal amounts of protein were suspended in 500 μl raft isolation buffer and subsequently mixed with 1 ml 60 % Opti-prep solution to obtain a final concentration of 40 % Iodixanol. Homogenate was transferred to a 4 ml SW60 swing bucket rotor tubes and overlaid with a step gradient of 30 % iodixanol solution and 5 % iodixanol solution to a final volume of 4 ml. The step gradients were centrifuged in ultra-clear tubes for 5 h at 132000 x g at 4 °C. Subsequently, five fractions were obtained by taking 800 μl from the top to bottom.   Proteomic analysis of co-IP´s, post nuclear lysate and SILAC labelled DRMs  After IP, the proteins eluted in SP3 buffer were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin using the SP3 protocol. For the analysis of DRM fractions generated from SILAC labelled cells and label free profiling of post-nuclear lysate, the proteins were precipitated with aceton. The pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5, and digested with LysC and Trypsin as described previously (Schatton et al., doi: 10.7554/eLife.74552). Digested samples were loaded on Stage Tips and submitted to the CECAD proteomics facility. Immunoprecipitated as well as SILAC labelled samples were analysed in data depended acquisition mode (DDA) on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. For whole proteome profiling of post-nuclear lysate, samples were analysed in data independent acquisition mode (DIA) on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer

DATA PROCESSING:
DDA raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 or 2.0.1.0. LFQ quantification was enabled with default settings and the match-between runs option was enabled within replicate groups. For SILAC ratio quantification the label multiplicity was set to 3 with Arg-6 and Lys-4 selected as medium and Arg-10 and Lys-8 as heavy labels. DIA data were analysed with DIA-NN 1.8.1. First the narrow window DIA runs were demultiplexed and transformed to mzML files using the msconvert module in Proteowizard. These files were used to generate an experiment specific spectral library from a swiss prot human canonical fasta file using the library generation option in DIA-NN.   For statistical analysis the MaxQuant or DIA-NN output tables were imported to Perseus version 1.6.15.0. Potential contaminants were removed, intensities were log2 transformed and the data sets were filtered for at least 100 % data completeness in at least one condition. Remaining missing values were imputed with random values from the lower end of the intensity distribution using Perseus defaults. Student´s T-tests and ANOVAs were calculated with permutation-based FDR control (q < 0.05)   For the five DRM fractions, no imputation was use and the following steps were performed separately. Significant candidates with changing SILAC ratios between any conditions were identified by ANOVA multiple sample testing (S0 = 0.1, permutation-based FDR < 0.05 with 250 randomizations). Next, the dataset was filtered for significantly regulated candidates, SILAC ratios were Z-score normalized protein-wise, and Euclidean hierarchical clustering was performed to identify protein clusters with similar changing protein SILAC ratios over the three conditions. Finally, all fractions were merged, protein groups were annotated with Gene ontology (GO) terms and compartments and Fisher’s exact tests were performed for each fraction separately (Benjamini-Hochberg FDR = 0.02) to identify regulated processes systematically.