PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Tear gland
diseases: Sjogren's syndrome
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion ETD
modifications: methylthiolated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Sjögren's disease; Mouse; Lacrimal gland

ABSTRACT:
The lacrimal gland (LG) is the major source of aqueous tears, and insufficient LG secretion leads to aqueous-deficient dry eye (ADDE) disease. To provide a foundational description of LG's protein expression patterns, we prepared protein extracts of LGs from a wild-type and an ADDE mouse model and analyzed the proteome by quantitative mass spectrometry.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Lacrimal Gland from Sjögren's disease animal model

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
LGs were isolated from an ADDE mouse model, male NOD (non-obese diabetic) mice and control wild-type BALB/c mice (n = 6 each). Protein samples were prepared in urea-based lysis buffer and protein concentrations determined by the BCA method. The equivalent of 200 μg protein were tryptically digested and analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteins were identified and quantified using the PEAKS X bioinformatics suite. Downstream differential protein expression analysis was performed using the MS-DAP R package. Selected significantly differentially expressed and detected proteins were subjected to spatial expression analysis using immunohistochemistry.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
An overview of the study workflow is presented schematically in Figure 1. In this study, using algorithmic statistical models for differential expression analysis (DEA), the protein expression patterns of LGs from NOD mice, an ADDE, and excellent Sjögren's disease animal model, were compared with those from BALB/c mice – control animals that do not show signs of inflammation (Supplementary Fig. S1).
Animals
All procedures were performed in accordance with the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology (ARVO) statement for the use of animals in ophthalmic and vision research and were approved by the Tufts Medical Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Thirty-eight-week-old, male NOR/LtJ mice (catalog # 002050, purchased from The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were used in this study. NOR/LtJ mice are an insulitis resistant and diabetes-free strain that still develops peripheral T-lymphocyte accumulation as characterized in NOD/ShiLtJ mice. Their respective sex- and age-matched controls, BALB/c mice (catalog # 028) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA, USA). Animals were euthanized and their exorbital LGs excised and processed for protein extraction or histopathological procedures, as described below.
Protein Digestion and Peptide Purification
Frozen LGs from NOD (n = 6) and BALB/c (n = 6) mice were resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8], 1 mM NaF, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM PMSF, and 1 tablet of EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail) and homogenized using sonication. Homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C and protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay method.
The equivalent of 200 µg of protein were subjected to protein digestion following a modified S-Trap protocol. Briefly, protein extracts were supplemented to a final concentration of 5% SDS and 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) prior to reduction with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) for 15 minutes at 56°C. Samples were cooled to room temperature (RT) and alkylated with 20 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 minutes. Lysates were acidified to a final concentration of 1.1% phosphoric acid, mixed with binding/wash buffer (BW = 90% methanol, and 100 mM TEAB) and the resulting protein suspension was transferred to the S-Trap and centrifuged at 2800 × g for 1 minute. Trapped proteins were washed four times with BW buffer. Then, 5 µg Trypsin/Lys-C (in 125 µL 50 mM TEAB) were added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C. The tryptic peptides were eluted via centrifugation for 1 minute at 2800 × g sequentially with 80 µL of TEAB, 80 µL of 0.2% TFA, and 80 µL of 50% ACN in 0.2% TFA. The eluted peptides were vacuum-dried and resuspended in 5% ACN in 0.2% TFA.
LC-MS/MS Analysis
Nanoflow LC-MS/MS measurements were performed using an Easy-nLC 1000 system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for label-free quantitation. Tryptic peptides were trapped using an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 µm × 2 cm) column, washed in 0.1% formic acid, and transferred to an Easy-Spray C18 (ES900, 75 µm × 15 cm, 3 µm particle size) analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column temperature of 45°C. Chromatographic separation was achieved using a linear gradient up to 44% solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 120 minutes.
The mass spectrometer (MS) was operated in data-depended acquisition mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS measurements. Full scan MS spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap in the scan range from 350 to 1200 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3.0 × 105 ion counts and a maximum injection time (maxIT) of 250 ms. After the survey scan, the 20 most abundant precursor ions (intensity ≥ 2.5 × 104 ions) were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of a 1.6 m/z for high-collision dissociation fragmentation and fragment ions were recorded in the Orbitrap at a 15,000 resolution, AGC and maxIT were set to 5 × 104 and 150 ms, respectively. The dynamic exclusion time for previously analyzed precursor ions and isotopes was 40 seconds.
Identification and Quantification of Peptides and Proteins
Raw MS data were processed using PEAKS Studio XPro 10.6 software using the following parameters: merge scans (retention time window = 10 ppm, precursor m/z tolerance = 10 ppm, and precursor mass and charge states z = 1–10). Other data pre-processing (centroiding, deisotoping, and deconvolution) was executed automatically. Searches were performed iteratively against the house mouse (Mus Musculus) UniProt database (July 2021, containing 15,000 entries) and the Mouse Oral Microbiome Database (MOMD; February 2023, containing 148,242 entries) using the following search parameters: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance 0.02 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity with cleavage prior to proline permitted; variable modifications: Methylthio (C), phosphorylation (STY), pyro-glu (Q), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), HexNAcylation (N), acetylation (N-term); one non-specific cleavage specificity on one terminus, maximal two missed cleavages, and maximal two variable post-translational modifications per peptide. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and proteins were filtered at a false discovery rate of 1% calculated using the decoy-fusion approach. Proteins were considered identified with at least two unique peptides. For protein quantification, the peak areas of all identified peak features were exported and further bioinformatics analysis were carried out in R software (version 4.4.01) using the MS-DAP 1.1.2 package. Specifically, peptides were globally filtered (quantified in at least three samples; at least two peptides per protein) prior to normalization using a combination of the robust linear regression (rlr) algorithm and subsequent balancing of between-group protein level fold changes with mode-between protein normalization. Subsequentially, peptide-to-protein-rollup was performed using the MaxLFQ-algorithm and DEA using the MSqRob algorithm. The MS-DAP differential detection algorithm was used to rank and prioritize proteins-of-interest not evaluated by the DEA algorithm due to insufficient data points across the entire dataset and a strong difference between the number of detected underlying peptides between the two sample groups.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
The (fgsea) R software package was used for gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using all quantified proteins and a combination of their effect sizes and differential expression significance (adjusted P values) as a pre-ranking metric. Effect sizes indicate how meaningful the difference between the two groups is, allowing us to provide not only a statistical significance (P value), but also a substantive significance for how large the protein expression differences between NOD and BALB/c samples are. GSEA was performed against the M2, M5, and M8 collections of the Molecular Signatures database (MSigDB version 2023.1.Mm updated March 2023) that contain curated gene sets from online pathway databases, as well as ontology and cell type signature gene sets, respectively.
Immunofluorescence Staining
LGs from at least 3 different NOD and BALB/c mice were fixed in 4% methanol-free formaldehyde diluted in PBS. Glands were washed in PBS and dehydrated using a series of xylenes and graded ethanol solutions prior to embedding. LG tissue was then embedded into paraffin blocks and 7-µm-thick tissue sections were cut and mounted onto Superfrost Plus microscope slides (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Tissue sections were then dried in an Isotemp oven at 55°C for 15 minutes, deparaffinized in 3 washes of xylenes, and rehydrated using a series of gradient ethanol solutions, and a final wash in deionized/pure water. Next, antigen unmasking was performed by placing the slides in either an EDTA buffer (1 mM EDTA, 0.05% Tween 20, and pH 8.0) or citric-based antigen retrieval solution (pH 6.0; BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) prior to microwaving them for 5 minutes. Tissue sections were allowed to cool down at RT for 20 minutes, and, when appropriate, tissue permeabilization was performed by incubation with 0.1% Triton X-100 in 1% BSA/PBS at RT for 10 minutes. After 3 washes with TBS, non-specific binding sites were then blocked using 10% normal donkey serum (Jackson Immuno Research Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA) for 1 hour at RT. Tissue sections were then left incubating overnight, at 4°C, with the appropriate primary antibody (see Supplementary Table S1 for a list of antibodies used). Primary antibody was omitted for sections used as negative controls (Supplementary Fig. S2). Tissue sections were then incubated with a Donkey anti-Rabbit IgG H&L, Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated secondary antibody (1:1000 dilution; Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA) for 1 hour at RT. Any endogenous tissue fluorescence was then quenched using Invitrogen's Ready Probes Tissue Autofluorescence Quenching kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) prior to covering the slides with a SlowFade Diamond Antifade mounting medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) containing DAPI for nuclear counterstaining.
For double staining immunofluorescence experiments, LG tissue sections were processed as described above and incubated with directly labeled primary antibodies. Rabbit primary antibodies were conjugated using either the FlexAble 2.0 CoraLite Plus 488 or FlexAble 2.0 CoraLite Plus 555 antibody labeling kits for rabbit IgG as instructed by the manufacturer (Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA). Briefly, each antibody was labeled individually in a separate microtube with the corresponding fluorochrome and later mixed for the desired application. After deparaffinization, rehydration, antigen retrieval, and tissue permeabilization, tissue sections were blocked for 45 minutes using 1% bovine serum albumin and incubated overnight at 4°C with the labeled antibodies mixture (see Supplementary Table S1 for a list of antibodies used). Then, tissue sections were washed 3 times with TBST (0.05% Tween-20) and quenched for autofluorescence prior to cover slipping as described above.
Immunofluorescence Image Acquisition and Analysis
Immuno-stained slides were imaged using a color digital camera (SPOT Insight CMOS; SPOT Imaging, Sterling Heights, MI, USA) mounted on an Eclipse E600 microscope (Nikon Instruments Inc., Melville, NY, USA). Two to three images (from 3 serial tissue sections on each slide) were randomly captured using the same exposure and gain parameters between BALB/c and NOD tissue sections. As described on ImageJ's webpage, the color threshold tool on the FIJI software (ImageJ version 1.54, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA) was used to manually select the positively stained areas of each image. Subsequently, the mean gray value calculated for each selected area per image was used as a measurement of fluorescence intensity.
Statistical analyses of immunofluorescence images and data plots were made using the GraphPad Prism Software (version 10.2.3; Boston, MA, USA). Where appropriate, data are presented as means ± standard deviation (SD). Any outliers were identified and removed using the ROUT method (Q = 1%) and normal data distribution was evaluated using normality and lognormality tests. Data were analyzed using two-tailed unpaired t-test with Welch's correction. Statistically significant differences between each group were considered at P value < 0.05.

RESULTS:
Results
LC-MS/MS Identification of Peptides and Proteins
A total of 31,932 peptide sequences were identified by nanoflow LC-MS/MS resulting in 2617 protein identifications at a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide and protein level (the complete list of identified proteins is provided in Supplementary Table S2). The number of identified peptides per sample was, on average, statistically significantly lower in the control BALB/c samples when compared with NOD samples and showed higher levels of in-group variance (18,200 ± 1000 compared with 19,620 ± 500 peptides in BALB/c and NOD samples, respectively, two-tailed unpaired t-test; Fig. 2A). Quality control (QC) analysis revealed technical issues with sample “BALB/c 4” which was excluded from further analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) showed a clear separation of LG samples from diseased NOD and control BALB/c mice (Fig. 2B). Similarly, a hierarchical cluster analysis revealed a consistent group specific clustering of BALB/c and NOD samples (Fig. 2C).
Differential Expression Analysis and Differentially Detected Proteins
After applying the global peptide filtering criteria and peptide-to-protein-rollup, the remaining 1750 proteins were subjected to DEA using the MSqRob algorithm. DEA analyses identified 580 proteins that had statistically significant expression differences between BALB/c and NOD samples after correction for multiple comparisons (see Supplementary Table S3 for all 580 proteins with significant expression differences). To optimally visualize and display the DEA results, a volcano plot with defined q-value and foldchange cutoffs (q-value threshold = 0.05; bootstrapped log2 fold change threshold = 0.815) was created (Fig. 3A). A heatmap analysis of the differentially expressed and differentially detected proteins confirmed the distinct protein expression profiles of BALB/c versus NOD clusters (Fig. 3B).
We took into consideration both the log2 fold changes and differential expression significance (adjusted P values) of all differentially expressed and differentially detected proteins as a ranking criterion to identify the most significantly up- and downregulated proteins in our dataset. This ranking method allow us to take all proteins with significant expression changes into consideration and not only those that have large expression changes (such as fold changes ≥ 2) as it is frequently done. The top 10 most significantly up- and downregulated proteins in the LGs of diseased NOD mice compared with control mice are presented separately in Tables 1 and 2.
In our DEA approach, we chose not to impute abundances for missing values. Accordingly, proteins that are predominantly found in one sample group cannot be statistically evaluated by the differential expression analysis algorithm. Instead, we used the differential detection algorithm and resulting z-scores to identify group-specific proteins. A total of 44 proteins were differentially detected between NOD and BALB/c samples. Table 3 shows the top 10 differentially detected/found proteins in LGs from NOD mice and the 4 only proteins predominantly found in BALB/c samples (see Supplementary Table S4 for the complete list of differentially detected proteins).
Up- and Down-Regulated Pathways Using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
All quantified proteins were ranked based on their effect sizes and adjusted P values prior to being subjected to GSEA against the M2, M5, and M8 mouse collections of the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB). To elucidate the biological functions of the identified proteins with different expression levels in healthy versus diseased LGs, we analyzed the enriched gene sets against the M5 collection of the MSigDB. The M5 collection is derived from gene ontology (GO) resources and represents GO terms belonging to three root ontologies: biological processes (BPs), cellular components (CCs), and molecular functions (MFs). In our dataset, a total of 62 pathways and another additional 7 pathways from the M5 collection, were upregulated and downregulated, respectively. Multiple pathways related to actin/actin-binding and actin filament components of the cytoskeleton were upregulated among the top 20 enriched gene sets in our analysis (Fig. 4A), suggesting that many of the differentially expressed proteins upregulated in diseased LGs from NOD mice were cytoskeletal proteins. Conversely, amino acid and tRNA metabolic processes were two metabolism-associated pathways downregulated in our analysis against the M5 collection. The largest molecular function downregulated was “translation factor activity RNA binding” whereas a set of pathways related to vesicle mediated transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the golgi apparatus were also highly downregulated in our dataset (see Fig. 4A).
Additionally, protein-protein interactions were evaluated using the STRING database (https://string-db.org/). The top 50 (for data visualization purposes) up- and downregulated proteins in the dataset were inputted into the database and protein association or interaction network maps were generated with a medium confidence (0.400) criterion. Similar to the GSEA results, proteins involved in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton were the largest interacting cluster observed among the top 50 upregulated proteins, followed by histone proteins or proteins with similar molecular structure activity, and, last, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins involved in pre-mRNA binding and RNA metabolism (Fig. 4B). Conversely, very few protein-to-protein interactions were present among the top 50 downregulated protein list, with a small interacting cluster consisting of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases such as Valine, Glycine, and Asparagine-tRNA ligases (Fig. 4C).
The M2 collection contains gene sets from curated online pathways databases and the biomedical literature, which are divided into chemical and genetic perturbations, as well as canonical pathways. GSEA against the M2 collection revealed upregulation of 19 pathways in LGs from NOD mice and 2 downregulated pathways. Among the top 20 enriched pathways presented in Figure 5A, gene sets associated with translation initiation and translation factors were the 2 downregulated canonical pathways. Meanwhile, the “Chen metabolic syndrome network” pathway (comprised of genes forming the macrophage-enriched metabolic network related to metabolic syndrome traits), and several Rho GTPases signaling pathways, were significantly upregulated in diseased LGs from NOD mice when compared with BALB/c mice.
Last, GSEA against the M8 collection facilitated the identification of up- or downregulated cell type signatures among the differentially expressed and detected proteins in our dataset. The M8 collection of the MSigDB contains cluster marker genes for cell types that have been identified in different single-cell sequencing studies of mouse tissue. Fifteen total pathways were upregulated, and none significantly downregulated, as shown in Figure 5B. Not surprisingly, several cluster marker gene sets for cell types associated with T-cell aging were significantly upregulated in the chronically inflamed LGs of NOD mice. Most of the remaining significantly upregulated pathways were associated with immune-system-related cell types, such as monocytes and myeloid cells aging.
Overall, our GSEA shows that more gene sets or pathways were found to be upregulated than downregulated in chronically inflamed LGs of diseased NOD mice, suggesting that significant alterations are taking place in the LG proteome after the development of dacryoadenitis.
Validation of LC-MS/MS Results Using Immunofluorescence Staining
To validate the LC-MS/MS results, selected proteins with significant differential expression or differentially detected in healthy controls versus diseased mice were subjected to spatial expression analysis using immunofluorescence staining. One of the most significantly differentially upregulated proteins (2.70 positive fold-change, adjusted P value = 1.26E-67) in LGs from diseased animals compared with controls was Filamin-A (FLNA). As shown in Figures 6A and 6B, immunofluorescence staining confirmed the overexpression of FLNA in diseased LGs. Moreover, and because the staining pattern of FLNA was very similar to that of alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), an important contractile protein expressed by myoepithelial cells (MECs) of the lacrimal and other exocrine glands, LG tissue sections were double stained with anti FLNA and anti α-SMA antibodies. Double staining immunofluorescence showed that FLNA was very strongly co-localized with α-SMA (Fig. 6C), suggesting that this actin-binding protein is greatly upregulated in the MECs of inflamed LGs from the diseased animals. Additionally, a positive FLNA staining signal was observed in some areas where infiltrated lymphocytes were localized within the gland (see Fig. 6C).
The upregulated expression of Annexin A2 (ANXA2; Figs. 7A, 7B) and downregulated levels of Valyl-tRNA synthetase (VARS1; Figs. 7C, 7D) in diseased LGs was also analyzed and confirmed by spatial immunofluorescence staining. In addition, LG sections from healthy, young NOD and BALB/c (3 weeks old) mice were also stained for VARS1 and the fluorescence staining intensity semi-quantified. In contrast to the results from stained LG sections from diseased animals and their age-matched controls, the measured VARS1 staining intensity was not lower in these very young NOD mice when compared with age-matched BALB/c controls (83.70 ± 10.48 in BALB/c versus 104.4 ± 21.37 in NOD; Supplementary Fig. S3).
APAF1 interacting protein (APIP) was one of the four proteins significantly differentially detected in BALB/c samples, and, thus, downregulated (fold change = –2.07; effect size = –6.29; adjusted P value = 9.53E-09) in LGs from diseased NOD mice. APIP was expressed both at the nuclear and cytoplasmic level in the LG acini regions from both the diseased and healthy control animals (Fig. 8A). However, there was no significant difference between the measured fluorescence intensity of APIP-stained LG sections from control versus diseased mice (data not shown). Because APIP seemed to be expressed at the apical portion of the acini, additional LG sections were double-stained with APIP and aquaporin-5 (AQP5) – a water channel protein that is known to be expressed at the apical region of secretory cells of lacrimal and salivary glands. Based on the double staining results, APIP was not precisely co-localized with AQP5 in acinar and ductal cells, however, the staining localization of APIP did seem to be near that of AQP5 present in the acini (Fig. 8B). Additionally, no fluorescence staining intensity difference was observed between young and healthy (3 weeks old) NOD and age-matched BALB/c LG sections stained for APIP (97.08 ± 32.41 in BALB/c versus 92.13 ± 22.24 in NOD; see Supplementary Fig. S3).

INTRODUCTION:
The lacrimal gland (LG) is responsible for providing the major components of the aqueous layer composing the human tear film. Secretions from the LG provide essential proteins, growth factors, anti-microbial agents, electrolytes, and immune cells required to nourish, protect, and help regulate the function of the cornea and conjunctiva. Dysfunction of the LG can be induced by inflammation, aging, and other biological and/or environmental factors, resulting in insufficient lacrimal fluid and tear production. Insufficient tear production and low-quality lacrimal fluid leads to aqueous-deficient dry eye (ADDE) disease. Patients with ADDE disease often experience severe pain caused by irritation of the eye, blurry vision, and sensitivity to light. Moreover, severe dry eye disease can cause corneal ulcers and loss of corneal transparency, threatening vision and deteriorating the daily quality of life. ADDE has been recently subclassified into three types: type I (sporadic/intermittent disease), type II (persistent disease and the presence of an inflammatory component), and type III (chronic disease), based on the ability of the ocular surface to restore its equilibrium following exposure to key triggering factors, such as hyperosmolarity and inflammation.
Sjögren's disease, the leading cause of ADDE, is a chronic autoimmune disorder of the lacrimal and salivary glands affecting an estimated 1 to 4 million Americans (mostly women) that results in dry eye and dry mouth. Sjögren's disease can be clinically manifested as a primary disorder (primary Sjögren's disease) or be associated with other autoimmune diseases (secondary Sjögren's disease), such as rheumatoid arthritis or systemic sclerosis. Sjögren's disease is characterized by focal lymphocytic infiltration of the lacrimal and salivary glands, and the production of autoantibodies, such as those directed against the ribonucleoproteins Ro/SSA and La/SSB. Additionally, an increased expression of several proinflammatory cytokines is commonly observed in the lacrimal and salivary glands of patients with Sjögren's disease. Many of these proinflammatory cytokines, as we and others have previously reported, impair LG myoepithelial cells contractile function, and inhibit neurally stimulated LG secretion.
Male non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice have been extensively used as an animal model for human primary Sjögren's disease. In these mice, lymphocytic infiltration of the LG and disease severity occur in a time-dependent manner with older (>30 weeks) mice showing the most severe phenotype. Wild type age- and sex-matched BALB/c mice are an accepted control strain to use along the NOD mice as they do not showcase signs of inflammation.
An inflammatory proteomic profile has been reported to be present in the tear film of patients with Sjögren's disease when compared with healthy controls. Several comparative studies have described the use of proteomic techniques to analyze and characterize the tear and salivary proteomes of healthy patients and patients with Sjögren's disease or murine models of the disease. Nonetheless, and to our knowledge, most of these proteomic-based studies have focused on lacrimal fluid, tear fluid, and/or saliva samples, and not on the proteome of chronically inflamed and diseased glands themselves. Despite all the efforts and research to understand the pathophysiology, molecular markers, and general factors involved in ADDE disease, the underlying mechanisms causing insufficient LG secretion due to chronic inflammation are still not well understood, and, thus, effective treatment modalities are still lacking.
Proteomics techniques provide powerful tools enabling the study of proteins at a large scale. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has now been, for over more than a decade, the main crucial tool in proteomics research. In recent years, LC-MS/MS has been increasingly applied in the identification of disease biomarkers and analysis of therapeutic drug monitoring, enabling the optimization of drug treatments for patients. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to (1) provide a comprehensive overview of the LG proteome alterations induced by chronic inflammation as occurs in ADDE disease and Sjögren's disease, and (2) identify potential novel protein-based biomarkers that could be used for future dry eye therapies through pharmacological modulation.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material