PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Mesenchymal cell; Adipose tissue; Umbilical cord
instruments: TripleTOF 5600; Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Adipose tissue; Human mesenchymal stem cells; Hmscs; Umbilical cord

ABSTRACT:
We performed a proteomic profiling of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) derived from adipose tissue or umbilical cord.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic profiling of human mesenchymal stem cells derived from umbilical cord or adipose tissue

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human Mesenchymal Stem Cell lines (hMSCs) were derived by the Andalusian Public Health System Biobank (BBSSPA) from adipose tissue and umbilical cord samples. we lysed about 10^7 hMSCs derived from adipose tissue or umbilical cord. After precipitation, we subjected the proteins to two different analytical workflows. First, we fractionated the proteins by SDS-PAGE and performed an in-gel digestion with trypsin of the resulting 14 gel slices. After peptide extraction, we analyzed the samples by LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). In the second approach, we performed a trypsin digestion and peptides were resolved by high pH reversed phase chromatography. We collected 6 chromatographic fractions that, together with an aliquot of the unfractionated sample, were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in a 5600 Triple-TOF mass spectrometer (Sciex).

DATA PROCESSING:
We searched the acquired MS/MS spectra against the last release available of the neXtProt database (v2.15.0; 2018-01-17) using an in-house developed algorithm that combines the outputs of four independent search engines: MASCOT, X! Tandem, OMSSA and Myrimatch. Identifications were filtered at a FDR ≤ 1% at the protein level.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Currently, 14% of the human proteome is made up of proteins whose existence is not confirmed by mass spectrometry. We performed a proteomic profiling of human mesenchymal stem cells derived from adipose tissue or umbilical cord (PRIDE accession number: PXD009893) and identified peptides derived from 13 of such missing proteins. Remarkably, we found compelling evidence of the expression of hyaluronan synthase 1 (NX_Q92839-1) and confirmed its identification by the fragmentation of four heavy-labeled peptides that coeluted with their endogenous light counterparts. Our data also suggest that mesenchymal stem cells constitute a promising source for the detection of missing proteins.