PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Blood cell
diseases: Obesity
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Proteomics; Bioelectrical impedance analysis; Body composition; Paediatric obesity; Peripheral blood mononuclear cells

ABSTRACT:
We isolated cell lysate proteins from PBMCs obtained from 71 children and adolescents (age 5-18) with normal weight, overweight or obesity. Body composition was measured using bioelectrical impedance analysis. Nano-electrospray liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was used to measure protein abundances. Controlling for patient sex, we investigated changes in abundance depending on leukocyte counts and on percentage body fat (PBF). We show protein expression in PBMCs is altered in children with increased PBF, especially in mitochondrial proteins. These obesity-associated changes in are better explained by PBF than by purely height and weight-based metrics, supporting the utility of bioelectrical impedance analysis in obesity research.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
PBMC proteomics in paediatric obesity

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Blood samples (5 mL) were collected by trained nurses in EDTA-Vacutainers. Within one hour of collection, blood was diluted 1:1 with sterile phosphate-buffered saline solution (PBS), layered over Lympholyte-H Cell Separation Media (Cedarlane) and centrifuged at 800 rcf, 22°C for 20 minutes. The buffy coat (PBMC) layer was transferred to a fresh centrifuge tube, washed with PBS and centrifuged at 800 rcf for 10 minutes. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in PBS, split into three equal aliquots, pelleted and all aliquots stored at -80°C until further processing.  Cell pellets were lysed in 250 μL lysis buffer (100 mM Tris·HCl, 2.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate) and gently agitated, dithiothreitol (final concentration 4 mM) and chloroacetamide (final concentration 40 mM) were added, and the protein solution reduced and denatured at 95°C for 5 minutes. A portion of the lysate (80 μL) was transferred to fresh Protein Lo-Bind tubes (Eppendorf). The alkylated and reduced protein was processed following the SP4 protocol(Johnston et al., 2022): briefly, protein samples were precipitated using four volumes of acetonitrile, followed by five washes with 500 μL 80% ethanol. The protein pellet was briefly dried, then vortexed in 150 μL 100 mM TEAB buffer to facilitate resuspension. Trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega) was added in 1:25 m/m ratio and incubated overnight at 37°C, 700 rpm, which facilitated full resuspension of the protein pellet. This peptide solution was clarified by centrifugation and digestion stopped with addition of 25 μL 5% formic acid. Peptides were simultaneously filtered and desalted following the R3 cleanup protocol(O’Cualain et al., 2022): POROS R3 cross-linked poly-divinylbenzene particles (Thermo Scientific, cat. no. 1133903) were first suspended in 96-well filter plates and conditioned by washing with 50% acetonitrile, followed by washing twice with 0.1% formic acid in water. The peptide solution was added to conditioned R3 particles, incubated for 5 minutes and centrifuged through the filter plate. The flow-through unbound fraction was discarded. Particle-bound peptides were washed two times with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water and eluted in 0.1% FA, 50% acetonitrile in two portions, followed by evaporation of eluted peptides to dryness.   Desalted peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (3% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) and the peptide concentration was adjusted to 1.0 μg/μL. Peptides were analysed on a Ultimate 3000 RSCLnano (Thermo Scientific) HPLC system connected to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientifc) set up for direct injection operation. Samples were injected in random order to minimise batch effects due to MS instrument changes. Peptides (1 μL per sample) were separated on a 25 cm long column (EasySpray, Thermo Scientific ES902; 250 mm x 75 μM internal diameter, packed with 2 μm diameter C18 particles) kept at 40°C. The HPLC was set up with mobile phase A (0.1% FA in milliQ water) and mobile phase B (0.1% FA, 80% acetonitrile in water). The LC flow was maintained at 300 nL/min through with mobile phase composition changing as follows: 2 minutes peptide loading 4% B, 60 minutes linear gradient 4%-16% B, 60 minutes steeper linear gradient 16%-37% B, 5 minutes 37%-50% B, 3 minutes 50%-98% B, 2 minutes column wash 98% B, final equilibration to 4% B. Peptides were ionised in positive ionisation mode on EasySpray source with ionisation voltage +2.0 kV, capillary temperature 250°C, without auxiliary or sheath gas, S-lens RF level 50. Mass calibration was checked twice per week and recalibrated as needed.   Q Exactive Plus spectrometer was operated in Top14 data dependent mode, switching automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 200-2000) were acquired with a mass resolution 70 000, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 100 ms, followed by up to 14 sequential hich-energy collisional dissociation MS/MS scans with a resolution of 35 000 (NCE 27, isolation window 2.0 m/z, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 50 ms). Ions with charges other than 2, 3 or 4 were excluded from MS2 collection. All data were collected in centroid mode. Data acquisition was completed within two weeks and LC-MS/MS instrument performance was monitored by periodic standard acquisition.

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein identification and quantitation was perfomed in Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.4.1.15, Thermo Scientific) in a two-step workflow. The first step was adapted from Precursor Quan and Sequest HT Percolator default workflow. Each raw file was searched with Sequest HT against the reviewed SwissProt human proteome (Uniprot 9606, 20 342 sequences, downloaded 29 Sep 2023). The Hao group list of common contaminants was added as a second database(Frankenfield et al., 2022). Tryptic peptides only were allowed (up to 2 missed cleavages, peptide length 6-40 amino acid residues) with precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a global fixed modification, methionine oxidation as global dynamic modification, and acetylation and/or methionine loss as dynamic modification at protein N-terminus. Peptide spectrum matches were evaluated with Percolator against a concatenated target/decoy database with default settings. Resulting MSF files were used in a consensus analysis with the following options: features were aligned with maximum retention time shift set at 20 minutes, precursors were quantified based on intensity and no normalisation or scaling was performed at this stage.  Peptides, proteins and input file tables were exported from consensus analysis results and used for further analysis in R Statistical Software (version 4.3.0)(R Core Team, 2023). The workflow was adapted from a previously published process(Hutchings et al., 2024) which builds on QFeatures package for proteomics data handling(Gatto & Vanderaa, n.d.). After initial raw sample quality assessment, contaminant peptides, peptides without protein accessions, peptides without reliable quantity data, peptides belonging to multiple protein groups and ambiguous features were filtered out. Protein tables were used to remove peptides belonging to proteins that exceed dataset-wide FDR cutoffs (0.01) at peptide or protein level, based on a target-decoy strategy. Additionally, peptides present in <10% of samples were removed. Peptide intensities were log2 transformed, aggregated to proteins based on master protein accession using robustSummary aggregation, and protein intensities normalised using “diff.median” method. Only proteins identified by a two or more peptides passing quality filters, and present in ≥50% samples were used for further analysis.  Differential protein abundance according to PBF and leukocyte count was explored with Limma moderated t-tests, adjusted for participant sex, protein isolation batch and MS analysis date, using limma R package (version 3.58.1)(Ritchie et al., 2015). Limma moderated t-tests employ an empirical Bayes method to borrow information on protein variance across all proteins in the experiment, which increases the power while remaining robust even with small sample numbers. Covariates were selected based on observed correlations in clinical parameters (sex, leukocytes) and technical factors that are known to cause batch effects in shotgut proteomic analysis (isolation batch, analysis date). In initial exploratory analysis, differential expression was considered for genes with q-value <0.05 regardless of the magnitude of correlation.