PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: B cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: B cell receptor; Signal transduction; B cells; Immune cell death; Gene regulation in immune cells

ABSTRACT:
Ligation of the B cell antigen receptor (BCR) initiates humoral immunity. However, mere BCR signaling without appropriate co-stimulation commits B cells to death rather than to differentiation into immune effector cells. How BCR activation depletes potentially autoreactive B cells while simultaneously primes for receiving rescue and differentiation signals from cognate T lymphocytes remains unknown. Here, using a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach to identify cytosolic/nuclear shuttling elements, we uncover transcription factor EB (TFEB) as a central BCR-controlled rheostat that drives activation-induced apoptosis, and concurrently, promotes the reception of co-stimulatory rescue signals by supporting B cell migration and antigen presentation. CD40 co-stimulation prevents TFEB-driven cell death, while enhancing and prolonging TFEB’s nuclear residency, which hallmarks antigenic experience also of memory B cells. In mice, TFEB shapes the transcriptional landscape of germinal center B cells. Within the germinal center, TFEB facilitates the dark zone entry of light-zone-residing centrocytes through regulation of chemokine receptors and, by balancing the expression of Bcl-2/BH3-only family members, integrates antigen-induced apoptosis with T cell-provided CD40 survival signals. Thus, TFEB reprograms antigen-primed germinal center B cells for cell fate decisions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Transcription factor EB sets the stage for fate decisions of antigen-primed B cells in the absence and presence of co-stimulation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample preparation: Samples were reconstituted in 1× NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Invitrogen) and separated on 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen) using half of the gel length. Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue for visualization purposes, and each lane sliced into 11 equidistant regardless of staining. After washing, gel slices were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide and digested with Endopeptidase Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight. The resulting peptide mixtures were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid/ (v:v) and prepared for nanoLC-MS/MS as described previously (Atanassov and Urlaub, 2013). nanoLC-MS/MS analysis: For mass spectrometric analysis samples were enriched on a self-packed reversed phase-C18 precolumn (0.15 mm ID x 20 mm, Reprosil-Pur120 C18-AQ 5 µm, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and separated on an analytical reversed phase-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 200 mm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch) using a 30 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1). The eluent was analyzed on a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole/orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with a FlexIon nanoSpray source and operated under Excalibur 2.5 software using a data-dependent acquisition method. Each experimental cycle was of the following form: one full MS scan across the 350-1600 m/z range was acquired at a resolution setting of 70,000 FWHM, and AGC target of 1*10e6 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Up to the 12 most abundant peptide precursors of charge states 2 to 5 above a 2*10e4 intensity threshold were then sequentially isolated at 2.0 FWHM isolation width, fragmented with nitrogen at a normalized collision energy setting of 25%, and the resulting product ion spectra recorded at a resolution setting of 17,500 FWHM, and AGC target of 2*10e5 and a maximum fill time of 60 ms. Selected precursor m/z values were then excluded for the following 15 s. Two technical replicates per sample were acquired.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant Software version 1.5.2.8 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). Proteins were identified against the UniProtKB  Mus musculus reference proteome (v2018.01, 1748 protein entries) along with a set of common lab contaminants. The search was performed with trypsine as enzyme and iodoacetamide as cysteine blocking agent. Up to two missed tryptic cleavages and methionine oxidation as a variable modification were allowed for. The instrument type ‘Orbitrap’ was selected to adjust for MS acquisition specifics. The Arginine R6/R10 and Lysine K4/K8 labels including the ‘Re-quantify’ option were specified for relative protein quantitation by triplex SILAC. Perseus Software version 1.5.0.15 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany) was used to obtain relative protein quantitation values from the MaxQuant Software results and perform statistical evaluation.