PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Macrophage; Cell culture; Primary cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Lc-msms; Human primary macrophage; Coronary artery disease; Long noncoding rna; Inflammation

ABSTRACT:
Coronary artery disease (CAD) remains the leading cause of mortality worldwide. Macrophages play a crucial role in recruiting immune cells and regulating the inflammatory milieu through the release of a diverse array of cytokines, chemokines, and other immune mediators in CAD. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) interact with DNA, RNA, miRNA, and proteins, making them attractive therapeutic targets for regulating gene expression.  Methods and Results: Gene-expression meta-analysis and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) of human CAD datasets identified 26 lncRNA-mRNA co-expression modules. Network prioritization of top co-expression modules identified SPANXA2-OT1 as a potential key candidate. Conservation analysis revealed that SPANXA2-OT1 is human specific and conserved only in primates. We validated the candidate coding-noncoding RNA regulatory triad in human primary macrophages derived from healthy human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). IL-1β induced the expression of SPANXA2-OT1. RNA in situ hybridization localized SPANXA2-OT1 mRNA in cytoplasm of macrophages. Loss-of-function experiments using antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) against SPANXA2-OT1 demonstrated decreased monocyte/macrophage chemotaxis signature after SPANXA2-OT1 silencing, as demonstrated by unbiased global proteomics and RNAseq data.  Luciferase assay established that SPANXA2-OT1 binds to miR-338 through its miRNA response elements. Gain-of-function (miR-338 mimic) and loss-of-function (SPANXA2-OT1 ASO) experiments revealed that SPANXA2-OT1-miR-338 axis regulates the expression of monocyte chemotactic genes (e.g., IL-8) that may contribute to the pathophysiology of CAD. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated deletion of the SPANXA2-OT1 functional domain (exon 3, which harbors the miR-338 binding site) in human primary macrophages resulted in decreased IL-8 expression, alteration of the chemokine profile, and decreased macrophage chemotaxis. Conclusion: Our results indicate that the lncRNA SPANXA2-OT1 regulates chemokine signatures and macrophage chemotaxis. One such mechanism involves SPANXA2-OT1 binding to miR-338, making it unavailable to regulate IL-8 expression. Our findings may provide a molecular basis for the future identification of novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets for CAD.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Role of lncRNA-SPANXA2-OT1 in macrophage chemotaxis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The human primary macrophage cells were homogenized in RIPA buffer and lysates were proteolyzed using the iST in-solution digestion kit (PreOmics GmbH, Germany) automated on the PreON robot (PreOmics): 50 µg protein sample per 10 µL was added to 40 µL LYSE buffer (PreOmics). The samples were trypsinized for 3 hours following the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were dried in a speed vacuum (EppendorfVacufuge) and resuspended in 40 µL LC-load.

DATA PROCESSING:
The acquired peptide spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer package (PD, Version 2.5) using the SEQUEST-HT search algorithm the Uniprot human fasta database (downloaded 18 January 2022; n = 100 730 entries). The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance window to 0.6 Da. Methionine oxidation and n-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by the PD Percolator algorithm and peptides were filtered based on an FDR threshold of 1.0%. Peptides that were only assigned to one given protein group and not detected in any other protein group were considered unique and used for further analyses. A minimum of 2 unique peptides for each protein were required for the protein to be included in the analyses. The Feature Mapper was enabled in PD to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but may not have been sequenced in all samples. Chromatographic alignment was performed with a maximum retention time shift of 10 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of 5. Precursor peptide abundances were based on their chromatographic intensities and total peptide amount was used for PD normalization.