PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: 6x(13)C; 6x(13)C
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Inflammation; Ampk; Endocannabinoids; Diacylglycerol lipase; Activity based protein profiling

ABSTRACT:
Diacylglycerol lipase-beta (DAGLβ) serves as a principal 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) biosynthetic enzyme regulating endocannabinoid and eicosanoid metabolism in immune cells including macrophages and dendritic cells. Genetic or pharmacological inactivation of DAGLβ ameliorates inflammation and hyper-nociception in preclinical models of pathogenic pain. These beneficial effects have been assigned principally to reductions in downstream proinflammatory lipid signaling, leaving alternative mechanisms of regulation largely underexplored. Here, we apply quantitative chemical- and phospho-proteomics to find that disruption of DAGLβ in primary macrophages leads to LKB1–AMPK signaling activation, resulting in reprogramming of the phosphoproteome and bioenergetics. Notably, AMPK inhibition reversed the antinociceptive effects of DAGLβ blockade, thereby directly supporting DAGLβ–AMPK crosstalk in vivo. Our findings uncover signaling between endocannabinoid biosynthetic enzymes and ancient energy-sensing kinases to mediate cell biological and pain responses.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Endocannabinoid biosynthetic enzymes regulate pain response via LKB1–AMPK signaling

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Phosphoproteomics BMDM cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor, Thermo #A32961), sonicated and fractionated (14,000 x g, 15 min, 4°C) to remove cell debris. Light and heavy proteomes were diluted to 2.5 mg/ml in 200 µl and mixed as a total of 400 µl. Mixed samples were spiked with urea (6 M urea) and reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 65°C for 15 min. After buffer exchange to 200 µl 6 M urea:25 mM ammonium bicarbonate on 10KDa filter (Millipore #MRCPRT010), samples were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min, followed by buffer exchange to 200 µl 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were digested to peptides using trypsin/Lys-C (5 µg in 10 µl of ammonium bicarbonate, sequencing grade from Promega) was added to the mixture and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. Digested peptides were collected through the filter (14,000 x g, 15 min) and lyophilized by speedvac. Phospho samples were further enriched by TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo #A32993). Phosphopeptides and global peptides were prepared in 50 µL 0.1% formic acid for LC–MS/MS. Chemical proteomics Proteomes were diluted to 2 mg/mL in kinase buffer. Desthiobiotin ATP acyl phosphate nucleotide probe (0.5 mM in ddH2O) was then added to each sample (5 μL, 10 μM final), mixed gently, and allowed to incubate at 25°C for 30 min. After incubation, matched light and heavy proteomes were transferred and mixed in a 1:1 ratio in a two-dram vial containing 4:1:3 MeOH/CHCl3/H2O for extraction of proteins to remove excess probe, quickly vortexed, and centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 3 min to pellet protein. Organic and aqueous layers were removed using a Pasteur pipette, and the protein pellet was transferred to a screw-top tube in 600 μL MeOH. A second extraction was performed by adding CHCl3 (150 μL) and H2O (600 μL) to each sample, vortexed, and centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 3 min to pellet protein. Organic and aqueous layers were removed by pipetting, MeOH added to pellet (600 μL) and pellets were re-suspended by sonication (3 x 1 sec pulse, 20% amplitude) for a final extraction. Samples were then centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 5 min to pellet protein and MeOH was removed by pipetting. The pellets were re-suspended in 10 M urea/25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (500 mL), brought to a final volume of 1 mL with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 15 min at 65°C, allowed to cool, and then alkylated. To desalt the samples, each was transferred to a two-dram glass vial, and to the vial 4:1:2 MeOH/CHCl3/ was added. The vials were vortexed quickly, spun at 1,400 x g for 3 min to pellet protein, and aqueous and organic layers were removed using a Pasteur pipette. The resulting protein pellet was transferred to a screw-top tube in 600 μL MeOH, and then CHCl3 (150 μL) and H2O (600 μL) were added to extract protein a second time. The samples were vortexed quickly, centrifuged at 1,400 x g to pellet protein, and the aqueous and organic layers were removed by pipetting. Resulting protein pellet was suspended in MeOH (600 μL) via sonication, centrifuged at 17,000 x g for 5 min to pellet protein, and MeOH removed by pipetting. Protein pellets were then re-suspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (500 μL) and digested with 7.5 μg Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, 15 μL, 0.5 μg/μL) for 3 h at 37°C. Avidin-agarose beads (Thermo Scientific Pierce, 100 μL aliquot per sample) were washed three times by adding 10 mL DPBS, centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 1 min, and decanting. This wash step was repeated for a total of 3 times. Digested protein samples were mixed with washed avidin beads (100 μL) and brought to a volume of 5.5 mL with DPBS in a 15 mL conical and rotated for 1 h to enrich samples for the covalent desthiobiotin modification. The beads were washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (3X with 10 mL, centrifuge at 1,400 x g for 3 min, decant) and then H2O (3X with 10 mL, centrifuge at 1,400 x g for 3 min, decant). Washed beads were then transferred to a low-bind microfuge tube, centrifuged at 1,400 x g for 3 min, allowed to rest for 1 min to settle beads, and then excess H2O was removed carefully using a gel-loading pipette tip. To elute peptides, 100 μL of elution buffer (50% acetonitrile, ACN; 0.1% formic acid) was added to each sample and incubated for 3 min. Beads were spun down at 1,400 x g for 3 min, allowed to rest for 1 min to settle beads, and then 75 μL of peptide-containing supernatant was removed carefully using a gel-loading pipette tip and transferred to a new low bind centrifuge tube. This step was repeated two more times with 75 μL of elution buffer and all eluent were collected into the same centrifuge tube (∼225 μL total). Peptides were dried on a speed vacuum, resulting peptide samples acidified in 5% (v/v) formic acid, and stored at -80°C until analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
phosphoproteomics: Phosphopeptide identification and quantification pipeline processed on the Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) with internal third-party Byonic search engine. Processing parameters uniport mouse database, included trypsin (full) as enzyme, 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 20 ppm fragment mass tolerance, 1% protein FDR, variable (common) modification of phosphorylated amino acids (+79.966331 Da for S, T, Y) and heavy-labeled amino acids (+10.0083 Da for R, +8.0142 Da for K), and fixed modification (+57.021465 Da for alkylated cysteine residues). Consensus steps included PSM filters of 5 ppm delta mass and Byonic score > 300, total peptide amount for normalization, t-test for hypothesis test, and protein modification report only for master protein. Protein ratios were calculated as pairwise ratio based. For SILAC ratio, maximum values were set to 20 and minimum values to 0.05 before log2 calculation. Volcano plot was given -log10(p-value) versus log2(SR) of all peptide groups based on t-test, where p < 0.05 was regarded as significant changes. GO enrichment analysis powered by PANTHER were used for fold change analysis in both phosphoproteomics and global proteomics analysis. Cluster heatmaps were generated using Heatmapper9. Venn plots were generated using InteractiVenn. chemical proteomics: SILAC ATP acyl phosphatase probe-modified proteome analysis was accomplished on Byonic software package (Protein Metrics) using uniport mouse database and Skyline-daily to determine the SR of light/heavy peptides as previously described. SILAC ratios of Skyline report were converted to heavy/light ratio, and maximum values were set to 20 and minimum values to 0.05 before log2 calculation. Search results were imported into R, joined with uniport mouse kinase database to select probed kinases in BMDMs, and filtered for a Byonic score of >300 (unless otherwise specified), minimum peptide length as 6, a precursor mass error between −5 and +5 ppm, dotp > 0.80, idotp > 0.80, and ATP acyl phosphatase probe modification. Grubbs outlier test was performed on GraphPad QuickCalcs Web (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA) with p < 0.01. GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA) was used for LKB1 probe-modified activity as mean ± SEM, statistical Z score versus fold change plot, and heatmap of unique probed-modified kinome sites. Identified unique BMDM kinases were imported on a web-based tool KinMap to plot the protein kinome tree.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Details on SILAC bone marrow derived macrophage (BMDM) differentiation, gel-based competitive activity-based protein profiling (ABPP), quantitative LC-MS/MS proteomics, chemoproteomics and phosphoproteomics, extracellular flux analysis, behavioral assessment of animal nociception, and electrophysiology of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neurons can be found in SI Appendix.
Data, Materials, and Software Availability
Proteomics data have been deposited at ProteomeXchange via the PRIDE database (http://www.proteomexchange.org) and are publicly available under accession numbers PXD047413 and https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD047413. RNA-seq data are available on NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus, under accession number GSE249312.

RESULTS:
Results
Kinome Profiling Reveals Enhanced LKB1 Activity in DAGLβ-Disrupted Macrophages.
Genetic or pharmacological disruption of DAGLβ alters cellular levels of key signaling lipids including diacylglycerol (DAG), endocannabinoid (2-AG), and eicosanoid lipids. Each of these lipids can signal through cognate receptor proteins to position DAGLβ as a potential metabolic “hub” for regulating diverse cell biology (Fig. 1). While these prior studies focused on assigning DAGLβ as a key 2-AG biosynthetic enzyme, global analyses can reveal unanticipated regulatory mechanisms mediated by DAGLβ in cell biology. We selected primary macrophages as our model system because of the enriched activity and importance of DAGLβ in regulating innate immune responses.
We reasoned that a global assessment of changes in kinase functional profiles in DAGLβ-disrupted systems may reveal crosstalk between lipid and protein signaling to further illuminate the cell biological functions of this key endocannabinoid biosynthetic enzyme. These functional proteomic studies are especially important given that our transcriptomic analyses did not reveal overt changes in gene expression upon genetic disruption of DAGLβ in primary macrophages (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). To enable quantitative proteomics, we differentiated bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) in SILAC media to generate “light” and “heavy” BMDMs for our tandem liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) studies as previously reported. We performed lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 100 ng/mL, 16 h) stimulations to confirm that SILAC light and heavy BMDMs showed comparable inflammatory responses as determined by elevated TNFα secretion. Genetic knockout (KO) of DAGLβ resulted in significantly reduced LPS-stimulated TNFα release from BMDMs, which matched previous reports in macrophages (SI Appendix, Fig. S2).
We utilized ATP acyl phosphate activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) to gain insights into signaling alterations in DAGLβ-disrupted BMDMs (SI Appendix, Fig. S3A). This class of activity-based probe facilitates covalent modification of conserved lysines in the ATP-binding pocket for assessing activity states of protein and lipid kinases (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B). SILAC light and heavy BMDMs derived from DAGLβ wild-type (WT) and KO mice, respectively, were lysed, fractionated into soluble and membrane proteomes, and treated with ATP acyl phosphates to label active-site lysines. Light and heavy proteomes were combined after probe labeling followed by digestion with trypsin protease, enrichment of desthiobiotin-modified peptides by avidin-affinity chromatography, and LC-MS/MS analysis to quantify isotopically tagged active-site peptides of kinases. See SI Appendix for additional details of the LC-MS ABPP procedure including the quality control confidence criteria for evaluation of probe-modified peptides.
Using this approach, we quantified changes in probe binding on 170 kinases (>260 distinct modified K sites) in DAGLβ WT compared with KO BMDMs under basal and LPS-activated states (Fig. 2 A–C and SI Appendix, Fig. S4). The majority of probe-modified sites quantified did not show substantial changes with DAGLβ disruption (median SILAC heavy (KO)/light (WT) ratio or SR ~0.7, Dataset S1). Strikingly, we observed a >10-fold enhancement in probe binding to membrane LKB1 (encoded by Stk11) in DAGLβ KO compared with WT LPS-stimulated BMDMs (K178 site, SR >20; Fig. 2D). The K178 site is conserved between mouse and human LKB1 and located adjacent to the HxD motif of the catalytic loop. The probe-modified peptide containing the K178 site matches the consensus sequence targeted by ATP acyl phosphates. In contrast, probe binding to LKB1 in the soluble fraction LPS counterpart and total LKB1 protein expression was largely unchanged, which supports functional probe binding changes in contrast with general alterations in protein expression (SR = 0.9, Fig. 2 D and E and SI Appendix, Fig. S5).
DAGLβ Disruption Activates AMPK in Primary Macrophages.
The prominent increase in ATP acyl phosphate probe labeling of LKB1 K178 in membrane fractions of DAGLβ-deficient BMDMs suggested potential crosstalk between endocannabinoid biosynthetic and LKB1–AMPK pathways. Previous studies demonstrated that membrane localization of LKB1 is needed for AMPK activation in mammalian cells and mutagenesis of the HxD motif adjacent to K178 resulted in impaired LKB1 phosphorylation of AMPK. We compared the levels of phospho-AMPK (T172) in DAGLβ KO and WT BMDMs in the absence and presence of LPS stimulation. DAGLβ expression and activity were assessed using western blots and the DAGL-directed activity-based probe (HT-01), respectively. Total AMPK levels were largely consistent across the treatment conditions. In contrast, phospho-AMPK (pAMPK) levels were significantly increased in LPS-stimulated DAGLβ KO compared with WT BMDMs and treatment with the AMPK inhibitor dorsomorphin (10 µM, 4 h) reduced pAMPK levels (Fig. 3A and SI Appendix, Fig. S6). Dorsomorphin can reduce pAMPK levels by altering conformation of the activation loop (containing T172) upon binding to reduce phosphorylation by AMPK kinases and/or promote dephosphorylation of T172 by phosphatases.
Next, we tested whether this AMPK signaling effect could be recapitulated with acute perturbation using the DAGLβ-selective inhibitor KT109. We treated WT BMDMs from C57BL/6 J mice (naive or LPS-stimulated) with KT109 (200 nM, 4 h) followed by HT-01-based ABPP confirmation of DAGLβ inactivation and western blot evaluation of AMPK activation. We observed substantial DAGLβ inhibition from KT109 treatments in BMDMs under basal and LPS-activated conditions (~70 to 90%, Fig. 3B). Total AMPK expression levels in BMDMs appeared to be elevated with LPS stimulation. In agreement with our genetic disruption data, pAMPK levels in BMDMs were significantly enhanced with KT109 treatments, and dorsomorphin reversed this activation event (Fig. 3B and SI Appendix, Fig. S6).
To assess the functional impact of DAGLβ–AMPK crosstalk, we first performed LC-MS/MS proteomics to assess global alterations in DAGLβ KO (SILAC heavy) compared with WT (SILAC light) BMDM proteomes. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis revealed enrichment for biological processes related to energy metabolism (ATP synthesis, oxidative phosphorylation, and ATP synthesis coupled electron transport) as well as general catabolic processes (SI Appendix, Fig. S7). These proteomic findings are supportive of AMPK activation that is characterized by a shift in metabolism from anabolic (e.g., fatty acid production, protein biosynthesis) to catabolic processes (e.g., glycolysis, fatty acid oxidation). As a result, cells exhibit more aerobic and glycolytic characteristics that collectively present as an enhanced bioenergetic phenotype.
We measured the cellular bioenergetic profiles of BMDMs using extracellular flux assays to directly assess ex vivo the extracellular acidification rate (ECAR, measure of aerobic glycolysis) and oxygen consumption rate (OCR, measure of oxidative phosphorylation). We measured the glycolytic capacity of BMDMs and observed a significant elevation in both the stressed and basal ECAR in DAGLβ KO compared with WT counterparts (P < 0.01; Fig. 3 C and D). In contrast, OCR was not significantly changed in BMDMs lacking DAGLβ (SI Appendix, Fig. S8).
Collectively, our cell biological studies identified AMPK activation as a functional output from perturbing DAGLβ that reprograms BMDMs into a more glycolytic state. When integrated with our (chemo)proteomics data, our collective findings reveal a potential DAGLβ–LKB1–AMPK signaling axis that is important for regulating BMDM cell metabolism and signaling.
DAGLβ Inactivation Reprograms the Macrophage Phosphoproteome.
To characterize cell biological alterations in DAGLβ-disrupted BMDMs, we performed quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of SILAC BMDMs in the absence and presence of LPS stimulation. DAGLβ SILAC light (WT) and heavy (KO) BMDMs were generated and treated with LPS (100 ng/mL) to trigger the proinflammatory response as described above and in the Materials and Methods. Afterward, BMDMs were lysed and light and heavy proteomes combined 1:1, followed by trypsin digestion, and titanium dioxide (TiO2) enrichment of phosphopeptides. LC-MS/MS analysis was implemented to identify phosphopeptides and quantify changes in phosphorylation at specific protein posttranslationally modified (PTM) sites upon DAGLβ disruption (SI Appendix, Fig. S9). We confirmed enrichment of peptides (4,409 total phosphopeptides detected on 1,595 proteins) containing phosphorylated serines (87%), threonines (12%), and tyrosines (1%) at the expected frequency reported in literature (Fig. 4A and Dataset S1). See SI Appendix for details of the phosphoproteomic analyses.
Upon LPS stimulation, we identified phosphorylation events that were both up- (315) and down-regulated (529) as measured by altered phosphopeptide signals detected across 612 proteins [heavy (KO)/light (WT) SR >2 or < 0.5 and P < 0.05; Fig. 4A and Dataset S1]. Interestingly, a small fraction of phosphosites also showed comparable alterations in the absence of LPS stimulation (SI Appendix, Fig. S10). Down-regulated phosphosites in DAGLβ KO BMDMs were enriched for NF-κB pathway, which supports the reported antiinflammatory phenotypes from DAGLβ disruption, as well as additional functions related to transcriptional response of cells (GO analysis of phosphosites with SR < 0.5, P < 0.05; Fig. 4B).
Our phosphoproteomics investigation also provided insights into phosphorylation changes that further support activation of AMPK. Although the AMPK T172 phosphorylated site (AAPK2) was not detected, we identified increased phosphorylation of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 2 (PFKFB2) serine 469 (S469; S466 in human PFKFB2 or hPFKFB2), which was reported as a key site for PFKFB2 activation by AMPK (SR >20 in basal and LPS conditions, Fig. 4C). PFKFB2 controls the synthesis and degradation of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate that functions as an allosteric effector of 6-phosphofructo-1-kinase (PFK-1) to stimulate glycolysis. PFKFB2 activation can also be mediated by alternative kinase pathways including PKA and AKT1 that can affect phosphorylation of S469 and/or S486 (S483 in hPFKFB2). We did not detect alterations in phosphorylation of PFKFB2 S486, which suggests specificity of AMPK activation in DAGLβ-disrupted BMDMs (SR ~1, Fig. 4D).
Further evidence for AMPK activation was provided by decreased MAPK signaling as evidenced by increased phosphorylation of an inhibitory CRAF site [RAF1 S642, SR = 2.5] and decreased phosphorylation of ERK1 in DAGLβ-disrupted BMDMs (T203, Y205, SR = 0.05; Fig. 4C). Treatment of DAGLβ KO BMDMs with dorsomorphin resulted in significantly enhanced ERK1/2 phosphorylation at longer treatment times (SI Appendix, Fig. S11). Activated ERK can inhibit AMPK through phosphorylation and inactivation of LKB1. Comparison of phosphosites identified here with reported AMPK substrate sites revealed that many of the detected sites did not exhibit alterations like PFKFB2 S469, suggesting that DAGLβ inactivation affected phosphorylation of a subset of AMPK substrate sites (SI Appendix, Fig. S12A and Dataset S2). We also identified AMPK substrates with alterations in phosphorylation on noncanonical sites that are candidates for future studies (ULK1-S521, LYN-S19, MADD-S1058, Fig. 4C and SI Appendix, Fig. S12B).
In summary, global phosphoproteomics reveal multiple lines of evidence supporting AMPK activation including phosphorylation of direct glycolytic substrates (PFKFB2) and downregulation of MAPK signaling (CRAF and ERK) that can block LKB1-AMPK signaling.
DAGLβ-AMPK Crosstalk in Pain Response In Vivo.
Genetic and pharmacological inactivation of DAGLβ affects behavioral responses in preclinical models of pain. DAGLβ KO mice show an antiallodynic phenotype in the LPS model of inflammatory pain, while KT109 reverses LPS-induced allodynia in WT mice. AMPK activation with AMP analogs (e.g., metformin, AICAR, etc.) elicits antinociception in preclinical pain assays as well as clinical pain due in part to the antiinflammatory effects of AMPK signaling. Considering our cell biological findings supporting DAGLβ-AMPK crosstalk through LKB1 activation, we tested whether AMPK signaling serves as a mechanism for mediating the antinociceptive phenotype observed in DAGLβ KO mice.
In this experiment, DAGLβ WT and KO mice were given a daily intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of saline or dorsomorphin (20 mg kg−1) for 5 d. Following the day 4 injection, each mouse was given an injection of LPS (2 µg) into the intraplantar region of the right hind paw. At 1 h after the day 5 injection, each subject was assessed for von Frey thresholds in both the LPS-treated paw and contralateral (control) paw (Fig. 5A). In agreement with previous findings, LPS elicited significant allodynic responses in DAGLβ WT but not in KO mice. Dorsomorphin did not affect LPS-induced allodynia in DAGLβ WT mice or affect contralateral paw thresholds in either genotype. Strikingly, this AMPK inhibitor significantly reversed the antiallodynic phenotype of DAGLβ KO mice [F(1, 20) = 57.0, P < 0.0001, Fig. 5B and SI Appendix, Fig. S13].
Collectively, the behavioral studies complement our cell biological findings in BMDMs to support DAGLβ-AMPK crosstalk in pain sensitization in vivo.
DAGLβ-AMPK Regulates DRG Neuron Hyperexcitability in Neuropathic Pain States.
To assess further DAGLβ-AMPK signaling in nociception, we tested whether perturbing the DAGLβ-AMPK axis affects paclitaxel-induced dorsal root ganglia (DRG) neuron excitability. Macrophage infiltration and accumulation in the DRG can facilitate pronociceptive neuronal and immune cell interactions that contribute to chronic pain states. Specifically, DRG macrophages produce inflammatory mediators that directly act on nociceptors expressing cell-surface receptors of proinflammatory signals (e.g., TNFα, prostaglandins) to alter excitability and peripheral sensitization. Depletion of DRG macrophages in mice prevents and reverses mechanical allodynia in neuropathic pain models.
Chemotherapy-induced allodynia was induced in DAGLβ WT and KO mice using a cycle of paclitaxel treatment, consisting of a single i.p. injection of paclitaxel (8 mg kg−1) every other day for a total of four injections (days 1, 3, 5, and 7). To evaluate DAGLβ-AMPK crosstalk in DRG excitability, DAGLβ KO mice were given a daily i.p. injection of saline or dorsomorphin (20 mg kg−1) beginning on day 8 for 6 d. Two hours after the final injection, animals were sacrificed and primary cultures of DRG neurons were prepared from adult mice as previously described. Whole-cell patch clamp electrophysiology measurements were performed to evaluate DRG neuron excitability as previously reported and described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods.
The threshold potential (membrane potential for the activation of an action potential) in DRG neurons from DAGLβ WT mice was significantly more negative in the paclitaxel treated compared with control mice, indicating enhanced excitability (Fig. 6A and Dataset S3). Compared to DRG neurons from paclitaxel-treated DAGLβ WT mice, the KO counterparts exhibited significantly reduced excitability (Fig. 6B and Dataset S3). Rheobase was significantly increased, and the number of evoked action potentials was reduced when compared to paclitaxel-treated DAGLβ WT DRG neurons (Fig. 6 B and C). Treatment with dorsomorphin in vivo resulted in significantly reduced rheobase and concomitant increased action potential events in DRG neurons from paclitaxel-treated DAGLβ KO mice, indicating increased neuronal excitability. No difference in neuronal excitability was observed between DAGLβ WT and dorsomorphin-treated KO DRG neurons (Fig. 6 B and C and SI Appendix, Fig. S14).
Collectively, we demonstrate that blocking AMPK through in vivo dorsomorphin treatments in DAGLβ-disrupted mice reinstated paclitaxel-induced DRG neuronal hyper-excitability. These studies provide a mechanism that accounts for the antinociceptive phenotypes resulting from disruption of DAGLβ-AMPK.

INTRODUCTION:
Diacylglycerol lipase-beta (DAGLβ) and the functionally related DAGLα isoform represent key biosynthetic enzymes of the endocannabinoid, 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) and downstream metabolic product arachidonic acid (AA). These transmembrane serine hydrolases regulate cell signaling by hydrolyzing diacylglycerol (DAG) lipid messengers including the 2-AG precursor and PKC agonist SAG. DAGLα functions principally in central tissues (e.g., brain and spinal cord) while DAGLβ activity is enriched in liver and immune cells including macrophages, microglia, and dendritic cells. DAGLβ inactivation affects peripheral prostaglandins and inhibitors of this serine hydrolase have been likened to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in preclinical pain models, but without ulcerogenic effects. The prominent effects of DAGLβ inhibitors in neuropathic pain, however, suggest pharmacological mechanisms beyond AA-prostaglandin signaling alone.
Emerging studies on the role of exercise and caloric restriction in pain modulation identified an intriguing connection between bioenergetics and endocannabinoids. Regulation of energy homeostasis is mediated principally through sensing of low cellular ATP levels through an evolutionarily conserved system mediated by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK can monitor energy availability and respond to changes in the ATP/ADP and ATP/AMP ratio through direct binding of adenine nucleotides and activation of its kinase activity. Once activated, AMPK reprograms cellular metabolism through regulation of the phosphoproteome toward decreased anabolism and increased catabolism. Pharmacological activation of AMPK can produce therapeutic responses in the clinic. The antihyperglycemic drug metformin activates AMPK to regulate glucose metabolism for treatment of type 2 diabetes. The NSAID aspirin also acts as an AMPK activator to induce a pseudo-starved state of macrophages that suppresses inflammation. Depending on the biological system, activation of the endocannabinoid system can stimulate or inhibit AMPK. These disparate findings underscore the need for additional studies aimed at understanding AMPK-endocannabinoid crosstalk and regulation in the context of pain signaling.
AMPK is a heterotrimeric complex that consists of a single α- (catalytic), β- (regulatory), and γ- (regulatory) subunit. In humans, multiple isoforms of each subunit are encoded by different genes: α-subunit (PRKAA1 and PRKAA2), β-subunit (PRKAB1 and PRKAB2), and γ-subunit (PRKAG1, PRKAG2, and PRKAG3). The γ-subunit binds AMP (and ADP to a lesser extent) to stimulate AMPK activity through a key phosphorylation on threonine 172 (T172) in the α-subunit that contains the kinase domain. The β-subunit allows AMPK to bind and respond to glycogen. AMPK T172 phosphorylation is mediated by the upstream kinases liver kinase B1 (LKB1, encoded by STK11) and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 2 (CAMKK2). Mutations in STK11 cause the autosomal dominant disorder Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and these patients are at high risk for developing tumors. Biochemical and genetic analyses demonstrate that LKB1 mediates the bulk of AMPK activation in response to conditions of energy stress. The upstream regulatory mechanisms of LKB1 are poorly defined although recent studies have identified lipids as potential mediators.
Here, we identified DAGLβ as a principal regulator of LKB1–AMPK activation in primary macrophages and in vivo. We discovered crosstalk between endocannabinoid biosynthetic and AMPK pathways in primary macrophages using chemoproteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling. DAGLβ disruption enhanced membrane LKB1 activity and subsequent AMPK activation to regulate the bioenergetic state of macrophages. Notably, AMPK inhibition reverses the antinociceptive phenotype of DAGLβ KO mice, which could be explained in part by effects on hyper-excitability of dorsal root ganglion neurons. Collectively, our findings describe blockade of endocannabinoid biosynthesis as a targeted AMPK activation mechanism in vivo.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Supporting Information