PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Preterm premature rupture of the membranes
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Intra-amniotic inflammation; Late pprom; Amniotic fluid proteome; Il-6; Iai; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Preterm prelabour rupture of membranes (PPROM) complicated by intra-amniotic inflammation (IAI) represents a substantial portion of preterm birth cases. Currently, IAI is frequently defined as amniotic fluid IL-6 concentration above 2600 pg/mL However, the amniotic fluid IL-6 concentration was never correlated with the global response of other proinflammatory proteins to the ongoing IAI. In this cross-sectional study, protein quantification was performed using mass spectrometry (MS) analysis with isobaric peptide labeling followed by target quantification of selected proinflammatory proteins. Levels of amniotic fluid proteins determined by MS were put into the correlation with IL-6 concentration determined by ECLIA. In total, 925 proteins were efficiently quantified in all samples and differential expression analysis revealed 378 proteins upregulated towards IL-6 concentration above 10 000 pg/mL. Four proteins were selected to verify the achieved results (LCN2, MMP8, MPO, and S100A12). ROC curves were designed and the IL-6 concentration of 10 000 pg/mL was determined as cutoff value for global IAI response.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Quantification of intra-amniotic inflammation in late preterm prelabour rupture of membranes

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Amniotic fluid samples were supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Mini, EDTA free, Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), centrifuged at 300 x g for 15 minutes and passed through a 0.22 μm syringe filter (TPP, Trasadingen, Switzerland) to remove cells and debris. The total protein concentration in each sample was determined and top 14 ballast proteins (e.g. serum albumin, transferrin, immunoglobulins, α-1-antitrypsin, etc.) were removed using highly selective depletion mini spin columns (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Further, amniotic fluid samples were processed for protein digestion, isobaric labeling using Tandem Mass Tag (TMT), and LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Recorded MS and MS/MS spectra were processed and searched in MaxQuant 1.5.5.1 against a reviewed SwissProt human reference protein database including contaminants downloaded in 2022. Trypsin digestion specificity with up to two missed cleavages was used. Cysteine thiomethylation and TMTpro (+304.207 Da) at any peptide N-terminus and lysine (K) were set as fixed modifications. Correction factors for the isotopic impurity of reporter abundance were applied. Oxidation of methionine and proline were selected as variable modifications. The mass tolerance in MS and MS/MS mode was left at the default value for the initial search and 6 ppm was set as mass tolerance in MS mode for the main search. The false discovery rate for protein identification was left at the default value. Output files from MaxQuant were processed in Perseus and R. Potential contaminants, proteins identified by site and by reverse sequence were removed. The reporter intensities of proteins in each sample were transformed to log2(x) and normalized to reporter intensity of global internal standard. Resulting ratios were normalized to global median. Differential expression analysis with LIMMA was performed in R statistical environment to compare normalized protein ratios with corrections to Benjamin-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction at the significance level 0.05.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Reagents, Chemicals, and Drugs
All reagents and chemicals for tissue homogenization and protein digestion were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) or Fisher Scientific (Hampton, NH, USA), if not specified otherwise. Organic solvents and water (LC-MS grade) were purchased from Honeywell (Morris Plains, NJ, USA) or Fisher Scientific, if not specified otherwise. Daunorubicin (DAU, hydrochloride salt, pharmaceutical grade) was purchased from Euroasia′s (India).
Animal Model of Severe Anthracycline Cardiomyopathy
Adult, male New Zealand White rabbits (3.0–3.5 kg Velaz, Praha, Czech Republic) were caged individually under standard conditions with ad libitum access to a standard rabbit chow diet and tap water. The study was approved by the Animal Welfare Committee of Charles University, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Králové. Chronic anthracycline cardiotoxicity was induced by the administration of daunorubicin (DAU, 3 mg/kg, i.v., weekly for 10 weeks). For the proteomic analysis, three animals fulfilling predefined criteria of severe cardiomyopathy and heart failure were included into the study, i.e., treatment-induced decline of the left ventricular (LV) systolic function from baseline at least by 1/3 as examined by echocardiography and apparent signs of blood congestion due to the heart failure observed during in necropsy (hydrothorax, increased lung weight and ascites). The severe cardiotoxic phenotype was deliberately selected as it was assumed to represent the most prominent alterations of the myocardial proteome (changes to cardiomyocytes but also other cells of the myocardium and extracellular matrix). Three animals receiving saline in the same volume instead of DAU in the same schedule were used as the controls. The LV systolic function was examined noninvasively under light anesthesia (ketamine 30 mg/kg; midazolam 1.25 mg/kg, i.m.) by echocardiography (Vivid 4, 10 MHz probe; GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) at the beginning and at the end of the experiment. LV fractional shortening (FS) and LV ejection fraction (EF) as parameters of systolic function were determined as described previously. At the scheduled end of experiment, LV catheterization examination was performed under surgical anesthesia (pentobarbital 10 mg/kg, i.v.) using a Mikro-Tip pressure catheter (2.3F; Millar Instruments, Houston, TX, USA) as described in detail elsewhere.
Collection of Myocardial Samples and Tissue Homogenization
A week after the last DAU dose and immediately after the scheduled invasive examination of cardiac function, the animals were overdosed with pentobarbital. During necropsy, the heart was rapidly excised, washed, and briefly retrogradely perfused with ice-cold saline using a syringe to flush out the blood. The transverse sections of the heart ventricles were obtained for histological examination. The rest of the LV myocardium was cut and then shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen samples were pulverized in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until further analyses.
Histological Examination of the Myocardium
Transverse sections of the heart ventricles were immersed in 4% neutral formaldehyde for 5–7 days and embedded in paraffin. Serial paraffin sections (5 μm thick) were stained with Masson’s blue trichrome. The preparations were scanned using SmartZoom ClassRoom software (Smart In Media AG, Germany), and photomicrographs were then taken at 3× and 20× magnification of the scans.
Solubilization of the LV-Myocardial Homogenate
Approximately 50 mg of the homogenized LV myocardium was used for proteomic analysis. A solubilization buffer consisting of 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 8 M urea was added to each homogenized sample in the volume (μL) equal to 5-fold of sample weight (approximately 50 mg). All samples were kept on ice from this point on further. Samples were sonicated in an ultrasound bath for 15 min and incubated at 10 °C for 60 min under continuous shaking (1400 rpm). Due to high viscosity, a lysis buffer was added according to the equation described above. Samples were centrifuged at 10,000g (15 min, 10 °C), and supernatants were transferred into clean microtubes and kept at −80 °C. The total protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid and copper sulfate solution (BCA protein assay kit) before further processing.
Protein Digestion
After the tissue homogenization and lysis, 150 μg of each sample was transferred to the fresh tube and 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5) and water was added to the samples to get final concentration of 0.1% SDC, 100 mM TEAB, and 0.8 M urea. Reversibly oxidized cysteines were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) at 37 °C for 60 min. Free thiol groups were further alkylated by 10 mM S-methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) at RT for 10 min. Subsequently, ice-cold acetone in the 6-fold volume was added to each sample, and proteins were precipitated by keeping samples at −20 °C for 4 h. All samples were then centrifuged at 8000g (10 min, 4 °C), supernatants were then carefully decanted, and pellets were shortly dried using vacuum concentrator to remove the possible remnants of acetone. Prepared pellets were redissolved in 100 mM TEAB/0.1% SDC and rLys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Osaka, Japan) and sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) were added in 1:25 enzyme-to-substrate ratio (w/w) and proteins were digested at 37 °C overnight. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to reach pH ≤ 2, and precipitated SDC was removed by phase-transfer extraction using water-saturated ethyl acetate. All samples were evaporated to the dryness.
Tandem Mass Tag Isobaric Labeling
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) 10-plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used as an isobaric labeling reagent for protein quantification. Each TMT label (0.8 mg) was reconstituted in 82 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile (AcN). A 100 μg of peptides reconstituted in 100 μL of 100 mM TEAB was combined with 41 μL of its respective TMT reagent to get a TMT-to-peptide ratio 4:1 (w/w). The peptides were labeled at 25 °C for 1 h. The TMT labeling was quenched by addition of 8 μL of 5% hydroxylamine and sample incubation at 25 °C for 15 min. Subsequently, equal amounts of all samples were pooled together and desalted using Discovery DSC-18 solid-phase extraction cartridges previously conditioned by methanol and equilibrated using 0.1% TFA in 5% AcN. Peptides were eluted with 0.05% TFA in 50% ACN, evaporated to dryness, and stored at −80 °C in appropriate aliquots for further analysis.
High-pH Fractionation
Samples were redissolved in mobile phase A (2% AcN/10 mM NH4FA), and 372 μg was injected on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated using an XBridge BEH column C18, 2.5 μm, 2.1 μm × 150 mm (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) in a linear gradient of mobile phase B (80% AcN/10 mM NH4FA) at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The gradient was running from 0% B to 2% B in 2 min followed by 2% B to 20% B in 9 min, from 20% B to 50% B in 41 min, and from 50% B to 52% B in 5.5 min. In total, the gradient time was 57.5 min. Fractions were collected in a 96-well polypropylene plate (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) at 45 s from intervals from 3.5 to 57.5 min yielding 72 fractions in volume of 225 μL. Collected fractions were subsequently pooled into 24 fractions containing 15.5 μg of peptides each (Table S4). Finally, 3 μg of peptide material was evaporated and stored at −80 °C for nLC-MS/MS, and the remaining evaporated 12.5 μg were stored at −80 °C for μLC-MS/MS.
Nanoflow Liquid Chromatography Coupled to Tandem Mass Spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS)
Each fraction (3 μg) was redissolved in a loading solvent (2% AcN/0.1% TFA), and 0.5 μg was injected into an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The analytical system consisted of a PepMap100 C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 20 mm trap column, and PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 250 mm analytical column (both from Thermo Scientific). All fractions were loaded in a trap column at a flow rate of 5 μL/min for 5 min. Peptides were separated in a linear gradient of mobile B (80% AcN/0.1% FA) running from 2% B to 34.5% B in 70 min followed by 34.5% B to 45% B in 10 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Eluted peptides were introduced into Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer via a Nanospray Flex ion source (both Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Positive ion full-scan MS spectra were acquired using the parameters specified in Table 1. All fractions were analyzed in two technical replicates.
Microflow Liquid Chromatography Coupled to Tandem Mass Spectrometry (μLC-MS/MS)
Peptide separation was processed after injection into an UltiMate 3000 binary RSLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) configured as previously described. In brief, each fraction (12.5 μg) was redissolved in mobile phase A (3% DMSO/0.4% acetic acid (HAc/0.1% FA) and 10 μg of the sample was injected into a HALO Peptide ES-C18, 2.7 μm, 160 Å, 1.0 mm × 250 mm analytical column (Advanced Materials Technology, Wilmington, DE, USA). Peptides were separated in a linear gradient of mobile phase B (78% AcN/3% DMSO/0.4% HAc/0.1% FA) running from 0.2% B to 2% B in 4 min followed by 2% B to 30% B in 70 min and by 30% B to 45% B in 9 min at a flow rate of 68 μL/min. Eluted peptides were introduced into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer via an EASY-Spray ion source equipped with an HESI-II probe (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The settings of MS and MS/MS acquisition were optimized to reach the utmost protein coverage. Optimized parameters for the full-scan MS method are listed in Table 1. All fractions were analyzed in one technical replicate.
Data Processing
Survey MS and MS/MS spectra were processed by MaxQuant v1.6.14.0 with its built-in search engine, Andromeda. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Oryctolagus cuniculus reference proteome (UP000001811) downloaded from Uniprot in April 2021. Contaminants were identified according to the MaxQuant-implemented database. For TMT data processing, reporter ion in MS2 was selected as a group-specific parameter. Reporter ion intensities were corrected by TMT correction factors provided by the manufacturer. Reporter mass tolerance was set to 3.16 mDa. Unique and razor peptides were selected for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Precursor tolerance for the first search was set to 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra to 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled). Only peptides with maximal charge per peptide z = 7, minimal length 7 amino acids, and maximal mass of 4600 Da were considered to analysis. Alkylation of cysteine sulfhydryl groups to dithiomethane was set as fixed modification. Protein N-term acetylation and methionine and proline oxidation were set as variable modifications. Trypsin/P with maximum 2 missed cleavages was specified as a protease. For modified peptides, the minimal Andromeda score was 40 and minimal delta score was 6, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches (PSM) were filtered using a false discovery rate of 0.01 employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Also, PSM were filtered by their precursor intensity fraction (PIF) to value ≥ 0.75. The Remaining MaxQuant parameters have been kept in their default value.
Data Treatment and Evaluation
Output files from MaxQuant were processed using Perseus 1.6.14.0. Potential contaminants and proteins identified by site and by reverse sequence were filtered out. Corrected reporter ion intensities were converted to log2 values, and only proteins with valid values in each TMT channel in at least one technical replicate (nLC) were considered for further analysis. Reporter intensities were subsequently normalized by subtraction of median from each observed value in each TMT channel. Redundant hits of proteins were searched and filtered out based on the number of razor and unique peptides as follows: 1) 0 unique peptides but leading razor peptides > protein included other proteins filtered out; 2) leading razor and unique peptides > protein included and other proteins filtered out; 3) proteins with the same fasta names but different gene names > checked according to appropriate peptide sequences > filtering according to razor and unique peptides; 4) filtered out peptides with 0 unique proteins and 1 razor peptides, if there was alternative. Uncharacterized proteins were annotated using String db based on gene names, if present. Finally, protein levels in DAU-treated samples were compared with controls by moderated t-tests based on the Linear Models for Microarray Data (LIMMA) approach in R 4.0.5. Significantly changed proteins were annotated by Gene Ontology (GO) terms: the biological process, cellular component, and molecular function, and 1D enrichment for these GO terms with Benjamini–Hochberg correction (FDR 0.05) was performed in Perseus.

RESULTS:
Results
Establishment of Oroteolysis and Peptide Labeling Workflow
Heat-induced disulfide bridge reduction and protein digestion in urea-containing buffers are associated with an increased risk of the occurrence of artificial peptide modifications. Therefore, the temperature was a critical condition given the presence of urea in the lysis buffer. We performed basic optimization of the temperature used for reduction of disulfide bonds and digestion (Supporting Methods, Table S1). The temperature of 37 °C was selected for the disulfide reduction due to the low number of artificially modified peptides (Figure 1A). A further decrease in temperature for disulfide reduction to 25 °C did not significantly decrease the number of modified peptides in our experimental settings (Figure 1A) and led to a decrease in the number of identified proteins (data not shown). As proteins were acetone-precipitated prior to the digestion, the same temperature (37 °C) could be employed for the digestion step as well as because potential issues related to urea were mitigated. Being a critical step for protein quantification, the labeling efficiency was assessed by searching the achieved data with TMT labels set as variable modifications. The TMT labeling efficiency was assessed as a ratio (%) of N-terminally labeled peptides (Nti) along with labeled lysins (Nki) to total number of N-termini (Ntt) and lysins (Nkt).
Both reduced (4:1) and recommended (8:1) TMT-to-peptide ratio was tested as described in Supporting Methods and both approaches achieved labeling efficiency of 99.5% (Figure 1A), if the labeling procedure was performed in 100 mM TEAB. Reduced concentration of TMT (4:1) resulted in 2988 quantified proteins means only 1.65% difference in favor of the higher employed ratio (8:1, 3038 proteins). Based on these pilot experiments, 100 mM TEAB and a TMT-to-peptide ratio of 4:1 were applied in further experiments.
Comparison of TMT Peptide Labeling and Label-Free Approach
The yield and accuracy of TMT labeling (TMT) and label-free (LFQ) quantification were compared using a S. pneumoniae (strain Rx1) proteins spiked into the protein matrix of mouse B lymphoblast at six ratios (Supporting Methods and Figure 1B) and analyzed in three technical triplicates (Figure 1C). The TMT multiplexing approach consumed only ≈16 h of instrument time, whereas LFQ analysis required ≈93 h to finish the whole experiment. In total, higher number of protein groups was identified in LFQ, but also along with higher number of missing values subsequently mitigated using Match-between-runs algorithm (MBR) integrated in MaxQuant. By contrast, the number of missing values in the TMT experiment was very low regardless of the application of MBR (Figure 1D). Protein ratios estimated by both TMT and LFQ analysis were distinct from the expected values. A combination of TMT approach and nLC-MS/MS strongly underestimated the theoretical ratios toward more abundant protein levels, whereas the reverse trend was observed in LFQ. However, the compression of TMT-MS2 ratios was less noticeable in μLC-MS/MS data compared to nLC-MS/MS. The experimentally achieved TMT-MS2 ratios were significantly closer to the theoretical (expected) values especially toward lower concentration, for instance, Δ 0.4% versus −4.9% at a 1.5 fold-change or Δ −11.4% versus −25.6% at a 3 fold-change) (Figure 1E). The approach to increase the number of quantified proteins was also tested by comparing 1D with simple 2D LC-MS/MS (8 fractions) with more extensive 2D LC-MS/MS (24 fractions) (Table S4 and Figure S1A,S1B). The initial 1D nLC-MS/MS analysis of the mouse B lymphoblasts lysate digest (Supporting Methods) served as the benchmark for quantification, resulting in the identification of 1632 proteins. In comparison, the simple 2D nLC-MS/MS analysis with previous high-pH fractionation (8 fractions) led to the quantification of 4517 proteins. The number of quantified proteins was further increased by modifying the fractionation protocol to obtain the final 24 concatenated fractions. The resulting analysis yielded the quantification of 6456 proteins (Figure S1A). Only a small number of proteins were unique to either the 1D or 2D (8 fractions) approach. Therefore, we opted to employ a more comprehensive 24-fraction approach, which was capable of quantifying the highest number of proteins while also generating 1938 unique proteins (Figure S1). The further mapping of proteome changes induced by DAU was conducted via LC-MS/MS analysis of concatenated 24 fractions.
Animal Data
The characteristics describing cardiac status in each rabbit included in the study (DAU1–3 and CTRL1–3) at the end of the study are summarized in Table 2. Altogether, the data from DAU-treated animals included in this study showed the development of severe cardiotoxicity characterized by profound decline of the left ventricular (LV) systolic function (LV fractional shortening and LV ejection fraction examined by echocardiography) from the initial values and marked rise of plasma biomarker of cardiac damage (cTnT). Furthermore, congestion in lungs (increased lung weight normalized on the body weight and hydrothorax) was observed in all DAU-treated animal as a consequence of the LV dysfunction along with increased heart weight normalized on the body weight and macroscopic changes to the heart (mainly LV dilation). One DAU-treated animal (DAU3) suffered by end-stage heart failure and died spontaneously before invasive examination of LV function at the end of experiment. In this case, the necropsy was performed immediately, so the myocardium sample was taken for further analysis in the standard way as in other animals. No changes in comparison with the baseline were found in the control group.
Histological Analysis
Histological analysis revealed extensive morphological damage to the myocardium of DAU-treated animals (Figure 2A), particularly in the LV and interventricular septum. These changes comprised mainly distinct focal degenerative changes to cardiomyocytes characterized by loss of myofibrils and vacuolization of the cytoplasm. Many cardiomyocytes showed advanced degenerative changes resulting in cell death. The healing process, i.e., replacement fibrosis accompanied by a mild mononuclear infiltrate (including macrophages removing decayed cells), resulted in the formation of fibrous scars of variable extent. At the macroscopic level, LV or biventricular dilation (in end-stage heart failure) was observed. In contrast, normal morphology of the myocardium was observed at both microscopic and macroscopic levels in the control group.
Wide-Scale Analysis of Myocardial Proteome Changes Induced by Severe ANT Cardiotoxicity
Based on method and system optimization described above, 2D-TMT μLC-MS/MS (μLC) analysis of protein level changes in rabbit myocardium related to severe DAU-induced cardiomyopathy (Figure 2A) was performed, and the results were compared to 2D-TMT nLC-MS/MS equivalent (nLC) (Figure 2B). Globally, 4729 items were attained across both data sets after filtering of protein inference redundancy. In total, 3956 proteins were quantified with valid values for all TMT channels in μLC data set and 4549 proteins were available with at least one valid value from two technical replicates (4489 in first replicate and 4458 in second replicate, respectively) in each TMT channel in nLC. Across both data sets, 83.6% of quantified proteins were shared, whereas 83 proteins were quantified uniquely in μLC and 676 proteins were unique for nLC (Figure 2C). However, μLC-MS/MS exhibited a broader (log2) fold-change protein distribution (Figure 2D), better resolution of TMT ions in MS2 (Figure 2E) consistent with the low compression of TMT ratios in μLC (Figure 1E), higher probability of PSM (Figure S2B), and narrower peak width (Figure S2C).
From all quantified proteins, levels of approximately 55% proteins were found significantly changed due to the induction of severe anthracycline cardiomyopathy. In particular, 2183 (55.2%) and 2498 (54.9%) significantly changed proteins were quantified in μLC and nLC, respectively (Figure 3A and Supplementary Table 1). From those, 1900 were shared by both data sets, 283 changed proteins were quantified uniquely in μLC and 598 changed proteins were unique for nLC (Figure 3B). Hence, nLC performed moderately better herein, as it detected more significantly changed proteins. On the other hand, when looking for significantly changed proteins with a higher fold-change (arbitrary selected fold-change ≥ 2), than TMT μLC-MS/MS identified 21% (820) proteins, while TMT nLC-MS/MS only 12% (535) proteins (Figure 3A). Most of the significantly changed proteins with a fold-change of ≥2, which were detected using the μLC analysis but not nLC analysis, were upregulated due to the severe cardiotoxicity development. In addition, a high correlation of GO terms designed based on 2D enrichment analysis (Spearman corr. coefficient = 0.94, p < 0.001) (Figure 3C) as well as high correlation of significant protein changes determined by μLC and nLC was affirmed (Spearman corr. coefficient = 0.97, p < 0.001) (Figure 3D). Both data sets confirmed the consistent shift of myocardial proteome due to induction of severe DAU cardiomyopathy from controls in all 3 biological replicates (Figure 3E).
Changes of Myocardial Proteins Induced by Severe Daunorubicin Cardiomyopathy
Data obtained by both μLC and nLC revealed significant upregulation of many proteins related to immune and defense response (68 vs 84 proteins; μLC vs nLC) (Figure 4A), extracellular matrix (35 vs 40 proteins) (Figure 4B), and cell junction (135 vs 138 proteins) (Figure 4C). Among the proteins of the immune and defense response GOBP cluster (Figure 4A), interferon response proteins like the ISG15 ubiquitin-like modifier (ISG15), protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 and 3 (IFIT and IFIT3), 2–5 oligoadenylate synthase (OAS2 and OAS3), and STAT1 or dynamin-type G domain-containing protein (MX2) were strongly upregulated in both μLC and nLC analysis. Noteworthy, ISG15 was also the most upregulated protein due to severe DAU cardiomyopathy in both data sets. Furthermore, pentaxin (CRP), interleukin-18 (IL18), complement comment proteins (C1S, C3, C6, C8A, C8B, and C8G) and lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP) were other important inflammatory proteins found changed by both μLC and nLC from the same GOBP cluster.
Regarding GOCC cluster, extracellular matrix proteins (Figure 4B), important changes toward upregulations were found both using μLC and nLC analysis in proteins: (a) regulating extracellular matrix remodeling (cellular communication network factor 2–CTGF, latent transforming growth factor beta binding protein 2–LTBP2), (b) matricellular proteins (tenascin C–TNC, periostin–POSTN, and osteonectin–SPARC), (c) glycoproteins (fibulin 2–FBLN2, SMB domain-containing protein/vitronectin - VTN), (d) proteoglycans (asporin–ASPN, biglycan–BGN, and decorin–DCN), (e) collagenous proteins (collagen type XII alpha-1 chain – COL12A1 and collagen type VI alpha 3 chain–COL6A3) and (e) galectin 3 (LGALS1) and related galectin-3-binding protein (LGALS3).
The cell junction GOCC cluster showed a marked but diverse response to induction of the severe anthracycline cardiotoxicity. Cadherins, the transmembrane glycoproteins forming cell–cell connections, were found to decrease using both LC-MS analyses. This concern cadherin 2 (N-cadherin, CDH2), which is the main cadherin of cardiomyocytes located in their intercalated discs. Other important proteins related to the intercalated disc were decreased, e.g., desmoplakin (DSP), which provides the link from the desmosomes to the intracellular intermediate filaments or alpha and beta catenins that mediate interaction of N-cadherin with the intracellular F-actin cytoskeleton. Furthermore, the main gap junction protein of the intercalated disc (Gap junction alpha-1 protein/connexin 43–GJA1) was also decreased. Besides that, cadherin 5 (VE cadherin, CDH5) involved in the adhesion of the vascular endothelial cells was also decreased due to the treatment. Integrins, the transmembrane heterodimeric receptors important for cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix, were mostly upregulated (ITGAV, ITGA7, ITGB1, ITGB2, and ITGB5) as determined by both μLC and nLC analysis, but some of the alpha subunits (ITGA5, ITGA6, and ITGA9) were found downregulated. Talin, which interacts with the intracellular domain of the integrins, showed an isoform-specific response to severe anthracycline cardiotoxicity as determined by both μLC and nLC analysis (talin 1–TLN1 was upregulated, while the opposite was true for talin 2 – TLN2). Proteins of the dystroglycan complex (dystrophin – DMD and dystrobrevin–DTNA) were decreased in the DAU-treated hearts. In contrast, both μLC and nLC analysis found a marked increase in intermediate filament desmin (DES), which anchor myofibrils to the costamere and desmosomes, and the same was true for noncardiomyocyte intermediate filament vimentin (VIM). Key proteins of normal cardiac sarcomere such as myosin 6 (MYH6), myosin 7 (MYH7), actin alpha cardiac muscle (ACTC1) and titin (TTN) were concordantly found markedly decreased in severe anthracycline cardiotoxicity.
High concordance was also attained between μLC and nLC results in the clusters showing clear downregulation of myocardial proteins due to cardiotoxicity induction, e.g., proteins related to the NADH dehydrogenase complex (i.e., subunits of complex I of the respiratory chain) were severely decreased due to the DAU treatment as determined by both μLC and nLC (25 vs 23 proteins; e.g., NDUFA6, NDUFB3, NDUFB6, and MT-ND1) (Figure 4D), and similar was true for proteins of the ribonucleotide biosynthetic process (21 vs 23 proteins) (Figure 4E). In the latter cluster, vast majority of proteins was related to ATP synthesis, and approximately half of these proteins were subunit of complex V of respiratory chain (e.g., ATP5B, ATP5F1, ATP5I, and MT-ATP6). In the light of this data, it is not surprising that mitochondrial proteins ranked among those most altered in the severe anthracycline cardiotoxicity in both μLC and nLC analysis (336 vs 365 proteins) (Figure 4F). Vast majority of these proteins (≈85%) showed a decrease in abundance, and the most profound changes in both analyses were related to glutamic-pyruvic transaminase 2 (GPT2), glycine C-acetyltransferase (GCAT), and glycine N-acyltransferase (GLYAT). Less common was an increase in mitochondrial proteins due to the cardiotoxicity which was observed, e.g., in BCL2-associated X (BAX) or calcium-binding mitochondrial carrier protein SCaMC-1 (SLC25A24).
Both μLC and nLC described the induction of the expression of natriuretic peptides (ANP and BNP) in the myocardium with severe anthracycline cardiotoxicity, which is a hallmark of LV dysfunction. Both μLC and nLC also identified decreased abundance of the cardiac isoform of troponin I (TNNI3) and corresponding TNNI3 interacting kinase (TNNI3K) in the severe anthracycline cardiotoxicity, while the slow skeletal muscle isoform of troponin I (TNNI1) was increased. Besides that, multiple signaling proteins that are typically present in lower abundance were successfully identified altered by both μLC and nLC (e.g., SIRT3, SIRT 5, CAMK2G, CAMK2D, PRKCD, PDK1, PDK2, PDK3, RRM2B, and PRKACB or multiple subunits of AMPK like PRKAA2, PRKAB2, and PRKAG2).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
In the past few years, μLC-MS/MS has become a reasonable alternative to the nLC-MS/MS setup for bottom-up proteomics. The limited sample loading, high sample complexity, wide dynamic concentration range of protein contents, and time-consuming LC gradients are factors challenging the performance of nanoelectrospray ionization. With new analytical columns with a larger inner diameter (ID) up to 1 mm, the speed and the sensitivity of new generation of mass spectrometers are transferring the bottom-up proteomics toward microflow LC operating in tens of μL/min. Recent high-impact articles showed an exceptional robustness with the excellent stability of RT across thousands of injections and extraordinary proteome coverage using a microflow LC setup. From initial attempts yielding less than 1000 proteins and few thousands of peptides, nearly 10,000 proteins and 130,000 peptides have been attained by coupling of microflow LC and modern hybrid Orbitrap mass spectrometers after 2020. Hence, μLC-MS/MS appears as a fully viable option for efficient and deep MS-based proteome research.
Cardiovascular (CVD) diseases are the most frequent cause of mortality in developed countries, followed by cancer in second place. Current anticancer treatments have dramatically improved the survival of patients with many different types of tumors, but often at the cost of a significant toxic burden on the host organism.− As a consequence of anticancer therapy, long-term cancer survivors may suffer from markedly higher overall cardiovascular morbidity. For instance, repeated cycles of anthracycline (ANT) chemotherapy (e.g., daunorubicin/DAU/ and doxorubicin) may induce the development of irreversible cardiomyopathy and chronic heart failure. Hence, there is an unrelenting effort to advance the understanding to complex changes occurring in the heart during toxic damage induced by anticancer drugs.
Proteomic research significantly contributed to advances that have been made in the field of cardiovascular medicine over past two decades including important insights into the mechanism of anticancer drug-induced cardiotoxicity in animal models. However, wealth of these data was acquired using two-dimensional (2D)-PAGE-MS/MS.− Shotgun LC-MS/MS studies are still underrepresented and rather employed to anticancer-induced toxicity in cell cultures in vitro.− Modern bottom-up LC-MS/MS studies performed on myocardial samples taken from translational animal models after long-term exposition to anticancer drugs are still scarce and provided only limited insights yet. Indeed, LC-MS/MS proteomics has been successfully exploited to research of a number of cardiac pathologies.− In these studies, 1145–4168 myocardial proteins were detected using both 1D or 2D nLC-MS/MS and a distinct setup of protein quantification (LFQ/TMT/iTRAQ).
The aim of our study is to assess the suitability of μLC-MS/MS application for appropriate mapping of myocardial proteome changes associated with the development of severe cardiomyopathy induced by anthracycline anticancer therapy in a well-established rabbit model. We followed our previously published article reporting the μLC-MS/MS setup employing analytical column with ID of 1.0 mm and introduced it to quantitative TMT-based proteomic analysis of global myocardial proteome. Outcomes were compared to the background of the protein coverage achieved by parallel nLC-MS/MS analysis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomic data and MaxQuant output text files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD047014.
Supporting Information Available
Supporting data for μLC-MS/MS and nLC-MS/MS (XLSX)
Additional experimental details, tables, and figures; (Table S1) urea-assisted protein digestion conditions; (Table S2) samples of the 2 species proteome model for TMT and LFQ method assessment; (Table S3) high-pH RP fractionation table, 8 fractions; (Table S4) high-pH RP fractionation table, 24 fractions; (Figure S1) impact of 2D chromatography separation on the number of the quantified proteins; (Figure S2) quantitative characteristics of single-shot DDA LC-MS/MS of 6 rabbit myocardium samples; (Figure S3) assessment of numbers of quantified proteins for first and second replicates analyzed either with μLC-MS/MS or nLC-MS/MS analysis (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.4c09377.
Supplementary Material
The authors declare no competing financial interest.