PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Colon; Colon
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Supermeres; Fplc; Affinity purification; Proteomics

ABSTRACT:
The cell seretome is diverse and contains extracellular secreted vesicles (EVs) as well as non-vesicular extracellular nanoparticles (NVEPs) called exomeres and supermeres, all of which carry different kinds of cell signaling cargos. One supermere enriched cargo is transforming growth factor beta induced (TGFBi) protein. We have created TGFBi-neon green-His tagged expressing cell lines in the microsatellite stable (MSS) colorectal cancer cell line DiFi and another one in CC-CR cells with microsatellite instability (MSI). We have developed a fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) method for isolating EVs, exomeres and supermeres from biofluids. We used either FPLC or FPLC and then nickel columns that bind His tags to isolate supermeres from DiFi or CC-CR cells. We utilized a proteomics approach acquiring LC-MS/MS data to compare FPLC to FPLC and His tagged TGFBi-containing purified supermeres from DiFi and CC-CR cells. This was done using hollow fiber 3D bioreactor production of conditioned media from these cell lines.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome of DiFi and CC-CR supermeres purified by FPLC with or without additional affinity purification for TGFBi

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
DiFi or CC-CR cells were cultured until 80% confluent, washed 3X with PBS, and cultured in serum-free medium for 48 h prior to collection of EVs and NVEPs. Hollow fiber bioreactors were loaded with 1-5 x 108 DiFi cells, allowed to reach equilibrium growth based on glucose utilization, and harvested for media collection. With each harvest, 20 mL of conditioned media was centrifuged at 250g then 2,500g for 10 min each to remove cells and debris, respectively. Media was gravity filtered through a Millex 0.22-µm pore syringe filter. The TGFBi-neon green-TEV protease site-His tagged (TGFBi-NG-His) construct was generated via VectorBuilder and infected via lentivirus into DiFi or CC-CR cells. Bioreactor-produced medium from DiFi and CC-CR cells expressing TGFBi-NG-His was concentrated and size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) was performed on an ATKA Purifier fast-protein liquid chromatography system (GE/Cytiva) with two inline Superose 6 Increase resin columns (Cytiva). Samples were filtered off-line using 0.22 µm spin-filters, and 0.5 mL of filtered samples were injected into the FPLC. Fractions containing SEC-purified supermeres were concentrated utilizing 10 kDa MWC Ultra Centrifugal Filters (Amicon) at 2,500g in a tabletop swinging bucket centrifuge at 4 C. Concentrated pooled fractions were mixed with 1 mL fresh HisPur Ni-NTA resin (Thermo Scientific) that was prepared in PBS in accordance with manufacturer’s guidelines. The slurry was incubated overnight at 4 C with end-over-end rotation using a tabletop rocker. Resin and immobilized TGFBi-NG-His supermeres were pelleted via centrifugation at 200 rpm for 1 min and the supernatant was decanted. The affinity resin was then washed with 10 mL of PBS for 10 min using a tabletop rotator, and the resulting supernatant was decanted. TGFBi-NG-His supermeres were eluted from the affinity resin with 5 mL of buffer (20 mM Tris-HCL, 500 mM NaCl, 1M imidazole, pH 7.9). Affinity-purified TGFBi-NG-His supermeres were then sequentially dialyzed three times with 4 h exchanges of 4 L PBS at 4 C. Next, the His affinity tag was removed from the TGFBi-NG-His supermeres by cleavage with the TEV protease separating the mNeonGreen fusion protein and the His-tag. To do so, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to dialyzed TGFBi-NG-His supermere samples to a final concentration of 3mM. TEV protease was added to supermere samples at a total protein concentration ratio of 10:1 (supermere/enzyme; w/w), and incubated with gentle rocking at room temperature for 3 h, followed by an overnight incubation at 4 C. Samples were dialyzed against PBS, as above, to remove DTT from the samples prior to subsequent Ni-NTA removal of the His tag. Dialyzed samples were applied to freshly equilibrated Ni-NTA resin and the unbound fraction containing TGFBi-NG-His-tagged supermeres was collected for downstream applications removing pelleted resin.  Samples were then prepared for proteomics analyses. First, the samples were brought to a final concentration of 5% SDS, reduced with TCEP (10 mM) at 55 °C for 15 min, and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Protein samples were then prepared for S-Trap (ProtiFi) digestion per manufacturer’s instructions. Aqueous phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 2.5%, followed by addition of 90% methanol containing 100 mM TEAB (binding/wash buffer) at 6X the sample volume. Samples were loaded onto S-Trap micro columns and centrifuged at 4,000g. The columns were washed 4X with binding/wash buffer, and proteins were digested with trypsin for 1 h at 47°C. Peptides were eluted by sequential addition of 40 µL each of 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid, and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. Eluted peptides were dried in a speed-vac concentrator.

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteomics samples were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoLC and a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18 reverse phase capillary column and gradient-eluted at a flow rate of 350 nL/min, using a 90-min gradient. Peptides were analyzed using a data-dependent (top 20) method. The MS/MS AGC target was set to 5 x 104, HCD collision energy was 27 nce, and dynamic exclusion was enabled. Data were searched with Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a Homo sapiens database created from the UniprotKB protein database. Variable modifications included +15.9949 on Met (oxidation) and +57.0214 on Cys (carbamidomethylation). Search results were assembled in Scaffold 5.1.0 (Proteome Software) using a minimum filtering criteria of 95% peptide probability and 99% protein probability.