PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Embryonic stem cell
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: 6x(13)C labeled residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Knockdown; Ddx18; Silac

ABSTRACT:
This study explores the crucial role of the nucleolus-specific RNA helicase DDX18 in maintaining the pluripotency of human embryonic stem cells. We demonstrate that DDX18 coordinates nucleolus phase separation and chromatin organization by interacting with NPM1 in the granular component of the nucleolus, facilitated by nucleolar RNA species. The absence of DDX18 disrupts immiscible nucleolar substructures, significantly affecting centromere clustering and perinucleolar heterochromatin (PNH) formation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
SILAC of hESCs with DDX18 knockdown

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Lysine and arginine were labeled light (regular L-lysine and L-arginine) and heavy (13C6, 15N2 L-lysine and 13C6, 15N4 L-arginine). Human ESCs with control (heavy) and DDX18-knockdown (light) were harvested and counted. An equivalent number of SILAC-labeled cells (5x10e6) were lysed and sonicated in RIPA buffer on ice. After centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C, proteins of an equal number of cells were combined, and the concentrations were estimated using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher). The proteins were boiled with SDS loading buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by colloidal blue staining. Gel fragments were excised, washed, and sent for liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to identify proteins.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software with SEQUEST engine against mouse International Protein Index (IPI v3.68) protein sequence database. Carbamidomethylation (CAM) was set as the fixed modification, and methionine oxidation was set as the variable modification. Outputs of protein identification from Proteome Discoverer were imported into a local Microsoft Access database. Common contamination proteins (trypsin, keratins) were removed, and protein Heavy/Light quantification ratios were obtained.