PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: phosphorylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Lc/ms; Mouse; Hypr-ms; Rna-protein interaction

ABSTRACT:
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) exert regulatory functions in a wide spectrum of biological contexts, and certain regulatory functions involve the formation of RNA-protein complexes. Discovering the structure/function of these complexes may unveil important functional insights. The DDX41 gene encoding the DEAD-box RNA helicase 41 protein (DDX41) is subject to extensive germline genetic variation, and certain variants create a predisposition to develop myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While the importance of DDX41 for the control of hematopoiesis is established, many questions remain regarding the mechanisms of how DDX41 functions in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Previously, we identified a DDX41-regulated lncRNA, growth arrest-specific 5 (Gas5) (Kim et al.). As Gas5 function in hematopoiesis is unknown, we analyzed protein interactors of Gas5 lncRNA using HyPR-MS (Hybridization Purification of RNA-Protein complexes followed by Mass Spectrometry). 28 proteins were identified as Gas5 lncRNA interactors, five of which were experimentally validated as Gas5 lncRNA interactors by RNA Immunoprecipitation qPCR (RIP-qPCR) analysis. The identification of protein interactors with a DDX41-regulated lncRNA establishes a foundation to guide future mechanistic and biological studies.c

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
lncRNA-protein interactions  in hematopoietic progenitor cells by hybridization capture  and mass spectrometry

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For formaldehyde crosslinking, cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then incubated in 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature (RT). The formaldehyde was quenched by incubation with 250 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.0) for 10 min at RT. Cells were rinsed with ice-cold PBS twice, pelleted by centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 5 min, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C.  Cells were lysed and sonicated as described. Capture oligonucleotides (COs) targeting Gas5 lncRNA were added to the cell lysates with negative control scrambled sequence oligonucleotides (SOs) (Figure 1; Supporting Information Table 3). The scrambled oligonucleotide was designed to have the same number of nucleotides and comparable Tm as the capture oligonucleotide but lacking significant complementarity to the target transcript or any other transcript in the cells. The samples were incubated at 37 °C for 3 hours with gentle nutation. SeraMag streptavidin-coated magnetic speed beads (Fisher Scientific) were washed twice at RT and added to the lysate. The samples were rocked for one hour before bead collection and lysate removal. Beads were washed and resuspended in a release buffer with release oligonucleotides (ROs) (Supplemental Table 1). The beads were gently rocked at RT for 30 min to release RNA-protein complexes, and the supernatant was isolated and storced at 4 °C. The release process was accomplished with Gas5 lncRNA target RO, followed by scrambled RO. The supernatants from each release were transferred separately to new tubes, and each was divided into aliquots for RT-qPCR and mass spectrometric protein analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectral files were analyzed with the free and open-source search software program MetaMorpheus and the reviewed Swiss-Prot mouse XML (canonical) database using default settings.51, 59 A 1% FDR for both peptides and proteins was applied. Up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed for protein identification and quantitation. To determine the differential protein interactomes of the target lncRNA, Gas5, pairwise comparisons were made between protein abundances from target lncRNA, compared to protein abundances from the scrambled control using a Student’s t test in Perseus software.60 For each protein, the intensities across all capture samples and scrambled samples were normalized by the median intensity values of each file.