PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification; SILAC
keywords: Proteostasis; gain and loss; chromosome 3; lung cancer; proteomic buffering; : aneuploidy; proteomics; dynamic silac; protein degradation; protein synthesis

ABSTRACT:
How aneuploid cells tolerate chromosome arm gains or losses remains an open question. Using an isogenic human lung cell model with either 3p loss or 3q gain, combined with quantitative mass spectrometry and isotopic labeling, we reveal distinct proteostasis mechanisms for gain- and loss-type aneuploidy. Surprisingly, while compensation for 3q gain is primarily driven by increased degradation of excess protein complex subunits, 3p loss is neither counteracted by global protein degradation nor selectively reduced degradation, but rather by relatively upregulated protein synthesis to maintain protein complex stoichiometry. Additionally, proteins encoded on 3p exhibit increased thermal stability in loss-type aneuploidy, potentially via their interactions with other proteins from euploid chromosomes. Together, our findings uncover distinct proteomic buffering strategies that enable cells to tolerate either excessive or deficient single-arm aneuploidy.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Divergent proteome tolerance against gain and loss of chromosome arms

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells involved in chromosome 3 isogenic cell model (3q gain/3p loss/chr3 WT) and chromosome 8 isogenic cell model (8p loss/ chr8 WT) were harvested and digested as previously described1. In brief, cells were washed three times by precooled PBS, released from dishes using trypsin and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The cell pellets were immediately lysed by adding 10 M urea containing complete protease inhibitor cocktail. Then the cell pellets were ultrasonically lysed by sonication at 4 °C for 2 min using a VialTweeter device and then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 1 h to remove the insoluble material. The protein concentration of supernatant was determined using BioRad Bradford assay, and around 200 µg protein was transferred to a clean Eppendorf tube. The protein was reduced using dithiothreitol at 56 °C for 1 h at the final concentration of 10 mM, and then alkylation using iodoacetamide in the dark for 45 min at room temperature with the final concentration of 20 mM. After alkylation, 100 mM NH4HCO3 was added until the concentration of urea is below than 1M. Sequencing grade porcine trypsin was then added at a ratio of 1:20 overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptide mixture was desalted with a C18 column. The final peptides amount was determined by Nanodrop. About 2 µg peptide digests were loaded onto mass spectrometry for the following DIA analysis. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to a nano-electrospray ion source was used as the liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) system with the data acquisition controlled by Xcalibur. LC separation was carried out on EASY-nLC 1200 systems  using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column with C18 material of ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-Q 1.9 μm. A 240-min measurement with buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) from 4% to 37% and corresponding buffer A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) during the gradient was used to elute peptides from the LC at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The DIA-MS method consisted of one MS1 scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable windows as previously described2,3. The MS1 scan range was 350–1650 m/z, and the MS1 resolution was 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was set to be 2.0E6, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200 with the MS2 scan range 200–1800 m/z. The MS2 AGC target value was set to be 1.5E6, the maximum injection time was 52 ms, and the normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. Both MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode. For the total proteome analysis of 8p WT and 8p loss cells, a 150-min measurement with buffer B from 4% to 37% and corresponding buffer during the gradient was used to elute peptides from the LC, and DIA-MS parameters remained unchanged.  Cells from the chromosome 3 and isogenic cell system (3q gain/3p loss/chr3 WT) and the chromosome 8 isogenic cell system (8p loss/8p WT) were subjected to pSILAC measurment. SILAC 1640 medium lacking L-arginine and L-lysine was firstly supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and the same penicillin/streptomycin mix. The Heavy L-Arginine-HCl (13C6, 15N4), and L-Lysine-2HCl (13C6, 15N2) were purchased from Cortecnet and spiked into the culturing medium as described previously1.  Cells were collected, washed with PBS twice and resuspended in 100 ml of PBS to obtain a single cell suspension with concentration of 40 million cells/mL. The single cell suspension was evenly divided into 15 aliquots,  and heated at 37 °C, 39 °C, 41 °C, 43 °C, 45 °C, 47 °C, 49 °C, 51 °C, 53 °C, 55 °C, 57 °C, 59 °C, 61 °C, 63 °C and 65 °C for 3 min in a 96-well thermocycler, followed by 3 min cooling at 4 °C.

DATA PROCESSING:
For total proteome analysis: DIA-MS data analyses were conducted using Spectronaut (v16.2). The total proteome data were directly searched against the SwissProt protein database (February 2018, 20,258 entries). Carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The possibilities of oxidation at methionine and acetylation at the protein N-terminals were set as variable modifications. Overall, both peptide- and protein-FDR (based on Qvalue) were controlled at 1%, and the data matrix was filtered by Qvalue. The data extraction was performed by Spectronaut with default settings and a Q value cut-off of 1% at both peptide and protein levels. All the other Spectronaut settings for identification and quantification were kept as default.   For pulsed SILAC experiment: DIA-MS data analyses were performed using Spectronaut on an optimized pSILAC-DIA workflow4. For pSILAC, the spectral library was generated, based on DIA measurements on relevant pSILAC samples. The default settings for the Pulsar search of Spectronaut were used. For modification in labeling, SILAC labels (‘‘Arg10’’ and ‘‘Lys8’’) were specified in the second channel. Oxidation at methionine was set as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. For the targeted data extraction and subsequent identification and quantification, the spectral library-based search was chosen. In the search setting, the Inverted Spike-In (ISW) workflow was used4. Both peptide and protein FDR cutoff (Qvalue) were controlled at 1%.  For CETSA experiment: All DIA data analysis following CETSA experiment were performed using the DirectDIA function of Spectronaut (v15.1). The DIA runs were all directly searched against the SwissProt protein database. The possibilities of oxidation at methionine and acetylation at the protein N-termini were set as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The cross-run normalization was disabled. After performing DirectDIA quantification, protein abundance data were adjusted based on the external bovine protein abundance in each sample to match the theoretical relative ratio, which was determined by the external protein amount added to each sample. Subsequently, the adjusted DIA intensity values were recalculated—specifically, for each temperature point, the percentage of supernatant-derived peptides that were loaded onto the MS was determined (this percentage was denoted as coefficient A). The DIA intensity at each temperature point was then divided by coefficient A to estimate the initial total amount of each protein in the supernatant. Next, fold changes at each temperature were calculated against the respective 37 °C and as input for the TPP package (v3.24.0) to identify melting points5. The filtering criteria for normalization were modified as this: fold change at the tenth temperature should be between 0.4 and 0.6, fold change at the fourteenth temperature should be between 0 and 0.3, and fold change at the fifteenth temperature should be between 0 and 0.2. The melting temperature difference was then calculated. We only considered proteins quantified with at least 29 temperature points across the two biological replicates in the same genotype for downstream analysis.