PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Bone marrow
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: In vitro; Endocrine-disrupting chemicals; Estrogenic chemicals; Intracellular free concentration

ABSTRACT:
Many environmental toxicants can activate the estrogen receptor α (ERα), contributing to disruption of normal endocrine function. Although these activities are known from in silico, in vitro and in vivo models, transferring the active concentrations between the different models is often challenging. We hypothesized that cellular uptake and the resulting active free intracellular concentration could bridge the gap in efficacy between assays of different complexity. Here, we tested this hypothesis by comparing cell-free (hER) and cellular (ERα-CALUX cells) estrogen assays. First, we used predictive modeling to select representative estrogenic chemicals from the ToxCast collection. Three classes of compounds were identified: Bisphenols, parabens and phthalates. We then confirmed that the potency of many of the estrogenic chemicals differed between the two systems. Next, we determined cellular uptake and intracellular binding using computational and experimental methods. Finally, we used cellular uptake and intracellular binding to improve the correlation between ERα activities in cell-free systems (hER) and cellular systems (ERα-CALUX cells) to allow translation of active concentrations between the two models. Both the computationally derived and measured cellular TK parameters varied widely between the different classes and chemicals within these classes. The free intracellular concentration was up to 1000 times lower than the nominal extracellular concentration. Correcting the active concentrations in the cell-free and cell-based assays for the computationally predicted or experimentally derived free (unbound) concentration resulted in significantly improved correlations between the two assays. The potencies in the two systems corrected by the experimentally derived cell uptake and binding showed a better correlation (Pearson coefficient, r = 0.887) than the computationally derived one (r = 0.811), and both were significantly improved compared to the uncorrected values (r=0.623). Our results indicate that the free intracellular concentration plays a crucial role for the biological activity of the tested estrogenic compounds and that its determination should be considered for a correct prediction of the potency of estrogenic toxicants. Furthermore, the computational predictions of cellular uptake and binding for these chemicals approach the accuracy of the experimentally determined data and could provide a reliable alternative for rapid screening for potential estrogenicity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The intracellular free concentration of EDCs enables successful translation between cell-free and cell-based estrogenic activity assays

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
ERα-CALUX cells were treated with vehicle (DMSO, 0.1%), 100 pM 17β-estradiol, or 3 µM bisphenol AF for 24 hours. Non-exposed cells were used as control (0 h). Two independent experiments have been performed with samples in monoplicates. Cells were washed three times with PBS, scraped, pelleted and stored at -80°C until analysis.  Frozen cell samples were rapidly thawed at room temperature, homogenized, and lysed in 25 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.6, containing 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 1 mM DTT. Proteins in the lysate were denatured at 95 °C for 5 min. Samples were prepared for proteomic analysis following a modified sp3 protocol, where simultaneous proteolytic overnight digestion was performed with 2 µg of endoproteinase LysC and 2 µg of trypsin per sample. Protein and peptide amounts were determined by fluorometric quantification using the Protein Broad Range Assay on the Qubit 4 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were separated on an EASY-spray C18-column (50 cm, 75 μm inner diameter)(Thermo Fisher Scientific), using an acetonitrile/water gradient (0.1% formic acid) at 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides where analysed using the TopN method (full MS followed by ddMS2 scans) on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operating in a data dependent mode with survey scans at a resolution of 120,000, AGC target of 3 x 106 and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The top 20 most abundant isotope patterns were selected from the survey scan with an isolation window of 1.7 m/z and fragmented with nCE at 26. The MS/MS analysis was performed with a resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 1 x 105 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. Each sample was injected in triplicate. The experimental metadata has been generated using lesSDRF.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw MS data files were processed with MaxQuant version 2.2.0.0 (https://www.maxquant.org/), where proteins were identified by matching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a reference human proteome database (UniProtKB; https:// www.uniprot.org/; accessed 26-10-2022). Carboamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and oxidation and acetylation as variable modifications.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Many environmental toxicants can activate estrogen receptor α (ERα), disrupting normal endocrine function. While these activities are predicted across in silico, in vitro, and in vivo models, translating active concentrations between these systems remains challenging. We hypothesized that cellular uptake and the resulting free intracellular toxicant concentration could bridge this gap. Using cell-free (hER) and cell-based (ERα-CALUX cells) estrogen assays, we tested this hypothesis by determination of the free intracellular concentration available for binding to the intracellularly located ERα. Predictive modeling identified three classes of estrogenic chemicals from the ToxCast collection: bisphenols, parabens, and phthalates. Experimental data confirmed potency differences of up to 100-fold between the cell-free and cell-based models. Cellular toxicokinetic (TK) parameters, including cellular uptake and intracellular binding, were determined using computational and experimental methods. Incorporating experimental TK parameters significantly improved the correlation between ERα activities in the cell-free and cellular models (from r = 0.6230, P = 0.0989 without corrections to r = 0.8869, P = 0.0033 after corrections), and bridged the gap between the cell free and cell based assays. Both computational and experimental TK parameters varied widely across chemical classes and compounds. Correcting active concentrations for free intracellular levels enhanced assay correlations, with experimentally derived corrections showing the strongest improvement with r = 0.8869 (compared to the in silico derived corrections with r = 0.811). Our findings highlight the critical role of free intracellular concentration in determining the biological activity of estrogenic toxicants and emphasize its importance in accurately assessing their endocrine-disrupting potential.

SDRF SUMMARY:
Total runs: 24
organism: Homo sapiens
organism part: bone marrow
cell type: cultured cell
cell line: bone marrow cell
instrument: Q Exactive HF
cleavage agent details: Lys-C; Trypsin/P
modification parameters: Acetyl; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
label: label free sample
precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm
fragment mass tolerance: 10 ppm