PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Mouse; Gephyrin interactome; Sleep deprivation

ABSTRACT:
GABAergic transmission controls cortical sleep, however the molecular determinants of GABAergic control of this phenomenon are unknown. We used immunoprecipitation of the inhibitory postsynaptic protein gephyrin to identify gephyrin interactors at ZT6 (sleep) and ZT6 with sleep deprivation (ZT6SD).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identifying altered mouse gephyrin interactome after sleep deprivation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation and whole cortices were bilaterally removed and immediately snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C, with n=4 individuals used per condition at Zeitgeber time (ZT) 6 (ZT6 versus ZT6 sleep deprivation (SD)). For the SD group, a 6-hour sleep deprivation started at ZT0 (at light onset), and the mice were sacrificed at ZT6. Sleep deprivation was accomplished by gentle handling (Tobler & Jaggi, 1987) such as placing a novel object in the cage, having the experimenters near the cages, and disassembling the nest. For bioinformatic analysis, one sample from the SD group was excluded due to lower sample quality. Sample preparation with gephyrin immunoprecipitation Cortices from each mouse were lysed mechanically in EBC lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 120 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, and 5 mM EDTA) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete™, Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2, Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3, Sigma-Aldrich), then incubated for 1 h on ice. The lysates were then centrifuged at 23,000 rpm (~48,500 rcf) for 30 minutes. The immunoprecipitation procedures were modified from the protocol outlined in the kit instructions for the magnetic beads used (Dynabeads™ Protein G, Invitrogen), using 100 L of magnetic beads per sample. The beads were prepared by the following steps before adding the lysates: washed 1x with EBC buffer + inhibitors, incubated 30 minutes with mouse anti-gephyrin antibody (clone 3B11) (gift from Guenter Schwarz, University of Cologne ) on a tube rotator (gentle end-over-end rotation) at room temperature. For the antibody control, we added 1 g of mouse IgG to the magnetic beads instead of the gephyrin antibody. After that, the supernatant was removed and 270 L of lysates were added to the beads, followed by 45 minutes of incubation on a tube rotator at room temperature. The supernatant was then removed after the incubation period and the beads were gently washed 1x with high-salt EBC buffer  with inhibitors and 2x with standard EBC buffer with inhibitors. Samples were kept on ice until elution and enzyme digestion followed by mass spectrometry.Sample preparation for protein quantification For each sample, the washed beads were re-suspended in 45 µl digestion buffer (10 mM Tris + 2 mM CaCl2, pH 8.2) and the proteins were on-bead digested using 5 µl of Sequencing Grade Trypsin (100 ng/µl in 10 mM HCl, Promega). The digestion was carried out overnight at 37°C. The supernatants were transferred in new tubes and the beads were additionally extracted with 150 µl TFA-buffer (0.1% TFA, 50% acetonitrile), the supernatants were collected and combined with the previously collected supernatant. The samples were dried in a speed-vac, and peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips (prepared in-house). After drying, the peptides were resolubilized in 20 µl of 3% acetonitrile, and 0.1% Formic acid before transferring into LC-MS vials.

DATA PROCESSING:
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). The solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, and 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample 2 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by nanoEase MZ C18 HSS T3 Column (100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 8 to 27% B in 85 min, 35% B in 5 min and 80% B in 1 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring full-scan MS spectra (350−1’400 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3’000’000, followed by HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation on the ten most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60’000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1’000’000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled. Single, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Only precursors with intensity above 120’000 were selected for MS/MS. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200.  The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS) (Türker et al., 2010) and all relevant data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride) and will be made available after publication.   Protein identification and label-free quantification The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3)(Cox & Mann, 2008), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a UniProt Mus Musculus (taxonomy 10090) reference proteome (canonical version from 2016-09-02), concatenated to its reversed decoyed FASTA database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, and Phospho (STY) were set as variable modifications. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P. For Label-Free-Quantification MaxQuant default settings are applied and match-between-runs was allowed. In the MaxQuant experimental design, each file was treated as a separate experiment to obtain individual quantitative values for each sample. Protein and phosphosite fold changes were computed based on intensity values as reported in the proteinGroups.txt and the Phospho (STY) Sites.txt files, respectively. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService (W. Wolski, J. Grossmann, C. Panse. 2018, http://github.com/protViz/SRMService) was used to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation and to compute p-values using a moderated t-test with pooled variance as implemented in the limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015).   Statistical evaluation was performed on the phosphosite level as well as the protein level separately. If all measurements of a protein or phosphosite were missing in one of the conditions, a pseudo-fold change was computed replacing the missing group average by the mean of 10% smallest protein intensities in that condition. Finally, the two sets of analyses were merged to create an integrated proteomics and phosphoproteomics dataset. In brief, the Phospho (STY) Sites.txt was used and the expand site table function was re-implemented then the global protein quantification results were merged with the quantitative phosphosite results. All rows with less than three valid non-zero values were filtered out. We obtained the information of peptides/proteins enriched in gephyrin-precipitated samples by using a cut-off criterion of log2 FC over 2 compared to IgG control as well as proteins which were identified only in the gephyrin-precipitated samples but not the control IgG sample.