PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Platelet; Blood platelet
diseases: Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Multiple sclerosis; Platelet releasate

ABSTRACT:
Multiple Sclerosis is an inflammatory neurodegenerative disease characterised by blood-brain barrier dysfunction and leukocyte infiltration into the central nervous system. Platelets are best known for their contributions to haemostasis, however upon activation platelets release an abundance of soluble and vesicular-associated proteins, termed the platelet releasate (PR). This milieu contains numerous inflammatory and vasoactive proteins which function to attract leukocytes and alter endothelial permeability. Here, we aimed to characterise the PR of Relapsing-Remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) patients, previously characterized with respect to thrombin generation dynamics compared to healthy controls. We carried out LFQ proteomic profiling of the PR from 15 RRMS and 19 aged-matched healthy controls. The PR proteome identified 9 proteins increased and 16 proteins decreased in RRMS patients.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Characterisation of Platelet Releasate Proteome in Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis Reveals Dysregulation of Inflammatory Signalling and Extracellular Vesicle Dynamics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human whole blood was drawn into Vacutainer tubes containing acid-citrate dextrose (ACD). Plasma was isolated by centrifugation (200 xg for 10 min, no break). Red blood cell contamination was removed by centrifugation (150 xg for 7 min, no break). Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was centrifuged (600 xg for 10 min, break 5) to separate platelets from plasma. Platelet-poor plasma (PPP) was removed and stored at -80 °C for further analysis. The platelet pellet was washed with modified Tyrodes’s buffer (130 mM NaCl, 10 mM trisodium citrate, 9 mM NaHCO3, 6 mM dextrose, 0.9 mM MgCl2, 0.81 mM KH2PO4, 10 mMTris pH 7.4) followed by centrifugation (600 xg for 10 min, break 5). After counting, platelets were resuspended to a final concentration of 1 x 109 platelets/mL. Platelets were activated in a Chronolog-700 platelet aggregometer (Chronolog Cor, Manchester, UK) with 1 U/mL thrombin (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) under constant stirring conditions (1100 rpm) for 5 minutes at 37 °C. Aggregated platelets were immediately placed on ice before treatment with 1 mM PMSF, 2% protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 2% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1µM PGE1 (Sigma Aldrich, Wicklow, Ireland). Remaining intact platelets were then removed by sequential centrifugation (3 x [1000 xg for 10 min] at 4 °C) while carefully harvesting the supernatant each time. To ensure vesicular lysis, the PR samples were subjected to lysis with a standard RIPA lysis buffer (300 mM NaCl, 2 % Trition X-100, 1 %sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 % SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) for 30 minutes at 4 °C. 30 µg of protein from each sample was then precipitated with 95% acetone (4:1 acetone:sample volume) at -20 °C overnight. Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea / 25 mM tris-HCl, pH 8.2, at 37 °C with gentle agitation. Disulphide bonds were reduced with 5 mM DTT and then protected with 15 mM IAA. Proteins were digested with Lys-C (1:100; Promega, Madison, WI) for 5 hours at room temperature followed by digestion with trypsin (1:100; Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were purified using ZipTipC18 pipette tips according to manufacturer instructions (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), before being dried down, re-suspended in 1% formic acid and subjected to MS analysis. Each sample was run on a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFischer Scientific, Waltham, MA) connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system (ThermoFischer Scientific). Each sample was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75 μm ID), pulled using a laser puller (Sutter Instruments P2000, Novato, CA, USA), packed with Reprocil Pur (Dr Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) C18 (1.9 μm; 12 cm in length) reverse phase media and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 47 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min direct into a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320 °C, and with a potential of 2300 V applied to the frit. All data was acquired while operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300 - 1600 m/z) was performed using the Q Exactive to select the 12 most intense ions prior to spectrum analysis using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD).

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.5.0.30. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against a human FASTA proteome obtained from UniProt (August 2016). MaxQuant analysis included an initial search with a precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm the results of which were used for mass recalibration. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01. For quantitative comparison between samples, we used label-free quantification (LFQ) with a minimum of two ratio counts to determine the normalized protein intensity. LFQ intensities were assigned to identified proteins by comparing the area under the curve of the signal intensity for any given peptide. Data was processed in the Perseus open framework. The amount of individual proteins was calculated as the ratio of their LFQ intensity (LFQ MS intensity) to the sum of all LFQ intensities (total protein) in the measured sample. LFQ total protein amounts were log2 transformed. Protein IDs were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, proteins only identified by site, and common contaminants.