PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Wounds and injuries
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Wound regeneration; Gel-lc-ms/ms; Human; Finger tip

ABSTRACT:
Distal injuries in human fingertips can regenerate almost fully, yet the process of human fingertip regeneration has hardly been characterized on a cellular and molecular level. A silicone finger cap, comprising a puncturable reservoir, was used to treat 22 human fingertip amputations. In all patients, subcutaneous tissue, nailbed and skin regenerated with excellent outcomes. Through the clinical assessment of the wounds, the regenerative process was divided into four distinct phases. Proteomic data from wound fluid samples collected at regular intervals, confirmed robust and unbiasedly distinct proteomic signatures, characteristic processes, and active regulatory networks in each phase. Moreover, this human dataset provides important insights, showing clear divergences from findings in regenerative animal models. The longitudinal and comprehensive analysis presented here unveils the complex orchestration of four clinically and proteomically-distinct phases of human fingertip regeneration. Further analyses of this proteomic data will allow for the identification of candidates orchestrating human fingertip regeneration and serving as a framework for comparative and regenerative medicine studies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human fingertip regeneration follows clinical phases with distinct proteomic signatures

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Gel bands (regions) were excised and cut into small cubes of approximately 1 mm side length. Gel pieces were destained and proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested in-gel with trypsin, and extracted according to standard procedures with slight modifications (digestion in 20mM NH4HCO3). Digests were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20°C until analysis.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, dried digests were recovered with 3 µl 30% formic acid containing 50 fmol/µl isotopically labelled peptide standards (Peptide Retention Time Standards, Table II), immediately diluted with 20 µl water, and transferred to HPLC vials. For analysis, 5 µl of the sample was injected into the HPLC system. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a trap column and desalted for 10 min with solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 3 µl/min. After desalting, the trap column was switched in-line with the separation column, operated at a flow rate of 200nl/min. After equilibration with solvent A, peptides were separated in a linear gradient of 90 min from 0% - 60% solvent B (60% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive HF, ThermoScientific, Bremen,Germany) was operated in data-dependent (DDA) acquisition mode.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide and protein identification was performed with Mascot V3.1.0 (Matrixscience), using the database of human reviewed proteins (UP5640 reviewed only) downloaded on 14-02-2025. rypsin was set as the protease, and a maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethyl-cysteine was set as fixed, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide hits were evaluated and aggregated in Scaffold 5.2.2 (ProteomeSoftware, USA).