PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Keratin; krt32

ABSTRACT:
GST-KRT32 and its interacting proteins in primary keratinocytes cells were enriched by pull-down using glutathione-Sepharose beads. Then, KRT32-interacting proteins were identified by mass spectrum. Proteins obtained in Pulldown were subjected to SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis and silver staining. The SDS-PAGE gel was sent to the mass spectrometry platform of the Jingjie PTM Biolab for subsequent processing and mass spectrometry detection.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification of novel KRT32-associated proteins in primary keratinocytes cells lysate by GST-KRT32 pulldown assays coupled with mass spectrometry.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
To identify the novel KRT32-associated proteins, primary keratinocytes cells lysate was incubated with GST or GST-tagged KRT32 for 12 hours. The GST complexes were subjected to the pull-down assay using glutathione-Sepharose beads, enabling selective affinity purification. After this purification process, the enriched protein complexes were subjected to protein gel electrophoresis. Silver staining was performed to visualize the protein bands, which were then excised from the gel for further analysis. The excised gel bands were submitted to Jingjie PTM Biolab for mass spectrometry-based detection and analysis. For in-gel tryptic digestion, gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ in 50% acetonitrile (v/v) until clear. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 μl of 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, the liquid removed, and the gel pieces rehydrated in 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 60 min. Gel pieces were again dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, liquid was removed and gel pieces were rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were incubated at room temperature, in the dark for 45 min. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 10 ng/μl trypsin resuspended in 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ on ice for 1 h. Excess liquid was removed and gel pieces were digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, followed by 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried to completion and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

DATA PROCESSING:
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo sapiens database. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.