PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Placenta
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Vegfr2; Placenta; Hofbauer cells; Mdmx; Trim21; Picalm; Oxytocin receptor; Proteomics

ABSTRACT:
VEGFR2 (Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2) is a central regulator of placental angiogenesis. The study of the VEGFR2 proteome of chorionic villi at term revealed its partners MDMX (Double minute 4 protein) and PICALM (Phosphatidylinositol-binding clathrin assembly protein). Subsequently, the oxytocin receptor (OT-R) and vasopressin V1aR receptor were detected in MDMX and PICALM immunoprecipitations. Immunogold electron microscopy showed VEGFR2 on endothelial cell (EC) nuclei, mitochondria, and Hofbauer cells (HC), tissue-resident macrophages of the placenta. MDMX, PICALM, and V1aR were located on EC plasma membranes, nuclei, and HC nuclei. Unexpectedly, PICALM and OT-R were detected on EC projections into the fetal lumen and OT-R on 20-150 nm clusters therein, prompting the hypothesis that placental exosomes transport OT-R to the fetus and across the blood-brain barrier. Insights on gestational complications were gained by univariable and multivariable regression analyses associating preeclampsia with lower MDMX protein levels in membrane extracts of chorionic villi, and lower MDMX, PICALM, OT-R, and V1aR with spontaneous vaginal deliveries compared to cesarean deliveries before the onset of labor. We found select associations between higher MDMX, PICALM, OT-R protein levels and either gravidity, diabetes, BMI, maternal age, or neonatal weight, and correlations only between PICALM-OT-R (p<2.7x10-8), PICALM-V1aR (p<0.006), and OT-R-V1aR (p<0.001). These results offer for exploration new partnerships in metabolic networks, tissue-resident immunity, and labor, notably for HC that predominantly express MDMX.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic studies of human placentas reveal partnerships associated with preeclampsia, diabetes, gravidity, and labor

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Immunoprecipitations Each immunoprecipitation of the 4-6 placental extracts, shown in Supplementary Tables 1-3, was carried out in one batch. Half mL of pellicular support M-280 Dynabeads was washed in homogenization buffer containing 1% ASB-14 and charged separately at room temperature for 2h with 0.9 μg VEGFR2, 15 μg MDMX or 7.5 μg PICALM antibody. Three mg of ASB14-extracted placental membranes from each placenta were mixed separately with the beads, overnight for logistical reasons, at 6-80C. Most proteins adhering to the beads were removed by washing four times with homogenization buffer containing 1% ASB-14 and once with detergent-free buffer. Bound proteins were eluted at 950C with 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 4% SDS (w/v) and 100 mM DTT. Eluted proteins were fractionated on 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gels. After Coomassie blue staining, gel strips from 25-220 kDa were submitted for mass spectrometric analysis.  Mass spectrometry Samples were submitted and analyzed in a double-blinded fashion. Immunoprecipitated proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 370 C as described [27]. Each group of immunoprecipitated samples was analyzed with a new trap and HPLC column. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated with a C18 reversed-phase-HPLC column on an Ultimate3000 UHPLC with a 60-min gradient and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus using data-dependent acquisition.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) and searched against the UniprotKB human protein sequence database. Search parameters included constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modification, methionine oxidation. Proteins were identified using the filtering criteria of 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Human subjects
All patients signed consent forms prior to their inclusion in the study according to the protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of South Florida and Tampa General Hospital. Placental samples were obtained from 44 patients with singleton pregnancies, aged 19–40 and gestational ages ranging from 35–42 weeks based on the dating criteria from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28426621/) for women who delivered vaginally or by cesarean delivery (CD), between 7 AM to 4 PM, based on obstetric indications (Table 1). Patients were excluded if they had active viral infections or fetal growth restriction, defined as estimated fetal weight of < 10th% per the Hadlock growth curve. Preeclampsia was diagnosed according to the criteria established in 2013 by ACOG (10.1097/01.AOG.0000437382.03963.88). Low risk pregnancy was defined by the absence of maternal co-morbidities including chronic hypertension defined as hypertension prior to pregnancy or systolic blood pressure ≥ 140 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure ≥ 90 mm Hg prior to 20 weeks’ gestation, pregestational or gestational diabetes, smoking, renal disease, and autoimmune disease. Patients with preeclampsia with severe features defined by the 2013 ACOG Guidelines received magnesium sulfate for seizure prophylaxis during induction of labor or CD through 24h postpartum. The demographic Supplementary Table 20 shows that 91% of study participants were 18–34 years old and 75% were multiparous. Most participants (91%) were ≥ 37 weeks’ gestation. There was no risk of bias in the selection of placentas which was at random. Patient identifications, Q1, T1, etc., (Table 1) are not known to anyone outside the research group and are assigned identifiers not using any personally identifiable information. 
Reagents
Most of the reagents were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA), MMP-200 metalloprotease inhibitor III, proteasome inhibitor MG-132, protease inhibitor cocktail III, marimastat, Hammarsten-grade casein, detergent ASB-14, Novagen S-protein HRP conjugate 69,047–3, Novex 4–12% BT SDS-PAGE gels, CL-XPosure film, magnetic Dynabeads M-280 charged with sheep anti-rabbit antibodies, Maxisorp Nunc C-bottom 8-well strips, protein assay Pierce BCA 562 nm kit 23225 (Pierce, Rockford, IL), and Protein Perfect HRP MW markers 69079–3/Millipore-Calbiochem (Billerica, MA). Additional reagents are provided in the sections below.
Antibodies
All antibodies were purchased in the USA. VEGFR2 (55B11) no. 2479 (RRID AB_2219274) Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA), MDMX A300-287A (RRID AB_ 263407) Bethyl Laboratories (Montgomery, TX), PDC-E2 SC-365276 (RRID AB_10858873) Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA), PICALM HPA019053 (RRID AB_1855361) Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO), OT-R ABN1735 (RRID AB_2864776) Millipore (Temecula, CA), V1aR MBS176788 (RRID AB_3068011) MyBiosource (San Diego, CA), CD163 MA5-33091 (RRID AB_2810183) InVitrogen-Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA), TRIM21 NBP1-33548 (RRID AB_10004085) Novus (Centennial, CO), Alexa-488 (green) and Alexa-64 (red) goat anti-rabbit/mouse conjugated secondary antibodies/Life Technologies (Eugene, OR), immunogold donkey-anti-rabbit secondary antibodies 25702 (6 nm) and 25705 (10 nm) (Electron Microscopy Sciences (Hatfield, PA).
Placenta tissue collection, homogenization, and protein extraction with ASB-14 Within 15 min of the delivery of the placenta, samples were obtained from the fetal side of the placental bed at 4–5 cm from the umbilical cord and at a depth of 1.0–1.5 cm, and were placed on dry ice and then stored at -80°C. Tissues were also fixed in formalin for IHC or in paraformaldehyde-tannic acid for IGEM. Frozen tissue samples were finely cut and placed, at 150 mg per mL, in homogenization buffer containing 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.6, 50 mM NaCl, 50 μM sodium o-vanadate, 10 mM NaF, 20 μM proteasome inhibitor MG-132, 10 μM marimastat and 6 μL protease inhibitor cocktail-III per mL. After homogenization at 40C by three 15 s bursts of a homogenizer with one-minute cooling in between, the homogenates were centrifuged for 1 h at 100,000 g. On top of the pellets was a thin pink fluffy layer, presumably of red blood cell (RBC) membranes, which was included when the pellets were suspended in homogenization buffer containing 1% ASB-14 and then extracted overnight, due to logistical reasons, at 6-80C by end-over-end rotation. The zwitterionic detergent ASB-14 was superior in solubilizing membrane proteins to CHAPSO or n-octyl β-D-maltoside. After centrifugation at 100,000 g for 1 h, the supernatant solution was used in immunoprecipitations and western blots. We refrained from washing the membrane pellets in order to capture weak protein complexes. Protein levels of the membrane extracts were determined in quadruplicate at two dilutions with the Pierce BCA 562 nm kit. Final yield: 10–15 mg of detergent-extracted proteins per g wet tissue. To determine the efficiency of protein extraction by ASB-14, the post-ASB-14 100,000 g pellets were solubilized in SDS-DTT at 950C and then probed in western blots. Extraction yield was 100% for VEGFR2, MDMX and PICALM, 86% for PDC-E2 and 64% for TOMM20, a marker for inner mitochondrial membranes.
Peptide synthesis to validate the OT-R and V1aR antibodies
Figure 1 shows OT-R peptides EGNRTAGPPRRNEA (selected within the OT-R immunogen range given for this antibody, and different from V1aR), AEAPEGAAAGDGGRVA (outside the OT-R immunogen range) and V1aR immunogen peptide HPLKTLQQPARRSRLMIAA to validate the OT-R Millipore ABN1735 (0.5 μg/μL) and V1aR MyBioSourse MBS176788 (0.5 μg/μL) antibodies. The peptides were synthesized on 100 mg Rink Amide-MBHA resin (0.65 mmol/g) at room temperature under air using standard solid phase peptide synthesis protocol.
Validation method for OT-R and V1aR antibodies
Maxisorp Nunc C-bottom strips were coated overnight at 40C with the indicated amounts of synthetic peptides (Fig. 1) dissolved in sodium carbonate buffer pH 9.6. After blocking, as in western blot experiments, the OT-R and V1aR antibodies were added for 2h at room temperature at the indicated dilution followed by the secondary anti-rabbit antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase. Detection of bound OT-R or V1aR antibodies was conducted by ECL on films exposed for the indicated times. The OT-R and V1aR antibodies bound only to peptide sequences used to raise them.
Immunoprecipitations
Each immunoprecipitation of the 4–6 placental extracts, shown in Supplementary Tables 1–3, was carried out in one batch. Half mL of pellicular support M-280 Dynabeads was washed in homogenization buffer containing 1% ASB-14 and charged separately at room temperature for 2h with 0.9 μg VEGFR2, 15 μg MDMX or 7.5 μg PICALM antibody. Three mg of ASB14-extracted placental membranes from each placenta were mixed separately with the beads, overnight for logistical reasons, at 6-80C. Most proteins adhering to the beads were removed by washing four times with homogenization buffer containing 1% ASB-14 and once with detergent-free buffer. Bound proteins were eluted at 950C with 100 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.6, 4% SDS (w/v) and 100 mM DTT. Eluted proteins were fractionated on 4–12% Bis–Tris NuPAGE gels. After Coomassie blue staining, gel strips from 25–220 kDa were submitted for mass spectrometric analysis.
Mass spectrometry
Samples were submitted and analyzed in a double-blinded fashion. Immunoprecipitated proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C overnight at 370 C as described. Each group of immunoprecipitated samples was analyzed with a new trap and HPLC column. Peptides were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC–MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated with a C18 reversed-phase-HPLC column on an Ultimate3000 UHPLC with a 60-min gradient and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus using data-dependent acquisition. Raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (www.maxquant.org) and searched against the UniprotKB human protein sequence database. Search parameters included constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modification, methionine oxidation. Proteins were identified using the filtering criteria of 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate.
Western blot analysis
Twenty five μg of protein from each of the 44 placental extracts, containing an average of 8 mg protein per mL, were resolved on 4–12% Bis–Tris NuPAGE gels, transferred to PVDF membranes and blocked overnight at room temperature in 1% Hammarsten-grade casein or 5% Difco skimmed milk powder. MDMX, PICALM, OT-R or V1aR primary antibody dilutions ranged from 1:800 to 1:10000. PVDF membranes incubated with ECL reagents were exposed to film for 1-20 s. Films were scanned in the transmittance mode (Epson Perfection 3200 Photo, Epson America, Los Alamitos, CA, USA). The intensity of the top band (Fig. 10) was measured with Li-Cor Image Studio Lite software (Lincoln, Nebraska, USA) and chosen from a film exposed at the linear portion of the correlation between band intensity and film exposure time before films were overexposed. In the statistical analyses we used the mean intensity from 3.6 blots, on the average, and relative to an internal control sample Q1 or V1 (Supplementary Table 4).
Immunohistochemistry
Four µm formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue sections were processed for IHC and stained with VEGFR2 (1:50), MDMX (1:500) or PICALM (1:1000) antibodies. Slides were exposed with diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride dehydrate as a chromogen and counterstained with hematoxylin before permanent mounting.
Immunogold electron microscopy
Tissue samples were promptly fixed in buffered 4% paraformaldehyde and kept overnight at 40C and then immersed in 0.75% buffered solution of tannic acid for 2h at room temperature. Samples were rinsed in filtered glass-distilled water, dehydrated through a series of increasing ethanol concentration, infiltrated, and embedded in LRW acrylic resin. Selected blocks were sectioned at 90–100 nm and mounted on formvar coated copper grids. The immunogold reaction was performed by incubating grids in standard blocking solution for 30 min at room temperature and transferring to either 1:100 MDMX rabbit Ab, 1:400 PICALM rabbit Ab, 1:100 VEGFR2 rabbit Ab or 1:600 OT-R or V1aR rabbit Ab for an overnight incubation at 40C. After washing in PBS, gold-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit Ab 25703 (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA), was applied at 1:50 dilution for 90 min at room temperature. The diameter of the gold particles (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) was 6 nm in VEGFR2 and MDMX and 10 nm in PICALM and OT-R experiments. Excess secondary antibody was removed by washing with glass-distilled water and the grids were further treated with 2% aqueous uranyl acetate added for contrast. In control experiments excluding the primary antibody, 1–2 gold particles were detected throughout the grids. In morphological analysis by transmission electron microscopy, tissues were fixed in 2% OsO4, after 2.5% glutaraldehyde fixation and prior to the dehydration and resin infiltration steps. Images were obtained with a JEM-1400 transmission electron microscope (JEOL, Peabody, MA) and Orius-832 camera (Gatan Inc., Pleasanton, CA).
Whole mount immunofluorescence (WMIF)
Small samples (2 × 2x2 mm) of placental tissues, were fixed in 1 mL 90% methanol for 2h at 4°C according to Bushway et al. with modifications. After washing with PBS, the samples were blocked for 2h at 40C with 1% Hammarsten-grade casein in PBS containing 0.02% Thimerosal. After washing with 0.5% Casein in PBS, antibodies to VEGFR2 and PDC-E2 were added at 1:400 dilution and incubated overnight at 40C, followed by washing with 0.5% Casein-PBS containing 0.3% Triton-X and incubation with the secondary antibodies at 1:100 dilutions. WMIF slides were observed with a Leica TCS SP5 AOBS laser scanning confocal microscope through a 40X/1.3NA Plan Apochromat oil immersion objective lens (Leica Microsystems CMS GmbH, Germany). 405 Diode, Argon 488 and He–Ne 647 laser lines were applied to excite the samples and tunable emissions were used to minimize crosstalk between fluorochromes. Images were captured with photomultiplier detectors and prepared with the LAS AF software version 2.7 (Leica Microsystems CMS GmbH, Germany). Chorionic villi video: A 3D projected image was created by Z-stack of images taken at 1.0–0.5-micron intervals to create a movie by Imaris version 7.6 (Bitplane AG, Switzerland).
Statistical analysis
The protein levels of MDMX, PICALM, OT-R and V1aR were analyzed for univariable and multivariable associations by linear regression using the R statistical program (https://www.r-project.org, 4.1.3). Parsimonious multivariable models were selected using Akaike’s Information Criteria with a stepwise selection procedure (StepAIC in the MASS package of R) and were run with covariates that were identified as statistically significant in univariable analysis. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Violin plots were made by R statistical program, and data Figures and graphs were assembled using Fiji ImageJ, GraphPad Prism 9.4.0, Adobe Illustrator and Windows Office365 software. To test the robustness of results to the specific datapoints included in the analysis, bootstrapped resampling (with replacement) was used to generate 1000 replicate datasets, upon which regression analyses were redone. Results of bootstrapped resampled analyses were summarized and compared to the full dataset to characterize consistency of point estimates and patterns of statistical significance. Pearson correlation coefficients were used to characterize correlation of protein measurements with each other.
Availability of data and materials
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.com) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD050049. All relevant data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All patients signed consent forms prior to their inclusion in the study according to the protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of South Florida and Tampa General Hospital (IRB-approved study protocol Pro00015578, John Tsibris Principal Investigator). Information presented in this manuscript cannot be used to identify individuals.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.

RESULTS:
Results
Immunoprecipitations (IP)
Key prerequisite for this study was that VEGFR2 protein complexes withstood tissue freezing and extraction by ASB-14. Since Blue-Native electrophoresis (BN) resolves protein mixtures under non-denaturing conditions, we fractionated placental extracts by BN followed by VEGFR2 immunostaining which revealed streaks extending up to 800 kDa. VEGFR2 monomers appear at 220 kDa in western blots. Apparently, ASB-14 stabilized the extracted protein complexes of VEGFR2. Several proteins described in this study were efficiently extracted by ASB-14 (see Methods). New VEGFR2 partners, MDMX and PICALM, were also selected for IP.
Figure 2 shows western blots of the fractions eluted from the magnetic beads and used to select the fraction for mass spectrometric analysis. Representative fractions are identified by the patient’s assigned letter-number code shown on Table 1. Magnetic beads retained all of the applied VEGFR2 (A) as none was detected in the flow-through fraction, but the MDMX and PICALM antibodies charged on the beads retained only a fraction of their target protein as shown, respectively, in E and F. All target proteins were greatly enriched in the eluted fraction-E relative to the applied placental extract, fraction-X. OT-R co-immunoprecipitated with MDMX (G, right side) and with PICALM (G, left side), but not with VEGFR2 (D). V1aR co-immunoprecipitated with MDMX (H, left side) and with PICALM (H, right side), but not with VEGFR2 (C). Eluted MDMX appeared smaller in the VEGFR2 IP (B) and MDMX IP (E), whereas PICALM (F), OT-R (G) and V1aR (H) appeared larger. The size of eluted VEGFR2 was the same as in the extracts (A).
Proteomic analysis
Results of the immunoprecipitations of VEGFR2 (samples O4, O5, O7, U1), MDMX (samples O1, O4, O6, Q1, Q4, R4), and PICALM (samples N3, O1, R4, Q1, Q4, U1) are listed in Supplementary Tables 1–3. The peptide coverage was not consistent among the placental extracts in each immunoprecipitation group due to different clinical characteristics of the patients whose tissues we tested, and potential differences in post-translational modifications, such as acetylation, and ubiquitination. Soluble proteins in villous homogenates having an affinity for membrane proteins would be retained on the pellets obtained after centrifugation at 100,000g for 1h.
Select proteins that co-immunoprecipitated with VEGFR2 (Supplementary Table 1)
VEGFR2 was retained on the beads by an Ab raised to the cytoplasmic tail of VEGFR2 exposing extracted proteins to its extracellular, VEGF-binding, domain (see Methods). Therefore, most VEGFR2 partners must have interacted, even after VEGFR2 internalization, with its extracellular rather than its intracellular tyrosine kinase domain, and in binary associations while fewer would bind via some intermediate protein partners. In principle, VEGFR2, MDMX, and PICALM isoforms post-translationally modified at the target sequence of the immunoprecipitating antibodies, are unlikely to be retained on the beads. Our experimental design provided only an estimate of peptide levels in each placental sample. Very basic proteins, such as VEGF-A (pI = 9.2), were not detected due to excessive trypsin digestion of these mostly intrinsically disordered proteins prior to mass spectrometric analysis. For example, more than 65% of the VEGF-A residues are expected to be disordered. Nevertheless, western blot analysis showed that VEGF-A co-immunoprecipitated in VEGFR2 IP, and that OT-R (pI = 9.6) and V1aR (pI = 9.5) co-immunoprecipitated in MDMX and PICALM IP. p53 and MDM2 were detected in IP eluates only by western blots. Under our protocol, proteins larger than 220 kDa were, most likely, identified by peptides from their smaller forms in the placenta.
The E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM21 (tripartite motif-containing protein 21) co-immunoprecipitated with VEGFR2 and in MDMX and PICALM IP (Supplementary Tables 1–3). TRIM21, a member of the large TRIM family, contains a zinc-binding as well as other motifs. TRIM21 is found in the cytosol and nucleus and is unique among all proteins as the highest-affinity Fc receptor in humans. TRIM21 does not distinguish free from bound antibodies. Another VEGFR2 partner was PDC-E2 (DLAT), the E2 component of pyruvate dehydrogenase (Supplementary Table 1). The association of PDC-E2 with VEGFR2 probably occurs in the nuclei and mitochondria, as discussed later, and is shown in the vasculature of the villi (Supplementary Video of chorionic villi). Other VEGFR2 partners were complement components (Supplementary Table 1) revealing complement activation known to occur in placental dysfunctions. Immunoglobulin heavy constant alpha 1 (IGHA1), an autoantibody antigen and signature protein of plasma cells, was among the large amounts of immunoglobulins detected that are carried by placental endothelial cells and maternal blood cells. A smaller than 220 kDa form of the giant protein titin was also detected in VEGFR2 and PICALM IP (Supplementary Tables 1, 3).
Select proteins that co-immunoprecipitated with MDMX and PICALM (Supplementary Tables 2, 3)
VEGFR2 was not detected in MDMX and PICALM IP, probably because of the limited binding capacity of the MDMX and PICALM antibody charged on the beads. Among the proteins that co-immunoprecipitated with MDMX were PICALM, annexins, arginase-1, RNA-binding protein HNPNPA2B1 and others that immunoprecipitated also in VEGFR2 and PICALM IP (Supplementary Tables 1, 3). Protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 2 (TGM2), which co-immunoprecipitated with MDMX and PICALM (Supplementary Tables 2, 3), catalyzes protein cross-linking, is considered a bridge between inflammation and hypertension, and is upregulated in preeclampsia. We indicated in Supplementary Table 2 the few proteins common in VEGFR2, MDMX and PICALM immunoprecipitations, and many more that co-immunoprecipitated only with MDMX and are likely members of the HC proteome. After an initial statistical analysis associated MDMX with the mode of delivery, we were prompted to study the OT-R, which is activated in the myometrium causing uterine contractions, and its partner V1aR, after validating two commercial antibodies (Fig. 1).
Immunohistochemistry and whole mount immunofluorescence
VEGFR2 strongly stained the endothelium of the villous capillaries (Fig. 3A). TRIM21 staining is seen in the cytoplasm of villous trophoblasts and stronger staining in intervillous maternal leukocytes (Fig. 3B, arrows). MDMX is predominantly expressed (Fig. 3C and D) on Hofbauer cells (HC) that are targets of Zika and other viruses. Strong MDMX staining was limited to the cytoplasm of HC, easily identified within the villous stroma, some within stromal channels (Fig. 3C). CD163, a marker for placental macrophages, stained the cytoplasm of the HC (Fig. 3D). PICALM showed strong staining of trophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts (Fig. 3E) and on higher power images (Fig. 3F) positive cytoplasmic staining of the villous capillary endothelial cells was also seen.
Supplementary Video of chorionic villi
Colocalization of VEGFR2 (red) and PDC-E2 (green) in endothelial cells of the villous vasculature of a normotensive, non-diabetic patient is shown in the video obtained from reconstructed stacked images of whole mount immunofluorescence. Nuclei were stained blue with DAPI.
Immunogold electron microscopy (IGEM)
VEGFR2 was localized along segments of endoplasmic reticulum, and in mitochondria (Fig. 4). MDMX was localized diffusely within the cytoplasm of an HC and was seen clustering in the nucleus and cytosol. Clusters ran along the nuclear membrane and appeared associated with mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum membranes (Fig. 5). PICALM was localized to endothelial cell junctions, along endothelial cell plasma membrane, in cytoplasmic projection into the lumen and adjacent stroma and fetal blood (Fig. 6). OT-R was detected in endoplasmic reticulum and cytoplasmic “peninsulas” of endothelial cells extending into the lumen and on clusters (Fig. 7). V1aR was localized to endothelial cell membrane, nucleus, and stroma. V1aR was also seen on a fetal RBC (Fig. 8). Details are seen in Figs. 4–8. Figure 9 shows representative intraluminal vesicles seen in the fetal capillary of the placenta sample that was processed with the OsO4 post-fixational step included, as discussed later.
Statistical analysis of protein levels in placental extracts
To estimate the protein levels of MDMX, PICALM, OT-R and V1aR, we analyzed by western blots 25 μg protein from each of the 44 placental extracts (Table 1). The intensity of the native-protein band, shown at the top of the representative western blots in Fig. 10, is relative to an internal control sample (Q1 or V1) taken as 100% (Supplementary Table 4). Violin plots show the analysis of the mean protein levels (Fig. 10) among different clinical conditions. Precluded from the statistical analysis were VEGFR2, since its protein levels did not differ significantly among the 44 placentas analyzed in this study, and TRIM21 due to extensive degradation of its native 50-kDa form in our placental extracts.
Next, we performed univariable and multivariable analyses, shown in Supplementary Tables 5–11, to test whether the mean protein levels of MDMX, PICALM, OT-R and V1aR, represented by western blot band intensity of placental extracts and relative to an internal reference sample Q1 or T1, varied as a function of maternal age, gravidity, gestational age, body mass index, race, preeclampsia, diabetic status, delivery mode, neonatal sex, and neonatal weight. Preeclamptic patients were compared to non-preeclamptic, and diabetic to non-diabetic patients.
Univariable analysis of protein levels
Protein expression units are the percentage values relative to an internal control sample taken as 100% (Supplementary Table 4).
MDMX protein levels were associated with diabetes with an increase of 47.63 units (95% CI 14.27, 90.00) among those with Type II diabetes and 47.91 (95% CI 5.51, 90.32) among those with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) compared to those without diabetes, and gravidity with an increase of 9.66 (95% CI 3.59, 15.70) with each unit increase in gravidity, neonatal weight (an increase of 0.03 (95% CI 0.01, 0.06) for each increase in grams), and preeclampsia (-44.13 (95% CI -71.63, -16.64). Regarding the mode of delivery, cesarean delivery, CD, prior to the onset of labor was associated with an increase of 56.16 (95% CI 24.13, 88.18) compared to those with SVD. See Supplementary Table 5 for full results. Recently, CD163 expression in Hofbauer cells was associated with BMI, gravidity, and fetal birthweight.
Increased PICALM levels were associated with maternal age with an increase of 3.68 (95% CI 0.28, 7.08) in intensity for each year increase, and body mass index with an increase of 2.06 (95% CI 0.66, 3.45) for each unit increase. Regarding the mode of delivery, CD prior to the onset of labor had an increase of 59.96 (19.24, 100.68) compared to those with SVD. See Supplementary Table 6 for full results.
OT-R protein levels were associated with maternal age, an increase of 1.56 (95% CI 0.13, 2.99) for each year of age, and diabetes with an increase of 24.16 (95% CI 5.47, 42.85) among those with Type II diabetes compared to those without diabetes. Neonatal weight was associated with an increase of 0.01 (95% CI 8.36 × 10–4, 0.03) for each increase in grams. See Supplementary Table 7 for full results.
V1aR protein levels were statistically significantly associated with mode of delivery, CD prior to onset of labor 20.36 (95% CI 10.58, 30.13) compared to SVD. See Supplementary Table 8 for full results.
No associations were found for race, neonatal sex, or gestational age between 35–42 weeks for any outcome.
Multivariable analysis of protein levels
A multivariable model considered simultaneously all variables that were statistically significant in univariable analysis. MDMX protein levels showed a statistically significantly association with gravidity 7.19 (95% CI 1.24, 13.14), and preeclampsia -40.61 (95% CI -66.18, -15.04) as shown on Supplementary Table 9. There were no significant associations for PICALM or OT-R as shown in Supplementary Tables 10–11. The best fit model for V1aR included only an intercept (no covariate).
To account for the spread in the replicate measurements of MDMX, PICALM, OT- and V1aR (Supplementary Table 4), we carried out the bootstrapping analysis shown in Supplementary Table 12–18. The statistical results were robust to bootstrapped resampling (n = 1000) of data points included in the analyses.
We also looked at the correlation of MDMX, PICALM, OT-R and V1aR protein levels with each other and found significant correlations between PICALM and OT-R (0.72 95% CI 0.54, 0.84, p < 2.7 × 10–8), PICALM and V1aR (0.41 95% CI 0.12, 0.63, p < 0.006), and OT-R and V1aR (0.47 95% CI 0.20, 0.67, p < 0.001). MDMX was not correlated with PICALM, OT-R or V1aR.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The placenta is a transient organ that performs the functions of major organs of the fetus, such as lungs, liver, and kidney, supplies the fetus and in particular the fetal brain with oxygen and nutrients, and facilitates waste disposal and provides immune protection. The genomes of placenta and fetus are identical except in cases of confined placental mosaicism. VEGF-A (vascular endothelial growth factor A) is a key regulator of vasculogenesis, angiogenesis and placental growth that acts mainly through VEGFR1 and VEGFR2, two tyrosine kinase single-pass transmembrane receptors.
Preeclampsia is a serious complication of human pregnancy occurring in 5–7% of all gestations with newly-onset hypertension and proteinuria as its primary clinical characteristics. Preeclampsia is a multisystemic syndrome of different subtypes associated with serious health problems to mother and child even after pregnancy. Lipid bilayer-enclosed extracellular vesicles (EV) transport extracellular nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and metabolites. Exosomes are EV measuring 20–150 nm in diameter. Placental-derived exosomes released in the maternal circulation are associated with pregnancy disorders and parturition. Cancer cells deploy EV to activate VEGF signaling in endothelial cells.
Tissue-based maps of the human proteome of many organs, including placentas, have been published, but great challenges remain to discover which among the hundreds of detected proteins regulate key metabolic networks, specifically, during normal and complicated pregnancies and labor. To obtain such information, we chose to immunoprecipitate VEGFR2, an ideal target as an extensively documented regulator of placental angiogenesis. To deploy a wide net for the membrane partners of VEGFR2, we analyzed the pellets obtained after high-speed centrifugation of chorionic villi homogenates. Uterine blood in the maternal intervillous space exchanges substances with fetal blood at the villous tree. Although the villi are physically separated from uterine blood, the pellets contain cells and EV from it. To preserve protein complexes, we extracted the pellets with ASB-14 (amidosulfobetaine-14), an efficient non-denaturing detergent, knowing that extraction of membrane proteins from their native environment could alter their structure and protein links. The extracts were immunoprecipitated with the bait antibody (Ab) charged on magnetic beads. Mass spectrometry identified proteins immunoprecipitated with VEGFR2, especially its newly discovered placental partners, the multifunctional MDMX and PICALM.
MDMX, also known as MDM4 and HDMX, is a zinc-binding protein and a p53 inhibitor acting in coordination with MDM2, a zinc-dependent E3 ubiquitin ligase. MDMX and MDM2 have numerous p53-independent activities. In preeclampsia, p53 is upregulated in villous trophoblasts. PICALM is a nuclear and plasma membrane protein that interacts with phosphatidylinositol to recruit clathrin and adaptor protein-2, initiates endocytosis of clathrin-coated vesicles, internalizes ligand-receptor complexes, and participates in iron and cholesterol homeostasis. PICALM is a genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease that participates in amyloid-β transcytosis and processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP). Human placentas express APP and APP-processing enzymes which are increased in preeclampsia. Oxytocin is a hydrophilic neuropeptide and Pitocin, a synthetic oxytocin, is prescribed in the USA to induce labor and decrease postpartum hemorrhage. The oxytocin receptor (OT-R, OXTR) is a magnesium-dependent G protein-coupled receptor that activates a phosphatidylinositol-calcium second messenger system. OT-R participates in numerous activities ranging from parturition to lactation and mother–child bonding. OT-R functions as a homodimer and in heterocomplexes with vasopressin receptors V1aR (AVPR1A) , V2R, and other receptors. V1aR is the most abundant among vasoactive receptors in human arteries.
Here, among the newly detected partners of VEGFR2 we focused on MDMX and PICLAM based on their documented biochemical functions, and their partners OT-R and V1aR. Finding OT-R in exosome-size clusters in the fetal lumen led to the hypothesis that placental OT-R is carried to the fetus in exosomes, potential transporters of future therapeutic agents. MDMX, PICALM, OT-R, and V1aR protein levels, estimated by western blots and relative to an internal control sample, were associated with clinical characteristics of the 44 patients we studied. Potential insights on the molecular mechanisms of placental MDMX and PICALM were gained, respectively, from the cancer and Alzheimer’s disease literature.