PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Spleen; T cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Metabolism; Lipid; T cell; Endoplasmic reticulum; Immunotherapy; Mitochondria; Tumor microenvironment

ABSTRACT:
The solid tumor microenvironment (TME) imprints a compromised metabolic state in tumor infiltrating T cells (TILs) hallmarked by the inability to maintain effective energy synthesis for antitumor function and survival. T cells in the TME must catabolize lipids via mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation (FAO) to supply energy in nutrient stress, and it is established that T cells enriched in FAO are adept at cancer control. However, endogenous TILs and unmodified cellular therapy products fail to sustain bioenergetics in tumors. Using patient samples and mouse models, we reveal that the solid TME imposes perpetual acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) activity, invoking lipid biogenesis and storage in TILs that directly opposes FAO. Using metabolic, lipidomic, and confocal imaging strategies, we find that restricting ACC rewires T cell metabolism, enabling energy maintenance in TME stress. Moreover, limiting ACC activity potentiates a gene and phenotypic program indicative of T cell longevity, engendering T cells with increased survival and polyfunctionality, with the ability to control solid cancer.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase Obstructs CD8+ T-Cell Lipid Utilization in the Tumor Microenvironment

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
T cells were washed in PBS and lysed in 9M urea, 50 mM Tris pH 8, and 100 units/mL Pierce Universal Nuclease (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the concentration of protein was measured using a Pierce BCA Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein was trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) digested at 37°C for 18 hours, and the resulting peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore). LC/MS data acquisition parameters: Peptides were separated and analyzed on an EASY nLC 1200 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line with the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with instrument control software v. 4.2.28.14. Peptides were pressure loaded at 1,180 bar, and separated on a C18 Reversed Phase Column [Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm x 50 cm (C18, 2 μm, 100 Å); Thermo Fisher Scientific] using a gradient of 2%–35% B in 120 minutes (Solvent A: 0.1% FA; Solvent B: 80% ACN/0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute at 45°C. Mass spectra were acquired in data-dependent mode with a high resolution (60,000) FTMS survey scan, mass range of m/z 375–1,575, followed by tandem mass spectra of the most intense precursors with a cycle time of 3 seconds. The automatic gain control target value was 4.0e5 for the survey MS scan. Fragmentation was performed with a precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and HCD collision energy of 35%; the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a 15,000 resolution. Monoisotopic precursor selection was set to “peptide.” Apex detection was not enabled. Precursors were dynamically excluded from resequencing for 20 seconds and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Advanced peak determination was not enabled. Precursor ions with charge states that were undetermined, 1, or >7 were excluded.

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein identification and quantification were extracted from raw LC/MS-MS data using the MaxQuant platform v.1.6.3.3 with the Andromeda database searching algorithm and label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Data were searched against a mouse Uniprot reference database UP000000589 with 54,425 proteins (March, 2019) and a database of common contaminants. The FDR, determined using a reversed database strategy, was set at <1% at the protein and peptide level. Fully tryptic peptides with a minimum of seven residues were required including cleavage between lysine and proline. Two missed cleavages were permitted. LC/MS-MS analyses were performed in triplicate for each biological replicate with match between runs enabled. The “fast LFQ” was disabled and “stabilize large ratios” features were enabled. The first search was performed with a 20 ppm mass tolerance, after recalibration a 4.5 ppm tolerance was used for the main search. A minimum ratio count of 2 was required for protein quantification with at least one unique peptide. Parameters included static modification of cysteine with carbamidomethyl and variable N-terminal acetylation. The protein groups' text file from MaxQuant was processed in Perseus v. 1.6.5.0. Identified proteins were filtered to remove proteins only identified by a modified peptide, matches to the reversed database, and potential contaminants. Normalized LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. The LFQ intensities of technical replicates were averaged for each biological replicate. Quantitative measurements were required in at least three of five biological replicates in each treatment group. Statistical Analysis: Log2 transformed, protein LFQ intensities, normalized in MaxQuant, exhibited normal distributions. Binary comparisons of each LC/MS-MS analysis yielded Pearson correlation coefficients > 0.90 between all technical and biological replicates within each experiment. For comparison of vehicle and tumor-coculture T cells, quantitative measurements were required in at least three of five biological replicates in each group. With a permutation-based FDR of 5% and S0 = 0.01, q val < 0.05, 177 proteins were significantly different between control and tumor transwell cocultured T cells. toppgene.cchmc.org Toppfun software package was used to measure significantly enriched GO:BP pathways.