PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Peritoneal dialysis fluid
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: TMT6plex; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: TMT
keywords: Cytoprotection; Tmt; Peritoneal dialysis; Plasma proteins; Biomarkers

ABSTRACT:
Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is a modality of renal replacement therapy in which the high volumes of available PD effluent (PDE) represents a rich source of biomarkers for monitoring disease and therapy. Although this information could help guiding the management of PD patients, little is known about the potential of PDE to define pathomechanism-associated molecular signatures in PD. Here we present the utilization of a high-performance multiplex proteomics approach based on depletion of highly abundant plasma proteins and enrichment of low abundance proteins and quantitation using a combination of label-free and isobaric labeling strategies for PDE samples from PD patients (n=20), who received either standard PD fluid or a novel PD fluid (added alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln)) in an open-label, randomized, two-period, cross-over clinical trial.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
TMT-FASP-LC-MS analysis of peritoneal dialysis effluent

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The complete volume of PDE after the 4 hours dwell of 40 peritoneal equilibtration tests of 20 patients receiving both treatments. The PDE was processed immediately following the end of the dwell and aliquoted samples were stored at -80°C until further analysis. The protocol was performed as previously reported (Lichtenauer et al., Electrophoresis 2014) with minor adaptations for clinical samples. CPLL Beads/Equalizer beads (ProteoMiner, BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) were prepared according to the manufacturers’ protocol. Following centrifugation (250 × g, 30 min, 600 ml aliquots) 1 L of cell-free PDE was mixed with 250 µl CPLL bead solution (50 µl bead bed volume) and incubated on a roller mixer (overnight, 4°C). The beads were allowed to sediment for 30 min, 900 ml effluent was carefully aspirated and the beads were recovered and centrifuged (100 × g, 10 min). The supernatant was removed and the beads were recovered in 1 ml remaining effluent and transferred to Mini Bio-Spin chromatography columns (BioRad). Following four washing steps with washing buffer (5 min, 150 µl, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaH2PO4, pH 7.4) and once with 200 µl deionized water proteins were eluted by four sequential elutions (15 min, 50 µl, 8 M urea, 2% CHAPS in 5% acetic acid) resulting in 200 µl protein solution (Fig. 1). Protein samples were precipitated (100% acetone, overnight, -20°C), washed twice (100% Ethanol) and resuspended in 150µl buffer (30 mM Tris, pH 8.5, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 1 mM EDTA, 1 tablet of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel; Switzerland) and 1 tablet of phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) per 100 ml).  FASP was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off ﬁlter (VIVACON 500; Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Goettingen, Germany) as described previously (Wisniewski et al., Nature Methods 2009). In brief, 50 µg of each sample was mixed with 180 μL of UA buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) in the ﬁlter unit and centrifuged (14000 × g, 15 min, 20°C). Following a second washing step with UA (200 μL) the proteins were alkylated (100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT). Following washing steps with UA (3x 100 μL) and TEAB buffer (3x, 50 mM, 100 μL) proteins were digested with trypsin (overnight, 37°C). Peptides were recovered using 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer, followed by 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl. Acidiﬁed tryptic peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 spin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA).   TMT labeling was performed according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer for the 6plex isobaric labeling reagent set (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Pooled samples were concentrated and desalted with C18 microspin columns (5−60 μg, The Nest Group). Eluates were dried in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 2 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10 before fractionation at basic pH.   Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high and low pH. In the ﬁrst dimension, peptides were separated on a Gemini-NX C18 (150 × 2 mm, 3 μm, 110 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) using a 45 min gradient from 5 to 70% acetonitrile containing 20 mM ammonia formate buffer, pH 10, at a ﬂow rate of 100 μL/min, run on an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Seventy two time-based fractions were collected and pooled into 50 HPLC vials based on the UV-trace at 214 nm. Samples were acidiﬁed by the addition of 5 μL of 5% formic acid, solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator, and samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid for a single injection. Mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) using the Xcalibur version 2.1.0 coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoﬂow system (dual pump system with one trap-column and one analytical column) via a nano electrospray ion source using liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Technical details of the nanoHPLC and MS conditions used in this study are described in detail elsewhere (Bennett et al., Journal of Proteomics 2011). In brief, the analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-10 high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) method for peptide identiﬁcation plus relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed The maximal ion accumulation time allowed for MS mode in the Orbitrap was 500 ms, and for HCD, the accumulation time was 200 ms, Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overﬁlling of the ion traps. In MS and MS2 modes, AGC was set to 106 and 105 ions, respectively. Peptides were detected in MS and MS2 mode at 30000 (at m/z 400) and 7500 resolution, respectively. The threshold for switching from MS to MS2 was 2000 counts.

DATA PROCESSING:
The acquired raw MS data ﬁles were processed with msconvert (ProteoWizard Library v2.1.2708) and converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) ﬁles. The resultant peak lists was searched against the human SwissProt database version v2013.01_20130110 (37398 sequences, including isoforms as obtained from varsplic.pl) with the search engines Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, U.K.) and Phenyx (v2.5.14, GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland). Submission to the search engines was via a Perl script that performs an initial search with relatively broad mass tolerances (Mascot only) on both the precursor and fragment ions (±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, respectively). High-conﬁdence peptide identiﬁcations were used to recalibrate all precursor and fragment ion masses prior to a second search with narrower mass tolerances (±4 ppm and ±0.025 Da). One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine, N-terminal, and lysine-modiﬁed TMT 6plex were set as ﬁxed modiﬁcations, and oxidized methionine was set as a variable modiﬁcation. To validate the proteins, Mascot and Phenyx output ﬁles were processed by internally developed parsers. Proteins with ≥2 unique peptides above a score T1 or with a single peptide above a score T2 were selected as unambiguous identiﬁcations. Additional peptides for these validated proteins with score >T3 were also accepted. For Mascot and Phenyx, T1, T2, and T3 were equal to 16, 40, 10 and 5.5, 9.5, 3.5, respectively (p-value <10−3). Following the selection criteria, proteins were grouped on the basis of shared peptides, and only the group reporters are considered in the ﬁnal output of identiﬁed proteins. Spectral conﬂicts between Mascot and Phenyx peptide identiﬁcations were discarded. The whole procedure was repeated against a reversed database to assess the protein group false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide and protein group identiﬁcations were <0.1 and <1% FDR, respectively. Identified keratins (n=18) were only excluded from the results if containing the terms “hair” or “cuticular” as cytokeratins are markers of mesothelial cells lining the peritoneal wall.  TMT Semiquantitative Analysis The R software package Isobar (Breitwieser et al., J Prot Res 2011) was used to calculate protein ratios. Isobar is publically available under the LGPL license from the CeMM Web site (http://bioinformatics.cemm.oeaw. ac.at) and through Bioconductor (http://bioconductor.org/ packages/release/bioc/html/isobar.html). Isobar implements a signal intensity noise model to account for heteroscedasticity in TMT reporter ion ratios and calculates p values for each quantitated protein estimating technical and biological variability. The statistical framework of Isobar was described previously (Breitwieser et al., J Prot Res 2011). TMT reporter ions were extracted at the expected m/z ± 0.005 m/z, and intensities were corrected for isotopic impurities, as supplied by the manufacturer. All channels were normalized to equal sum of intensities. Protein identiﬁcations were grouped based on peptide matches from both samples. Protein ratios were calculated based on unique peptides. Proteins were denoted as signiﬁcantly regulated (in one sample) when the ratio p value was <0.05, and the protein also had a ratio >2.5 times the median absolute deviation from the median. For further analysis, proteins were selected that were signiﬁcant in one or both samples and showed the same direction of change with a ratio p value of <0.05 in both samples. A protein was also selected if there was a signiﬁcant change in one sample only.

METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) if not specified otherwise.
Patients and Samples
The PDE samples were obtained during a prospective randomized, open-label, two-period, cross-over phase I/II study conducted at the Department of Nephrology at the Medical University of Vienna Austria. The study protocol was approved by the local ethics committee of the Medical University of Vienna (EK 867/2010, EK 1167/2013, EK 2035/2015), registered in www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01353638), and performed in accord with the Declaration of Helsinki. The study design, clinical methods, eligibility criteria, randomization, patient characteristics and adverse events have been previously described. All patients provided written informed consent before trial participation.
PDE samples were obtained from 20 stable PD patients treated per protocol (from a total of 21 enrolled, ≥19 years old, m/f: 13/7, free from peritonitis for at least 2 months). The protocol included for each PD patient two PDE samples designated for protein expression analysis collected from 4 h peritoneal equilibration tests (PET), one with commercially available PD fluid (Dianeal, 3.86% glucose, Baxter, Deerfield, IL) and another with the same PD fluid supplemented with AlaGln (8 mm, Dipeptiven, Fresenius, Bad Homburg, Germany) in a randomized order. PETs were separated by a wash-out period (28–35 days).
Depletion of High Abundance Plasma Proteins (and Enrichment of Low Abundance Proteins) in PDE (CPLL)
The complete volume of PDE after the 4 h dwell of the PET was collected from each of the 40 PETs of the 20 patients receiving both treatments. The PDE was processed immediately following the end of the dwell and aliquoted samples were stored at −80 °C until further analysis. The protocol was performed as previously reported with minor adaptations for clinical samples. CPLL equalizer beads (ProteoMiner, BioRad, Hercules, CA) were prepared according to the manufacturer's protocol. Following centrifugation (250 × g, 30 min, 600 ml aliquots), 1 L of cell-free PDE was mixed with 250 μl CPLL bead solution (50 μl bead bed volume) and incubated on a roller mixer (overnight, 4 °C). The beads were allowed to sediment for 30 min, 900 ml effluent was carefully aspirated and the beads were recovered and centrifuged (100 × g, 10 min). The supernatant was removed and beads recovered in 1 ml remaining effluent were transferred to Mini Bio-Spin chromatography columns (BioRad). Following four washing steps with washing buffer (5 min, 150 μl, 150 mm NaCl, 10 mm NaH2PO4, pH 7.4) and once with 200 μl deionized water, proteins were eluted by four sequential elutions (15 min, 50 μl, 8 m urea, 2% CHAPS in 5% acetic acid) yielding 200 μl protein solution (Fig. 1). Protein samples were precipitated (100% acetone, overnight, −20 °C), washed with ethanol and resuspended in 150 μl buffer (30 mm Tris, pH 8.5, 7 m urea, 2 m thiourea, 4% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 1 mm EDTA, 1 tablet of Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche, Basel; Switzerland) and 1 tablet of phosphatase inhibitor (PhosSTOP, Roche) per 100 ml). Protein concentration was determined using the 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) per manufacturer's instructions.
Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP)
FASP was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter (VIVACON 500; Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Goettingen, Germany) as described previously. In brief, 50 μg of each sample was mixed with 180 μl UA buffer (8 m urea in 100 mm Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) in the filter unit and centrifuged (14,000 × g, 15 min, 20 °C). Following a second washing step with UA (200 μl), the proteins were alkylated (100 μl 50 mm iodoacetamide, 30 min, RT). Following 3 UA washes (100 μl) and 3 more washes with TEAB buffer (50 mm, 100 μl), proteins were digested with trypsin (overnight, 37 °C). Peptides were recovered using 40 μl 50 mm TEAB buffer, followed by 50 μl 0.5 m NaCl. Acidified tryptic peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 spin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA).
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Derivatization
TMT labeling was performed according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer for the 6-plex isobaric labeling reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Pooled samples were concentrated and desalted with C18 microspin columns (5–60 μg, The Nest Group). Eluates were lyophilized in a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 20 mm ammonia formate buffer, pH 10 before fractionation at basic pH.
2D-RP/RP Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
Two-dimensional liquid chromatography was performed by reverse-phase chromatography at high and low pH. In the first dimension, peptides were separated on a Gemini-NX C18 (150 × 2 mm, 3 μm, 110 Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) in 20 mm ammonia formate buffer, pH 10, and eluted over 45 min by a 5–70% acetonitrile gradient at 100 μl/min using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA). Seventy-two time-based fractions were collected and pooled into 50 HPLC vials based on the UV-trace at 214 nm. Samples were acidified by the addition of 5 μl of 5% formic acid, organic solvent was removed in a vacuum concentrator, and samples were reconstituted in 5% formic acid. Every fraction was analyzed with a single injection. Mass spectrometry was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) using the Xcalibur version 2.1.0 coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system (dual pump system with one trap-column and one analytical column) via a nano-electrospray ion source using a liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Technical details of the nanoHPLC and MS conditions used in this study are described in detail elsewhere. Analyses were performed in a data-dependent acquisition mode using a top-10 higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) method for peptide identification plus relative quantitation of TMT reporter ions. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 60 s. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed. The maximal ion accumulation time allowed for MS mode in the Orbitrap was 500 ms, and the accumulation time for HCD was 200 ms. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion traps with AGC targets and set to 10E6 and 10E5 ions for MS1 and MS2, respectively. A resolution of 30,000 and 7500 (at m/z 400) was chosen for MS1 and MS2, respectively. The threshold for triggering MS2 scans was set to 5000 counts.
LC-MS Data Analysis
The acquired raw MS data files were processed with msconvert (ProteoWizard Library v2.1.2708) and converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) files. The resultant peak lists were searched against the human SwissProt database version v2016.11 (37,398 sequences, including isoforms as obtained from varsplic.pl) with the search engines Mascot (v2.3.02, MatrixScience, London, U.K.) and Phenyx (v2.5.14, GeneBio, Geneva, Switzerland). Submission to the search engines was done via a Perl script that performs an initial search with relatively broad mass tolerances (Mascot only) on both the precursor and fragment ions (±10 ppm and ±0.6 Da, respectively). High-confidence peptide identifications were used to recalibrate all precursor and fragment ion masses before a second search with narrower mass tolerances (±4 ppm and ±0.025 Da). One missed tryptic cleavage site was allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine, N-terminal, and lysine-modified TMT 6-plex were set as fixed modifications, and oxidized methionine was set as a variable modification. To validate the proteins, Mascot and Phenyx output files were processed by internally developed parsers. Proteins with ≥2 unique peptides above a score T1 or with a single peptide above a score T2 were selected as unambiguous identifications. Additional peptides for these validated proteins with score >T3 were also accepted. T1, T2, and T3 values for Mascot were 16, 40, and 10, and for Phenyx were 5.5, 9.5, 3.5, respectively (p value <10−3). Following the selection criteria, proteins were grouped based on shared peptides, and only the group reporters are considered in the final output of identified proteins. Spectral conflicts between Mascot and Phenyx peptide identifications were discarded. The whole procedure was repeated against a reversed database to assess the protein group false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide and protein group identifications were <0.1 and <1% FDR, respectively. Cytokeratins are markers of mesothelial cells lining the peritoneal wall, thus identified keratins were excluded from the results only if containing the terms “hair” or “cuticular” (n = 18).
Because of the lack of differentiation of protein isoforms in gene ontology and pathway analysis, protein isoforms were merged at the level of UniProt entry names.
Protein Abundance Estimation
Proteins abundance was quantified by the Top3 method using Skyline (version 3.1) for peptide area calculation. For some peptides with multiple PSMs, Skyline integration incorrectly considers only a local subpeak around a single PSM, possibly underestimating true peptide abundance. Therefore, for each peptide with at least 2 PSMs, on top of the peptide area calculated by Skyline AS we additionally calculate A0f as area under the chromatogram curve from time T0 to time Tf, where T0 and Tf are retention times of the earliest and the latest PSM for a given peptide. We consider the larger of AS and A0f as an estimate of peptide area for the Top3 algorithm.
TMT Semiquantitative Analysis
The R software package Isobar was used to calculate protein ratios. Isobar is publically available under the LGPL license from the CeMM Web site (http://bioinformatics.cemm.oeaw.ac.at) and through Bioconductor (http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/isobar.html). Isobar implements a signal intensity noise model to account for heteroscedasticity in TMT reporter ion ratios, and calculates p values for each quantitated protein, estimating technical and biological variability. The statistical framework of Isobar was described previously. TMT reporter ions were extracted at the expected m/z ± 0.005 m/z, and intensities were corrected for isotopic impurities, as described by the manufacturer. All channels were normalized to the equal sum of the intensities. Protein identifications were grouped based on peptide matches from both samples. Protein ratios were calculated based on unique peptides. Proteins were denoted as significantly regulated when the distribution of protein (effect) log ratios from individual patients was significantly different from 1 (p value <0.05, one-sided t test, numbers of observations from 3 to 20 ratios were considered).
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
The total number of samples analyzed was 40 that were obtained from 20 patients. For the analysis on general PDE protein abundance, each of the 7 TMT runs can be regarded as a biological replicate of 6 pooled samples from three patients. For the paired analysis of the effect of AlaGln in each patient, the same patient treated without the additive in the cross-over design trial acted as the control. Following an observation period, patients were randomized immediately before start of treatment to one of the two sequences. Random allocation of treatments with AlaGln or without AlaGln in a ratio 1:1 was performed using RandomizerR (www.randomizer.at) and stratified by sex, age (< or ≥ 60 years), time on PD (< or ≥ 1 year) and peritonitis history (yes or no).
Sample size calculation for the clinical trial was based on the primary outcome parameter “total heat shock protein (HSP) expression” in cells from PDE, expecting at least 30% percent increase after treatment with AlaGln compared with a control group, and a standard deviation of within-subject period differences of less than 50 percentage points, estimated from previous results in the ex vivo setting and from the literature.
Cut-offs were chosen following an extremes-of-phenotype approach, so that the number of candidate molecules was sufficient for subsequent bioinformatic steps. For this reason, and because of the relatively high interindividual differences and small effect size (especially for high abundance proteins), protein candidates were chosen without correction for multiple testing but further discussed only on fulfillment of the second criterion of Bonferroni-correction and pathway enrichment. Individual protein candidates not fulfilling at least two criteria were regarded as false-positives and not further discussed.
Graphical representations of the results were computed with R (http://www.r-project.org/), Excel (Microsoft, Office 2016) and Venn Diagram Plotter (version 1.5.5228.29250). Cellular component and biological process mapping and statistical overrepresentation tests of candidate proteins were performed using the Panther Classification System and implemented Gene Ontology (GO) database (version 11.1). All results were Bonferroni-corrected for multiple testing (p < 0.05). ReviGO (http://revigo.irb.hr/) and Cytoscape (version 3.5.1) were used to summarize and visualize GO enrichment results. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA 7.0, Qiagen, http//www.ingenuity.com) was used to identify pathways and interaction networks significantly affected by differentially expressed genes, calculating a p value for each functional pathway using a one-tailed Fisher exact test. Pathways with p values <0.05 were considered significantly affected. For each network, IPA calculates a score derived from the p value of the one-tailed Fisher exact test (score = -log(p value)) and indicates the likelihood of focus genes appearing together in the network because of random chance.
Data Availability
All mass spectrometry data, corresponding proteins, protein coverage and raw data files have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD006863.
Literature Search on PDE and Consensus Plasma Protein Concentrations
A literature search in NCBI Pubmed utilizing the query string (proteomics AND peritoneal dialysis) OR (proteome AND peritoneal dialysis) OR (proteomics AND peritoneal fluid) OR (proteome AND peritoneal fluid) OR (proteomics AND peritoneal effluent) OR (proteome AND peritoneal effluent) on Oct 26, 2017 resulted in 83 hits. These were restricted to clinical peritoneal dialysis effluent from humans, to return only 15 studies of which two were excluded because they focused solely on the exosomal fraction and one did not provide any protein accessions, resulting in 12 studies and 171 unique proteins for analysis (supplemental Table S1). Manual query of protein names presented by Zavvos et al. yielded 19 protein names not contained in the 171, of which 11 were unreviewed and 8 were reviewed entries in UniProt. Of those 8, not included in our analysis, 3 were immunoglobulin kappa variable region proteins and the remaining 5 were CD44 antigen, Dermatopontin, Nuclear fragile X mental retardation-interacting protein 2, Zinc finger protein 527 and Kelch-like protein 3.
The human plasma proteome database (HPPDB) was downloaded on May 15, 2017 from www.plasmaproteomedatabase.org. Mean concentrations for individual proteins computed from all reported studies were used as an approximation of a consensus plasma protein proteome.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Forty PDEs obtained from a prospective randomized controlled cross-over trial in 20 PD patients treated with standard or AlaGln-supplemented PD fluids were depleted and enriched using the CPLL approach previously developed in artificial PDE. Clinical results of a trial of this novel therapy were recently reported.
Pre-processing by the CPLL depletion and enrichment strategy was combined with TMT-labeling and FASP-LC-MS (Fig. 1). The 40 samples were arranged in seven TMT 6-plex runs (see supplemental Table S2 for experimental design), ensuring that both the treatment and control sample of each of three patients were grouped in one individual run. The last of the seven analyses contained only two patients. The two remaining TMT labels included two replicates of samples that were included in two previous analyses as functioned as an internal quality control.
A literature search identified 12 studies investigating the soluble proteome of human clinical PDE. Per-study and cumulative summation of PDE proteins previously identified in the literature (n = 171) plus mapping of these to the HPPDB abundance ranking of 1237 proteins with reported plasma concentrations are presented in supplemental Table S1. Previously identified soluble proteins in PDE are almost entirely clustered at the high end of the plasma protein abundance range (Fig. 2A and supplemental Table S1). Using the CPLL-FASP-TMT (CFT) LC-MS approach (supplemental Table S3 and supplemental Table S4) we identified 2506 PDE proteins, representing a 15-fold increase in coverage compared with all previous reports.
Each TMT 6-plex experiment yielded on average 11,812 peptides, ranging from 7874 to 14,389. 23,956 unique peptides were identified in total, associated with 1422 unambiguously identified proteins (ranging from 958 to 1688). In addition, on average 1448 protein groups (ranging from 977 to 1723) were identified. A comparison of identified proteins in the 7 TMT 6-plex experiments is shown in Fig. 2B.
From each of the 20 sample pairs representing an individual patient in the cross-over trial, on average, 11,581 peptides (ranging from 7574 to 14,234 with a total of 23,520 unique peptides) were identified. These were associated to 1289 unambiguously identified proteins (ranging from 820 to 1555) and 1322 protein groups on average (ranging from 846 to 1600). A comparison of the identified proteins is shown in Fig. 2C. Supplemental Table S4 provides details on numbers of identified peptides and proteins.
Using the CFT-LC-MS approach, the distribution of identified proteins was markedly shifted toward proteins of cellular origin. GO annotations of identified proteins in our data set compared with previous literature showed an increased proportion of the cellular component categories “cell part” and “organelle” and biological process categories “metabolic process” and “cellular process” (Fig. 2D and supplemental Table S5).
Based on MS1 information from the identified peptides, estimated abundances of PDE proteins were calculated using Skyline and the Top3 method (see supplemental Table S3). Even after depletion and enrichment with the CPLL technique, plasma proteins remained the most abundant proteins in PDE. Indeed, the CPLL method should only compress the dynamic range of the protein sample (equalizing effect) without significantly altering the protein abundance rank, in contrast to (e.g. multiple affinity) removal techniques.
Further systematic investigation required definition of a set of “typical plasma proteins.” Proteins identified in PDE were therefore mapped to 1237 proteins with reported plasma concentrations from the HPPDB. Computed mean plasma concentrations are summarized in supplemental Table S6. The 765 proteins present in both the HPPDB and our data set (Fig. 3A) were termed “typical plasma proteins”. In our experiments, a set of 472 plasma proteins with reported concentrations in the HPPDB were not identified in PDE.
The ranking of PDE proteins by observed abundance and discrimination by protein type confirms that typical plasma proteins constitute the top region of the distribution, and that these proteins are significantly more abundant than nonplasma proteins even in CPLL-treated PDE (Fig. 3B), but to a much lesser degree than in crude PDE or plasma.
The observed protein abundances in PDE correlate with reference concentrations in the HPPDB (Pearson's r = 0.63, Fig. 3C). Certain proteins, however, clearly deviate from this general trend. We were particularly interested in the biological roles of proteins that most differed in abundance ranking in PDE as compared with normal plasma (Fig. 3D). To investigate their biological roles, two groups of 100 proteins were selected for enrichment analysis of biological processes: the 100 least abundant proteins in PDE relative to plasma concentrations (lower ranked, based on their relative ranks), and the 100 most abundant proteins in PDE relative to plasma concentrations (higher ranked). Using the Panther database, among the higher ranked proteins we identified 30 significantly enriched processes with 13 specific subclasses, including “supramolecular fiber organization” and “tissue development” (Fig. 4A). Among the lower ranked proteins, we identified 86 significantly enriched processes with 21 specific subclasses including “neutrophil degranulation” (Table I, Fig. 4B and supplemental Table S7). Varying the input number of proteins as a means of robustness analysis showed that the general motifs of IPA canonical pathways are not sensitive to this input number within a reasonable range (not shown).
The paired character of the clinical cross-over study design and the ability to directly compare channels allowed study of the effect of AlaGln supplementation of PD fluid on PDE protein composition. The isobar algorithm was used to generate protein ratios for individual patients (supplemental Table S8 and supplemental Table S9). Numbers of isobar ratios per patient and run were marginally lower than Top3 quantitations because of the additional restriction of sufficient reporter ion signals from both samples of each patient.
We then assessed the distribution of ratios for a given protein to indicate significant up- or down-regulation. The differential abundance analysis was performed for all proteins for which a protein ratio could be obtained in at least 3 patients from the TMT data. One hundred sixty-four proteins exhibited significant differential abundance (85 increased, 79 decreased, Fig. 5A). Overrepresentation analysis of biological processes for this differential abundance group yielded 60 processes associated with 16 specific subclasses mainly linked to immune regulation (i.e. “neutrophil degranulation,” “viral processes,” “antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen”) and RNA regulation (i.e. “mRNA metabolic process,” “RNA splicing,” “regulation of mRNA splicing, via spliceosome”) (Table II). The propensity of proteins for significant differential abundance was associated with the number of observations and the sample abundance. Thus, high abundance proteins were more often detected in all patients, but also showed less difference on AlaGln treatment (Fig. 5B). We also performed the analysis for stably abundant proteins (putative high abundance proteins), for which a protein ratio could be obtained in at least 17 of 20 patients from the TMT data. As expected among those high abundance proteins, fewer (n = 50) were found with significantly differential abundance (21 increased, 29 decreased, supplemental Fig. S1). This group showed enrichment in only 15 processes (with 3 specific subclasses) (“platelet degranulation,” “plasma lipoprotein particle organization,” and “lipid transport”) (supplemental Table S10).
The PDE proteins that changed in abundance following AlaGln treatment were subjected to IPA network analysis and analysis of upstream regulators. The three largest networks were centered on “Akt and Hsp” (Network 1, Fig. 5C), “lipoproteins and the proteasome system” (Network 2, supplemental Fig. S2) and “integrin B1” (Network 3, Fig. 5D). The analysis considered only those upstream regulatory elements with p values for overlap less than 0.05 and activation z-scores above 1.5 or below −1.5 (Table III). supplemental Table S11 lists all networks including associated molecules.

INTRODUCTION:
More than two million patients world-wide rely on dialysis as life-saving renal replacement therapy. Peritoneal dialysis (PD)1, as a home-based therapy equivalent in efficacy and safety to hemodialysis, offers an attractive alternative to hemodialysis with respect to quality of life and independence from center-based care. PD introduces a hyper-osmolar, mostly glucose-based PD fluid into the peritoneal cavity via a permanent percutaneous catheter. Following an equilibration time, the peritoneal dialysis effluent (PDE) is drained from the peritoneum, thereby removing net solutes and water from the uremic patient. During PD treatment, however, the physicochemical properties of the fluid harm the peritoneal membrane. This leads to detachment and transdifferentiation of cells, sterile inflammation, increased risk of infections/peritonitis and eventual failure of ultrafiltration capacity ultimately resulting in clinical complications in most PD patients. Biomarkers are needed to guide the clinical course of PD patients, facilitating complication-free survival, identification of high-risk patients, stratification of patient groups for therapeutic interventions and evaluation of novel therapeutic approaches.
PDE contains small molecules, proteins and free-floating cells that can be sampled to provide noninvasive liquid biopsy specimens available in volumes up to 20 liters per day. Nevertheless, previous proteomic efforts to develop novel PDE biomarkers have been hindered by the PDE's plasma-like dynamic range of protein abundances, by the limited performance of separation and detection techniques applied to date, and by the design of the clinical trials from which the PDE samples were obtained. Thirteen published proteomic analyses of soluble PDE proteins have to date identified 171 unique proteins.
To minimize masking of low abundance candidate biomarker proteins by the background of high abundance proteins in PDE, we recently developed a depletion and enrichment strategy that was assessed in artificial PDE. Spiked-in aliquots of low abundance cellular proteins could be detected in PDE by two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) only by application of the combinatorial peptide ligand library (CPLL) technique. Because only few accepted PDE biomarkers are in routine clinical use, we propose that our CPLL method may facilitate development of clinically useful PDE biomarkers based on pathomechanism-associated molecular signatures (PAMS) originating from open -omics approaches.
Alanyl-glutamine (AlaGln) has been shown in vitro and in vivo to improve cellular stress responses and survival of multiple peritoneal cell types and thus to protect from peritoneal membrane deterioration. In experimental systems, our open -omic approach has revealed decreased cytoprotective stress responses during repeated or chronic exposure to PD fluid or in the presence of sterile inflammation that could be restored by AlaGln. Our recently reported first-in-man, cross-over, randomized controlled trial demonstrated that restoration of stress responses and improved cellular host-defenses in peritoneal cells by AlaGln supplementation of PD fluid can be translated into the clinical setting. That prospective clinical trial allowed collection of clinical PDE samples for delineation of cellular mechanisms relevant in PD and modified by AlaGln.
Here, we combined a CPLL-based depletion and enrichment approach with multiplex LC-MS analyses to explore the proteome of clinical PDE. Our study links proteins specifically enriched in the PDE proteome to PD pathomechanisms such as membrane fibrosis and decreased host defense. Further, we show that AlaGln supplementation of PD fluid interferes with these pathomechanism-associated signatures in PDE.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
DATA AVAILABILITY
All mass spectrometry data, corresponding proteins, protein coverage and raw data files have been deposited into the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) with the data set identifier PXD006863.
Supplementary Material
* The financial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry of Science, Research and Economy and the National Foundation for Research, Technology and Development is gratefully acknowledged. KK and CA were part of the European Training and Research in Peritoneal Dialysis (EuTRiPD) program, a project funded by the European Union within the Marie Curie scheme (287813). Research at CeMM is supported by the Austrian Academy of Sciences. C.A. is cofounder of Zytoprotec GmbH, a spin-off of the Medical University Vienna that holds the patent 'Carbohydrate-based peritoneal dialysis fluid comprising glutamine residue' (International Publication Number: WO 2008/106702 A1). R.H., A.W., M.U., A.L. and K.K. are former employees of Zytoprotec GmbH.
 This article contains supplemental material.
1 The abbreviations used are:
PD
peritoneal dialysis
2D-DIGE
two dimensional difference gel electrophoresis
2D-RP/RP
two dimensional reversed phase
AGC
automatic gain control
AlaGln
alanyl-glutamine
AMPK
AMP-activated protein kinase
CHAPS
3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate
CPLL
combinatorial peptide ligand library
CFT
CPLL-FASP-TMT
EMT
epithelial-mesenchymal transition
EPS
encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis
FASP
filter-aided sample preparation
FDR
false discovery rate
GO
gene ontology
HCD
higher-energy collision-induced dissociation
HPLC
high-performance liquid chromatography
HPPDB
human plasma proteome data base
HSF
heat shock factor
HSP
heat shock protein
IL
interleukin
IFN
interferon
IPA
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
ITG
integrin
LTQ
linear trap quadrupole
MMT
mesothelial-mesenchymal transition
PAMS
pathomechanism-associated molecular signatures
PDE
peritoneal dialysis effluent
PET
peritoneal equilibration test
RCT
randomized controlled trial
TEAB
triethyl-ammonium bicarbonate
TGF
transforming growth factor
TLR
toll-like receptor
TMT
tandem mass tag
VEGF
vascular endothelial growth factor.