PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Chemical cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Mouse; Cross-linking; Mitochondria

ABSTRACT:
Cellular functional pathways have evolved through selection based on fitness benefits conferred through protein intra- and inter-molecular interactions that comprise all protein conformational features and protein-protein interactions, collectively referred to as the interactome.  While the interactome is regulated by proteome levels, it is also regulated independently by, post translational modification, co-factor, and ligand levels, as well as local protein environmental factors, such as osmolyte concentration, pH, ionic strength, temperature and others.  In modern biomedical research, cultivatable cell lines have become an indispensable tool, with selection of optimal cell lines that exhibit specific functional profiles being critical for success in many cases.  While it is clear that cell lines derived from different cell types have differential proteome levels, increased understanding of large-scale functional differences requires additional information beyond abundance level measurements, including how protein conformations and interactions are altered in certain cell types to shape functional landscapes.  Here, we employed quantitative in vivo protein cross-linking coupled to mass spectrometry to probe large-scale protein conformational and interaction changes among three commonly employed human cell lines, HEK293, MCF-7, and HeLa cells.  Isobaric quantitative Protein Interaction Reporter (iqPIR) technologies were used to obtain quantitative values of cross-linked peptides across three cell lines.  These data illustrated highly reproducible (R2 values larger than 0.8 for all biological replicates) quantitative interactome levels across multiple biological replicates.    We also measured protein abundance levels in these cells using data independent acquisition quantitative proteomics methods.  Combining quantitative interactome and proteomics information allowed visualization of cell type-specific interactome changes mediated by proteome level adaptations as well as independently regulated interactome changes to gain deeper insight into possible drivers of these changes.  Among the biggest detected alterations in protein interactions and conformations are changes in cytoskeletal proteins, RNA-binding proteins, chromatin remodeling complexes, mitochondrial proteins, and others.  Overall, these data demonstrate the utility and reproducibility of quantitative cross-linking to study systems-level interactome variations.  Moreover, these results illustrate how combined quantitative interactomics and proteomics can provide unique insight on cellular functional landscapes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Combining quantitative proteomics and interactomics for a deeper insight into molecular differences between human cell lines

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
C2c12 cells were grown in DMEM media supplemented with 20% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin.  Differentiation was induced by switching to 2% horse serum when the cells were 70% confluent.  Cells were collected similarly to human cell lines described previously.  Mitochondria was isolated according to previously published protocol62. Briefly, cells were homogenized in Dounce homogenizer in isolation buffer (10 mM Tris-MOPS, 1 mM EGTA, 200 mM sucrose, pH 7.4) with 1 µM BKA or CATR purchased form Cayman Chemical, or without wither for controls.  The homogenates were spun down at 600 g to get rid of cellular debris.  Then supernatants were spun down at 7,000 × g and mitochondrial pellets were washed once.  Mitochondria were cross-linked in 150 µL of cross-linking buffer in the presence of wither either BKA or CATR with reporter heavy reagent (RH).  Controls were cross-linked with stump heavy (SH) reagent.  Cross-linking reaction was allowed to proceed for 30 min with shaking.  Supernatants were then removed by centrifugation and mitochondrial pellets were lysed in 8 M urea. BKA or CATR treated cross-linked mitochondria were combined with control mitochondria in 1:1 ratio. This was followed by reduction with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min, followed by a 30 min incubation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), and tryptic digestion.  Peptide samples were acidified to pH 2 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), followed by desalting by solid phase extraction using C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) and concentration by vacuum centrifugation.  Resulting peptides were suspended in 500 μL of 7 mM KH2PO4 in 30% acetonitrile, pH 2.8 and fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography using an Agilent 1200 series high-performance liquid chromatography system equipped with a 250 × 10.0 mm column packed with Luna 5 mm diameter, 100 Å pore size particles (Phenomenex).  Peptide were separated using a binary mobile phase solvent system consisting of solvent A and solvent B (7 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl, 30% acetonitrile pH 2.8) at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min using the following gradient: 0-7.5 min 100% A, 7.5-47.5 min 95% A/5% B to 40% A/ 60% B, 47.5- 67.5 min 40% A/ 60% B to 100% B, 67.5-77.5 min 100% B, 77.5-97.5 min 100% A.  A total of 14 fractions were collected and pooled as follows: fractions 6-7, 8, 9, 10, and 11-14.  Cross-linked peptides from SCX fractions were further enriched using UltraLink monomeric avidin (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  The enriched cross-linked peptide sample was concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80 °C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Pooled peptides from SCX fractions (6-7, 8, 9, 10, and 11-14) were resuspended in 30 μL of 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid.  Fractions were centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 min at room temperature and the supernatant of each sample transferred to an LC autosampler vial (Thermo).  For the Mango LC-MS/MS analysis, 3 µL of each sample (approximately 1 µg) from each pooled fraction was injected into the nano-LC system (Thermo), coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo).  Each fraction was analyzed either two or three times for technical replicates of the experiment.  Each peptide fraction was then loaded onto a trap column [3 cm × 100-μm i.d., stationary phase ReproSil-Pur C8 (5-μm diameter and 120-Å-pore-size particles)] with a flow rate of 2 μL/min of mobile phase: 98% (vol/vol) LC–MS solvent A [0.1% (vol/vol) FA in water] and 2% (vol/vol) LC–MS solvent B [0.1% (vol/vol) FA in acetonitrile], and chromatographically separated using an analytical column [60 cm × 75-μm i.d., stationary phase ReproSil-Pur C8 (5-μm diameter and 120-Å-pore-size particles)], applying a 240-min linear gradient: from 95% LC–MS solvent A, 5% LC–MS solvent B to 60% LC–MS solvent A, 40% LC–MS solvent B, at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.  For Mango analysis of the PIR cross-linked peptides, the mass spectrometer was set to high resolution method to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) of the 5 most intense ions with charge state of +4 to +8, with a dynamic exclusion of 30 s and isolation window of 3 Da.  Each MS1 scan (70,000 resolving power at 200 m/z, automated gain control (AGC) of 1 × 106, scan range 400 to 2,000 m/z, dynamic exclusion of 30 s) was followed by 5 MS2 scans (70,000 resolving power at 200 m/z, AGC of 5 × 104, normalized collision energy of 30).  For mango analysis, .ms2 files were generated containing individual precursor masses of released peptides for each spectrum and .peaks file containing all relationships within a 20 ppm tolerance. Comet (version 2019.01 rev. 4) was used to search mzXML files against the mouse database downloaded from UniProt .The data were filtered to an estimated maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the non-redundant cross-linked peptide level with XLinkProphet.  The cross-linking quantitation was done with iqPIR algorithm .  The cross-linking results were uploaded to XLinkDB.