PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Diabetic retinopathy
instruments: 6490 Triple Quadrupole LC/MS; Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: SRM/MRM; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification; TMT
keywords: Diabetic retinopathy; Aqueous humor; Proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a leading cause of blindness in adults under 40 in the developed world, with a significant proportion progressing to vision-threatening stages like proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) and neovascular glaucoma (NVG). This study aims to explore the molecular mechanisms underlying the progression from non-proliferative DR (NPDR) to PDR and NVG, focusing on identifying potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets. We utilized discovery-based proteomics, specifically label free quantification (LFQ), to analyze aqueous humor (AH) proteins from patients with NPDR, PDR, and NVG from the AH samples obtained during cataract surgery or anterior chamber paracentesis. We employed triple quadrupole (QQQ)-MS for targeted protein quantification to validate marker proteins for each disease state. Notably,subsequent analyses revealed specific proteins associated with each stage of DR. Gene ontology analysis and functional annotation unveiled significant processes in DR such as immune response and lipid metabolic process. Validation of potential biomarkers revealed proteins showing significant concentration changes, with several candidates demonstrating diagnostic potential through ROC curve analysis. These findings provide insights into the biomarkers and pathogenesis of these severe neovascular complications. The identification of specific proteins associated with the progression of DR to more advanced stages offer a promising avenue for early diagnosis and targeted therapy. The study underscores the potential of AH proteomics in understanding complex diseases like DR and its complications.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Analysis of Aqueous Humor Identified Clinically Relevant Molecular Targets for Neovascular Complications in Diabetic Retinopathy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
AH samples (0.1 ml) were obtained by anterior chamber paracentesis as the initial step of planned intraocular surgery. The samples were collected in sterile Eppendorf tubes and rapidly frozen at -80 °C until further analysis. Due to the exceptionally low protein concentration (0.1~0.3ug/ul) in AH and the limited volume (5–20 µL) obtainable from each patient, conducting a comprehensive proteomics analysis with depletion of high abundant proteins requires pooling samples. For this study, we collected 10 µL of AH from each group patients, pooling the samples to obtain ~100 µg of total protein, which was subsequently used for profiling experiments. To create profiling pools for each group, individual samples from each group (NPDR: 10, PDR: 10, NVG: 8) were pooled respectively in equal amounts. Pooled samples were used for label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis,(19, 20) and tandem mass tag (TMT) analysis in order to quantify overall AH protein expression and find out statistical significant protein candidates. The candidate targets were later validated through individual sample (NPDR : 37, PDR : 38, NVG : 9) to obtain statistical significance using multiple reaction monitoring (MRM).

DATA PROCESSING:
Statistical and bioinformatics analysis was conducted using R software (version 4.0.1). Each LFQ and TMT reporter ion intensity for NPDR, PDR, and NVG was transformed into log2 values. In order to integrate LFQ and TMT data, median normalization was held for each pipeline and batch effect was corrected using Combat package in R. Basic correlation analysis was calculated using Pearson method and hierarchical clustering was calculated using Euclidean method. In cases where missing values were present, relative quantification of proteins was performed by comparing the expression of proteins in one group with missing values to the average expression of the other groups with no missing values. For the clinical data, descriptive statistics were used. Aqueous humor concentrations of differentially expressed proteins were compared between patients with NPDR and PDR, as well as between those with PDR and NVG, using the fold change of protein expression and Student's t-test. Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05. Continuous values are presented as mean ± standard deviation. All statistical analyses were performed using R software (version 4.0.1).  Each sample has an experimental duplicate. MS data were pre-processed in skyline (version 22.2.0.312) and the precursor and product ion information. Only the peptides that have more than 3 transitions considered as identified peptide and quantified when its peak area is exceeding 10^3. Only the peptides those have less than 20% coefficient variance (CV) passed for further analysis. Peak area from each peptide were extracted and normalized using the beta-galactosidase peptides and calculated into fold change and p-values from Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test. Statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05. The predictability of novel aqueous humor biomarkers for PDR or NVG was assessed by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. All statistical analyses were performed using R software (version 4.0.1).