PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: N-linked glycan core N4-glycosylated asparagine
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Paucimannose; Glycoproteomics; Lysosome; Hela; Hek293; Thp1; Myo18b

ABSTRACT:
Many cancer cells exhibit increased amounts of paucimannose glycans, which are truncated N-glycan structures rarely found in mammals. Paucimannosidic proteins are proposedly generated within lysosomes and exposed on the cell surface through a yet uncertain mechanism. In this study, we assured that paucimannosidic proteins in cancer cells are produced by lysosomal glycoside hydrolases and secreted via regulated lysosomal exocytosis, a process in which lysosomes are directly fused with the plasma membrane. Interestingly, lysosomal exocytosis preferentially occurred in the vicinity of focal adhesions, protein complexes connecting the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix. Through genome-wide knockout screening, we identified that MYO18B, an actin crosslinker, is required for focal adhesion maturation, facilitating lysosomal exocytosis and release of lysosomal proteins to the extracellular milieu. Our data suggest that the mechanosensitive cation channel PIEZO1 locally activated at focal adhesions imports Ca2+ necessary for lysosome-plasma membrane fusion. Collectively, our study unveiled an intimate relationship between lysosomal exocytosis and focal adhesion, shedding light on the unexpected interplay between lysosomal activities and cellular mechanosensing in cancer.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
MYO18B promotes lysosomal exocytosis by facilitating focal adhesion maturation

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For whole-cell lysates, HeLa and HEK293 cells were lysed on a plate, whereas THP-1 cells were collected and lysed in a 15 ml Falcon tube with 8 M urea and 1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 30 min on ice. Cell lysates were sonicated for 5 min and centrifuged at 15,000 ×g for 20 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected, and the protein concentration was determined by the BCA assay. Proteins (500 µg) were reduced by 10 mM DTT at 56°C for 45 min and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. The solutions were diluted eightfold in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and sequencing grade trypsin was added to the solution at 1:40 (w/w), followed by incubation overnight at 37°C. Glycopeptides were enriched from the incubated mixture by Oasis MAX extraction cartridges (Waters), lyophilized by speed vac, and resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% formic acid buffer. The LC MS/MS based glycoproteomic analysis was performed as previously reported. Briefly, For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, 2 µg glycopeptides were applied to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) equipped with an internal RSLC C18 column (75 µm × 25 cm). The mobile phase consisted of phase A (0.1% formic acid) and phase B (90% ACN/0.1% formic acid). The flow rate was maintained at 550 nL/min. The gradient elution was 2–6% B, 1 min; 6–30% B, 90 min; 30–38% B, 22 min; 38–80% B, 5 min; and 80% B, 5 min. The mass detector was a high resolution Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were collected from 350 to 2000 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 using an AGC target of 4 × 105 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms. Secondary mass spectrometry analysis was then performed using the data dependent HCD fragmentation pattern. The parameters were as follows: resolution of 60,000, collision energy of 35% for HCD, 5% for stepped collision, AGC target 5 × 104, maximum injection time 150 ms, and microscan 1.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw mass spectrum data were converted to an mzML file and annotated by GPQuest 2.0 and a database containing 45,491 glycopeptides and 252 N-glycans. The mass tolerance parameters for MS1 and MS2 were 10 and 20 ppm, respectively. The mapped results were further filtered based on the following criteria: (1) FDR <1% for glycopeptides and (2) at least one N-glycan for one peptide spectra match.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Many cancer cells exhibit increased amounts of paucimannose glycans, which are truncated N-glycan structures rarely found in mammals. Paucimannosidic proteins are proposedly generated within lysosomes and exposed on the cell surface through a yet uncertain mechanism. In this study, we revealed that paucimannosidic proteins are produced by lysosomal glycosidases and secreted via lysosomal exocytosis. Interestingly, lysosomal exocytosis preferentially occurred in the vicinity of focal adhesions, protein complexes connecting the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix. Through genome-wide knockout screening, we identified that MYO18B, an actin crosslinker, is required for focal adhesion maturation, facilitating lysosomal exocytosis and the release of paucimannosidic lysosomal proteins to the extracellular milieu. Moreover, a mechanosensitive cation channel PIEZO1 locally activated at focal adhesions imports Ca2+ necessary for lysosome-plasma membrane fusion. Collectively, our study unveiled an intimate relationship between lysosomal exocytosis and focal adhesion, shedding light on the unexpected interplay between lysosomal activities and cellular mechanosensing.