PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Hela cell; K-562 cell
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Sample preparation; membrane protein; protein-ligand interaction

ABSTRACT:
The conventional use of detergent-containing buffers for integral membrane protein (IMP) extraction may disrupt native protein conformations, potentially compromising the performance of ligand target identification.  As a result, there is a lack of reliable, unbiased, detergent-free proteomic methods that enable the identification of ligand binding IMPs. In this study, we developed DFG-PELSA (Detergent-Free Grinding sample preparation method coupled with Peptide-centric Local Stability Assay), an innovative workflow that integrates mechanical grinding, extensive trypsinization, and DIA mass spectrometry for the proteome-wide identification of ligand binding proteins and binding regions with enhanced ability to identify IMP target proteins. Our method successfully recovered over 1,000 transmembrane proteins from HeLa cells while maintaining their native conformations. This method successfully mapped the interaction and binding regions of AMP-PNP with IMPs such as SERCA2 and ABCB6. DFG-PELSA also revealed the target and off-target mechanisms of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), providing valuable insights for drug discovery and optimization. Additionally, DFG-PELSA identified stability shifts induced by cardiotonic steroids binding to the transmembrane region of ATP1A1, demonstrating its effectiveness in studying challenging IMP targets. These applications highlight DFG-PELSA's unique capability in studying ligand-membrane protein interactions, offering a useful platform for structure-based drug discovery and target validation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A Detergent-Free Grinding Sample Preparation Method Dramatically Enhances PELSA for Mapping Integral Membrane Protein-Ligand Interaction

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HeLa (ATCC, CCL-2) cells were cultured in DMEM medium with 10% bovine serum. K562 (ATCC, CCL-243) cells were cultured in IMDM with 10% bovine serum. HeLa cells were gathered by scraping in ice-cold PBS (pH 7.4). Cell lines were then centrifuged at 320g for 5 min to obtain cell pellets. For the suspension cell lines, K562 cells were directly pelleted at 320g for 5 min. The collected cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and stored at −80 °C for further analysis. Prior to the experiment, the grinding chamber was pre-cooled to -40°C. Freshly collected cells were placed in the grinding tube with 2mm and 1mm diameter zirconia beads. The grinding tube was then fixed in the pre-cooled grinding chamber, and the grinding speed was set to 5 m/s. Two cycles of grinding were performed (30s on, 30s off). After grinding, ice-cold lysis buffer (PBS supplemented with 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the tubes. The cell lysate was then centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove insoluble debris. Cells were resuspended in 1 ml of ice-cold lysis buffer (PBS supplemented with 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail) and lysed by being snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and thawed in a 37°C water bath for three cycles. The cell lysates were then centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove cell debris. Freshly collected cells were resuspended in five times their volume of low-osmolarity lysis buffer (containing 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) and incubated on ice for 10 minutes. The cell suspension was transferred to a pre-cooled Dounce homogenizer, where cells were lysed using both loose and tight-fitting pestles with 20–30 repeated strokes. A 5–10 µL aliquot of the homogenate was mixed with an equal volume of Trypan Blue dye and examined under a microscope to ensure >95% cell membrane disruption. The homogenate was then transferred to a centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentrations in the cell lysates were determined using the Pierce 660 nm protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the protein concentration was adjusted to 1 mg/mL. Fifty microliters of cell lysates, treated with either a drug or vehicle control, were incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. Following the incubation, 25 μg of trypsin was added (with an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:2) for natural trypsin digestion for 1 minute. Digestion was stopped by adding three times the sample volume of 8 M guanidine hydrochloride (GdmCl) solution. 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) were added to the samples (final concentrations), followed by heating at 95°C for 5 minutes to perform carbamidomethylation. The protein samples were then transferred to a 10 kDa centrifugal filter and centrifuged at 14,000g for 1 hour to collect the filtrate. The filter was washed twice with 200 μL wash buffer (60 mM HEPES, pH 8.2), and the wash was centrifuged at 14,000g for 1 hour. The two filtrates were combined and acidified by adding 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The acidified filtrate (peptide mixture) was loaded onto self-packed Stage Tips equipped with C18 particles (Waters, Sep-Pak), for desalting and elution using 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile (ACN). The eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The dried peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Following the manufacturer's instructions, iRT peptides (Biognosys AB) were spiked into the peptide samples before LC-MS/MS analysis. The DIA samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC micro-system for micro-flow liquid chromatography. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm × 1 mm i.d. C18 column (ACQUITY UPLC peptide CSH C18, 130 Å, 1.7 µm; Waters) with a 10 μg sample load. A binary mobile phase was used: A (0.1% formic acid, FA) and B (80% acetonitrile, ACN, with 0.1% FA). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient, starting at 6% B and increasing to 32% B over 80 minutes, followed by a further increase to 45% B over 14 minutes at a flow rate of 50 μL/min. FAIMS (High-Field Asymmetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry) settings were as follows: compensation voltage of -45 V and a total gas flow rate of 3.5 L/min. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (m/z = 200) with a scan range of m/z 350–1400, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3 × 10^6, and a maximum injection time of 45 ms. MS/MS scans were collected in DIA mode at a resolution of 30,000 (m/z = 200). A total of 24 DIA segments were collected with a range of m/z 400–1000, a resolution of 30,000 (AGC target of 2 × 10^6, automatic maximum injection time), and normalized collision energy of 30%. The first fixed mass was set to m/z 300.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptide Identification and Quantification Peptide spectra were analyzed using the directDIA module of Spectronaut (Biognosys AG, v.18.3). The non-redundant UniProt human database (2018 release) containing 20,185 proteins was imported for directDIA search. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme (specificity), and local normalization was applied for data standardization. All other parameters were set to default.   Statistical Analysis Peptide intensities (PEP.Oquantity) from the Spectronaut output were used for downstream statistical analysis using R (limma package). A two-sided empirical Bayes moderated t-test was performed on the peptide intensities between ligand-treated and control samples. Reported log2FC represents the magnitude of stability changes, and −log10P indicates statistical significance for further analysis.