PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Liver
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Alcohol-associated liver disease; Protein modeling; Mass spectrometry; Cysteine proteomics; Redox; Acetylation

ABSTRACT:
Alcohol consumption induces hepatocyte damage through complex processes involving oxidative stress and disrupted metabolism. Combined, these factors alter proteomic and epigenetic marks providing a critical opportunity to identify therapeutic targets. Indeed, alcohol-induced protein acetylation is a key post-translational modification (PTM) that regulates hepatic metabolism and is associated with the pathogenesis of alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD). Interestingly, recent evidence suggests lysine acetylation occurs when a proximal cysteine residue is within ~15 Å of a lysine residue, referred to as a cysteine-lysine (Cys-Lys) pair. Here, acetylation can occur through the transfer of an acetyl moiety via an S à N acetyl transfer reaction. Alcohol-mediated hepatic redox stress is known to occur coincident with lysine acetylation, but the biochemical mechanisms related to cysteine and lysine crosstalk within ALD remain unexplored. A chronic murine model of ALD was employed to quantify hepatic cysteine redox and lysine acetylation, revealing that alcohol metabolism significantly reduced the cysteine proteome and increased protein acetylation. Interrogating both cysteine redox and lysine acetylation datasets, 1,281 proteins were mapped by AlphaFold2 to quantify distances between 557,815 cysteine and lysine residues. This process identified 388,698 Cys-Lys pairs that were further used to evaluate thiol redox signaling. Our analysis reveals that alcohol metabolism induces redox changes and acetylation selectively on proximal  Cys-Lys pairs with an odds ratio of 1.89 (p< 0.0001). We also identified key redox signaling hubs embedded in metabolic pathways associated with ALD, including lipid metabolism, the TCA cycle, and the electron transport chain. Specific protein targets embedded across these pathways include Echs1, Glrx5, Decr2, and Adh1, among many others. Interestingly, these proximal Cys-Lys exist as four major protein motifs represented by the number of Cys and Lys residues that are pairing (Cysx-Lysx). These motifs include Cys1:Lys1, Cysx:Lys1, Cys1:Lysx and Cysx:Lysx each with a unique microenvironment likely indicative of the mode of enzymatic regulation occurring. The motifs are composed of functionally relevant amino acids altered within ALD, identifying sites of therapeutic potential. Furthermore, these unique Cys-Lys redox signatures are translationally relevant as revealed by orthologous comparison with severe alcohol-associated hepatitis (SAH) explants, revealing numerous pathogenic thiol redox signals in these patients.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Acetylation of Proximal Cysteine-Lysine Pairs by Alcohol Metabolism

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cysteine proteomic analysis  The click chemistry Cys redox assay used was adapted from Yang et al.(16) and Pertova et al.(17) to quantify protein Cys residues that underwent a redox change due to alcohol metabolism by nHPLC-MS/MS. This assay utilized an isotopically labeled biotin-azide to click the free thiols of reduced Cys modified with alkynyl iodoacetamide. The pair-fed control and alcohol-fed murine hepatic peptides were combined 1:1 and were used to generate an accurate mass and retention time (AMRT) library(9). General protein quantitation was performed on the individual samples and used to normalize Cys redox proteomic abundance changes. MS quantitation data was extracted and aligned for both the protein quantitation and the Cys proteomic analysis as described elsewhere(9).  Acetylomic Sample Preparation  Whole liver samples (n=5) were homogenized by bead milling using a Qiagen TissueLyser LT set to 50 Hz for 6 minutes. Samples were homogenized in a 10:1 diluted urea lysis buffer as outlined in the  PTMScan HS Acetyl-Lysine Motif kit (Cell Signaling Technology #46784) at a ratio of 10 μL/mg of tissue. Samples were quickly spun down in a room temperature microcentrifuge to pellet any remaining tissue debris not solubilized and then a protein BCA assay was performed on the supernatant. Equivalent 4 mg aliquots of protein were taken from each sample. Acetyl BSA internal standard was added followed by reduction, alkylation, and 18 h trypsin digestion. Subsequent desalting on C18 SPE columns were performed as previously described(5, 14), however trypsin was added at 1:60 enzyme:protein and 100 ng of acetyl BSA was added into each 4 mg aliquot. The peptide eluent was divided to yield four 1 mg aliquots and dried down in 2 mL microcentrifuge tubes via speed-vac. One aliquot was used for general protein quantitation and another aliquot was used for immunoaffinity enrichment (IP) of acetyl Lys peptides. Acetyl peptides were dried down by speed-vac and stored at -80° C for LC-MS/MS analysis.  General protein quantitation (GPQ)  Overall, the protein quantitation for Cys proteomic and acetylomic analyses used identical murine cohorts(5, 9). Samples were re-suspended in a 3% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid solution containing 15 fmol/μL of Procal Spike Mix Retention Time Standards (TRK-1-10 pmol) to control for instrument variability(18). Samples were then loaded onto a 2 cm PepMap 100, nanoviper trapping column and chromatographically resolved on-line using a 0.075 x 150 mm, 3.0 µm EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 reverse phase nano column (Thermo Scientific) using an Ultimate 3000 RSCLnano LC system (Thermo Scientific). Mobile phases consisted of water + 0.1% formic acid (A) and 100% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (B). Samples were loaded onto the trapping column at 5.0 μL/min for 4.5 min at initial condition before being chromatographically separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a gradient of 3-7% B over 2.5 mins, 7-33% B over 93 min for a total 95.5 min gradient at 40° C. The gradient method was followed by a column wash at 70% B for 5 min. Data was collected on an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray Source operated using intensity dependent CID MS/MS to generate peptide ID’s. MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (Resolution = 120k; AGQ target = 100%; MaxIT = Auto; RF Lens = 30%; mass range = 350–1500; Profile data). Precursors selected for MS/MS were filtered by MIPS model set to peptide with an intensity threshold of 15,000 and only charge states 2-6 were allowed. Dynamic exclusion was employed for ten seconds and perform dependent scan on single charge state per precursor only was set to true. MS2 spectra were collected using CID in the linear ion trap (Isolation window = 1.2 m/z [quadrupole], rate = rapid; AGQ target = Standard; MaxIT = Dynamic; CID= 35%).

DATA PROCESSING:
Data were searched and extracted using SEQUEST HT and the label-free quantitation workflow in Proteome Discover (PD) software version 2.5.0.400 utilizing the minora feature detector, feature mapper,  and precursor ions quantifier algorithms. Spectra were searched against a combined Procal Retention Time (RT) standard peptide database and the SwissProt Mus musculus database downloaded July 17th, 2023, allowing up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages with fixed carbamidomethyl (C) and dynamic deamidated (N,Q) and oxidation (M) modifications. The monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance allowed was ± 10.0 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was ± 0.5 da. Peptides were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the percolator algorithm. Additionally, only high confidence peptides were allowed for protein scoring and a protein FDR cut-off of 1% was also used. A signal to noise (S/N) threshold of 1.5 was set for minora feature detector and at least 6 points had to be found across a peak. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) confidence levels were set to high for feature ID linking. A coarse retention time alignment of data was performed using vendor suggested default values. Following coarse RT alignment, the retention time tolerance was automatically determined by PD software based on coarse aligned data files, mass tolerance of 10 ppm, minimum S/N threshold of 5 were set for feature linking and mapping. Precursor quantification was based on area. Protein abundances were summed from all peptides matched to a specific protein using the Unique + Razor setting in PD software. The total Procal summed abundance for each sample was used to adjust protein abundances of all other identified and quantified proteins in that sample to control instrument variability. The GPQ Procal corrected protein abundances were then used to adjust acetyl peptide abundance on a per protein and sample basis.  Acetylomic Analysis by LC-MS/MS  Data were searched and extracted using the same parameters as general protein quantitation data with the following exceptions: Up to 4 missed tryptic cleavages were allowed, Lys acetylation was an allowed dynamic modification, oxidation, deamidation and carbamidomethylation were fixed, and spectra were searched against a combined Procal RT standard peptide database, SwissProt Mus musculus  database downloaded July 17th, 2023, and bovine serum albumin (BSA) database. Protein level summed area abundances of Procal peptides and acetylated BSA peptides were used to correct all identified and quantified acetyl peptide area abundances on a sample per sample basis. Procal area abundance within each sample was used to correct the corresponding acetylated BSA abundance within each sample. A normalization factor was then generated for each sample using the Procal adjusted acetylated BSA signal found within each sample. The Procal adjusted acetylated BSA normalized acetyl peptide abundance data was then normalized on a protein/sample specific basis based on Procal adjusted general protein quantitation data abundances. To summarize, Procal standards were used to control for run-to-run variability, acetyl BSA was used to control for sample preparation variation, and general protein quantitative data was used to adjust for protein abundance differences between each sample.  Statistical analysis was then performed in mass profiler professional software V.15.1 (Agilent Technologies) on adjusted acetyl peptide data using an unpaired T-test with Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing corrections and a fold change cut-off of log|0.58|.