PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Urinary bladder
diseases: Urinary bladder cancer
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition; Glycoproteomics
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Bladder cancer; n-glycomics; n-glycoproteins

ABSTRACT:
Aberrant glycosylation is a hallmark of cancer, offering opportunities to enhance clinical decision-making and enable precise targeting of cancer cells. Nevertheless, alterations in the bladder urothelial carcinoma (BLCA) N-glycome remain poorly characterized. Here, we used in situ N-deglycosylation and mass spectrometry, revealing a marked enrichment of oligomannose-type N-glycans in non-invasive Ta tumors, which diminished with disease progression. Complementary analysis of TCGA transcriptom-ic data revealed downregulation of key mannosidases in BLCA, suggesting a mechanistic basis for oligomannose accumulation, though this requires further validation. Then, targeted glycoproteomic profiling identified potential stage-specific carriers of oligomannoses. Functional annotation revealed stage-dependent glycoprotein activi-ties, ranging from metabolic regulation in Ta tumors to oxidative stress adaptation in muscle-invasive disease, highlighting glycosylation’s contribution to tumor progres-sion. Furthermore, myeloperoxidase (MPO) was enriched in more aggressive stages. Spatial validation confirmed MPO overexpression in tumor-infiltrating immune cells and its correlation with oligomannose content. Importantly, high MPO expression combined with low mannosidase levels was linked to poor survival, suggesting clinical relevance. This study suggests a dynamic, stage-specific N-glycome in BLCA and iden-tifies oligomannose-bearing glycoproteins as potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets, advancing the framework for glycan-based precision oncology.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Glycomics and Glycoproteomics Reveal Distinct Oligomannose Carriers Across Bladder Cancer Stages

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins were extracted from FFPE tissues (10 µm sections) using the QProteome FFPE tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Specifically, tissue sections were incubated with 500 µl heptane for 1 h at RT, followed by addition with methanol and centrifugation for 2 min at 9000 g to remove the paraffin. This step was performed twice. After solvent evaporation, samples were incubated with 188 µl EBX Plus buffer with 12 µl β-mercaptoethanol on ice for 5 min, followed by incubation at 100 ˚C for 20 min and then at 80 ˚C for 2 h. Proteins were extracted by 15 min centrifugation at 14,000 g followed by acetone precipitation. 200 µg of total protein extracts were resuspended in GNL buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2) and loaded on aga-rose-bound GNL for enrichment (Vector Laboratories, Newark, CA, USA). After washing the column 10 times with GNL buffer, the glycoproteins were eluted with 3 x 100 µl 3% acetic acid and dried in a rotational vacuum concentrator. GNL-enriched glycoproteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 80 °C for 10 min. Subsequently, disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at 60 °C for 30 minutes and cysteine residues alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 30 minutes in the dark. Glycoprotein digestion occurred overnight at 37 ˚C with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), followed by treatment with trifluoroacetic acid and so-lution clearing by centrifugation. Dried samples were resuspended in 30 µl of an aqueous solution containing 2% acetonitrile 0.2% formic acid, and 10 µl were injected. The mass spectrometry analysis was performed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a Vanquish neoUHPLC nano-LC coupled to a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Glycopeptides were separated in the analytical column (EASY-Spray C18 PepMap, 100 Å, 150 mm × 75μm ID and 3 μm particle size) at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min, using a linear gradient of 12-46% eluent B over 50 min. Column wash and re-equilibration were warranted before the following injection. Column temperature was set at 35 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive ion mode, with an m/z range from 300 to 2000, a spray voltage of 1.9 kV, and a transfer capillary temperature of 275 °C. Q-Exactive Plus settings were full scan resolution 140k, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6, maximum injection time of 200 ms. The top 15 peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation, using the following settings: fragment scan resolution 17,500, fragment scan fixed first mass at 110 m/z, AGC target of 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, and isolation window 4.0 m/z. Data-dependent parameters were as follows: minimum AGC target 7e3, exclusion of charge unassigned, 1, and >8, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, and dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Two MS runs were performed dif-fering on nce applied: nce of 20% and stepped nce of 35 with 2 steps.

DATA PROCESSING:
N-glycoprotein identification was performed using the MSFragger version 4.1 (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) within FragPipe interface v22.0 (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and the default workflow glyco-N-HCD. Specifically, HCD-MS raw data was searched against the reviewed UniProt KB human proteins (20,412 entries; accessed in November, 2024), including contaminants. Trypsin was defined as enzyme in protein digestion, enabling 3 missed cleavages, a peptide length between 7 and 50 amino acids, a peptide mass range 400-5,000. For peak matching, precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm were considered, enabling mass calibration and parameter optimization. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) was considered a variable modification and carbamidomethylcysteine (+57.02146 Da) was considered in fixed modifications, while labile modification search mode was set no nglycan. Moreover, the maximum fragment charge was increased to 4. PSM validation with PeptideProphet, protein inference, and FDR filter equal to 0.01 were enabled for valida-tion. Finally, PTM-Shepherd was enabled with the default settings for glyco search. The large N-glycan database containing 708 entries was enabled and a glycan FDR of 0.01 was considered. Curated protein results only include human proteins with a protein probability greater than or equal to 0.9, containing at least 2 total peptides and 1 unique peptide. In parallel, the curated PSMs list contains PSMs from human proteins with a probability greater than or equal to 0.9, while for glyco PSMs (gPSMs) the following criteria were also considered: a positive glycan score and a glycan q value less than or equal to 0.01.