PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood
diseases: Autosomal hemophilia a
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Hemophilia a; Erythrocytes; Inhibitors; Immunity; Factor viii

ABSTRACT:
Background: The main complication in hemophilia A treatment is the development of inhibitory antibodies against factor (F)VIII. Immune tolerance induction, the gold standard for eradicating anti-FVIII antibodies, is efﬁcient in only 60% to 80% of cases. This underscores the need for more efﬁcient induction of tolerance in patients with hemophilia A with FVIII inhibitors. Objectives: In this study, we explored whether red blood cells (RBCs) can be utilized as antigen delivery system to modulate the immune response against FVIII. Methods: Two promiscuously HLA-DR–presented peptides derived from the A2 and C1 domains of FVIII were fused to the TAT cell-penetrating peptide and incubated with RBCs. Results: Biotinylated TAT-A2 and TAT-C1 peptides were found to interact with RBCs as shown by ﬂow cytometry and imaging ﬂow cytometry. Moreover, macrophages efﬁciently phagocytosed TAT-FVIII peptide–treated RBCs. Using mass spectrometry– based immunopeptidomics we established that TAT-FVIII peptides were presented on major histocompatibility complex class II of macrophages that phagocytosed TAT peptide–pulsed RBCs. Speciﬁcally, the TAT-A2 peptide exhibited efﬁcient processing and presentation on HLA-DR molecules. Importantly, incubation of TAT-C1 peptide– treated RBCs-loaded macrophages with a FVIII-speciﬁc T-cell hybridoma led to a signiﬁcant increase in IL-2 production, suggesting functional presentation of TAT-C1– derived peptides by macrophages. Conclusion: Our ﬁndings indicate that RBCs can serve as effective vehicle for the delivery of FVIII-derived peptides to antigen-presenting cells. The successful display of T-cell epitopes on antigen-presenting cell using ex vivo–loaded RBC may be potentially utilized to modulate pathogenic immune responses such as observed in a subset of patients with hemophilia A.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Exploring red blood cells as an antigen delivery system to modulate the immune response towards FVIII in hemophilia A

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were desalted using Empore C18 STAGE tips which were prepared in-house. STAGE tips were equilibrated with 100% acetonitrile and subsequently washed with 1% formic acid. Samples were loaded on STAGE tips and washed once with 1% formic acid and once with 1% formic acid supplemented with 5% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from STAGE tips with 60 μL 1% formic acid supplemented with 30% acetonitrile and concentrated to a final volume of 5 μL using vacuum centrifugation. Eluted peptides were separated using columns (New Objective type FS360-75-8-N-5-C20, Inc., Woburn, MA, USA) filled with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Dr.Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, HPLC Buffer A was composed of 0.1 % formic acid in water and buffer B of 0.1 % formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5% buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-10% (22-27 min), 10- 28% (27-70 min) and 28-85% (70-84 min) followed by a 5 minute wash to 95 % and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. Column eluate was sprayed directly into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany) using a nano electrospray source with a spray voltage of 2.15 kV. Survey scans of peptide precursors from 300 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 × 106 ion count target in the orbitrap. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 0.7, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and fragment scan analysis in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60k. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1.5 x 105 and the max injection time was 118 ms. Only precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 20 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. All data were acquired with SII for Xcalibur software. The mass spectrometer was calibrated on a regular basis as recommended by the manufacturer in order to ensure high mass accuracy.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptides were identified using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Raw Xcalibur data files were screened against the UniprotKB.H_sapiens reviewed database (downloaded 2023), supplemented with the TAT-A2 peptide sequences with a mass deviation of 10 ppm, a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a false discovery rate of 95%. All identified FVIII-derived peptides with high and medium confidence were grouped and aligned for each donor.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Background</h4>The main complication in hemophilia A treatment is the development of inhibitory antibodies against factor (F)VIII. Immune tolerance induction, the gold standard for eradicating anti-FVIII antibodies, is efficient in only 60% to 80% of cases. This underscores the need for more efficient induction of tolerance in patients with hemophilia A with FVIII inhibitors.<h4>Objectives</h4>In this study, we explored whether red blood cells (RBCs) can be utilized as antigen delivery system to modulate the immune response against FVIII.<h4>Methods</h4>Two promiscuously HLA-DR-presented peptides derived from the A2 and C1 domains of FVIII were fused to the TAT cell-penetrating peptide and incubated with RBCs.<h4>Results</h4>Biotinylated TAT-A2 and TAT-C1 peptides were found to interact with RBCs as shown by flow cytometry and imaging flow cytometry. Moreover, macrophages efficiently phagocytosed TAT-FVIII peptide-treated RBCs. Using mass spectrometry-based immunopeptidomics we established that TAT-FVIII peptides were presented on major histocompatibility complex class II of macrophages that phagocytosed TAT peptide-pulsed RBCs. Specifically, the TAT-A2 peptide exhibited efficient processing and presentation on HLA-DR molecules. Importantly, incubation of TAT-C1 peptide-treated RBCs-loaded macrophages with a FVIII-specific T-cell hybridoma led to a significant increase in IL-2 production, suggesting functional presentation of TAT-C1-derived peptides by macrophages.<h4>Conclusion</h4>Our findings indicate that RBCs can serve as effective vehicle for the delivery of FVIII-derived peptides to antigen-presenting cells. The successful display of T-cell epitopes on antigen-presenting cell using ex vivo-loaded RBC may be potentially utilized to modulate pathogenic immune responses such as observed in a subset of patients with hemophilia A.