PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood platelet
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Proteomics; Proteins; Extracellular vesicles; Platelets.; Methodologies; Mass spectrometry

ABSTRACT:
This study presents a comparative study of different methodologies for the extraction of proteins from platelet derived-extracellular vesicles (pEV) prior to subsequent mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Protein isolation is performed through three different methodologies based on SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), organic solvent precipitation (OSP) or magnetic beads (MB), followed by protein digestion and sample acquisition by LC-MS/MS.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Comparative analysis of platelet-derived extracellular vesicles protein extraction methodologies for mass spectrometry 

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Organic solvent precipitation (OSP): Extraction of protein from pEVs samples was performed as follows. Absolute methanol was added to each sample in a 70:30 ratio and centrifuged at 18,213 rcf for 15 minutes at 4ºC. Precipitates were resuspended with lysis buffer. Protein concentration was measured spectrophotometrically. Pure isopropanol was added to 20 µg of protein from each sample, vortexed and incubated at -20 ºC overnight. Samples were centrifuged at 18,213 rcf for 10 minutes at 4 ºC. Supernatants were removed and precipitates were allowed to dry. Pellets were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and sonicated.  Protein disulfide bridges were reduced by adding 1,4-dithiothreitol for 30 min at 98 ºC. Alkylation process involved the incorporation of 2-iodoacetamide and incubation of samples for 30 min at room temperature. Protein digestion was achieved by the addition of sequencing grade modified trypsin and overnight standing of the samples at 37 ºC. Finally, 2 % trifluoroacetic acid in 20 % acetonitrile was added to the digested proteins.    Sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE): A 10 % polyacrylamide gel was prepared, and 20 µg of protein were loaded after samples were concentrated and lysed. 80V for 30 min and 120V for 10 min were programmed for electrophoresis. Gels were stained and complete visible bands were cut out and transferred to deionized water. Cleanup and destaining of protein bands were performed by adding 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile and incubated the samples for 10 minutes with gentle agitation. This process was repeated thrice. Gels were allowed to dry at room temperature after a final rinsing step with 100 µl of acetonitrile. For on-gel protein digestion, sequencing grade modified trypsin diluted in ammonium bicarbonate was included and stored overnight at 37 ºC. A mix of acetonitrile 50 % and trifluoroacetic acid 5 % was added to samples and incubated under agitation for 10 minutes. The process was repeated by adding acetonitrile to the gels. All collected extractions containing the digested proteins were pooled and stored.Magnetic beads (MB): Lysed samples from SDS-PAGE methodology were used to initialize the magnetic bead-based protocol. Protein reduction was conducted by adding 10 mM 4-dithiothreitol and incubating the samples for 30 min at 58 ºC under agitation. Subsequent alkylation process involved the addition of 10 mM 2-iodoacetamide and the incubation of samples at room temperature for 30 minutes. Then, proteins were quenched with 10 mM 4-dithiothreitol. SpeedBeads magnetic carboxylate modified particles were conditioned according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Stock beads were added to samples followed by the incorporation of absolute ethanol in 50:50 proportion. Samples were vortexed and incubated for 10 min at 25 ºC and intense agitation. External magnetic force was applied and supernatants were removed. Magnetic beads were rinsed by adding 80 % EtOH, vortexing and centrifuging samples. This step was repeated 3 times and final precipitates were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Sequencing grade modified trypsin was added for protein digestion and incubated overnight at 37 ºC under agitation. Digested proteins were obtained by using an external magnet and centrifugation process. Magnetic beads were additionally used for peptide purification along with the addition of pure acetonitrile. Samples were incubated in agitation for 10 minutes at 25 ºC. Using external magnetic force and centrifugation processes, supernatants were discarded and beads rinsed with acetonitrile.    Mass spectrometry (proteome) analysis: All samples, including two technical duplicates for each, were loaded onto Pierce C18 Spin Columns, following the manufacturer’s instructions and concentrated using an integrated vacuum concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 20 µl H2O/formic acid 0.1 % and 1 µl was used for sample acquisition, peptides present in the sample were not quantified before acquisition.   All analysis were performed by a Q-Exactive-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source and EASY-nLC 1200 peptide separation system. For each sample, a total volume of 1 µl was loaded onto a PePMap NeO C18 precolumn interfaced with a self-packed analytical column, followed by a gradient elution of mobile phase with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. Complete MS scans acquisitions were performed over a 375-1,500 m/z range with a 70,000 resolution. Data-dependent mode was operated on the spectrometer, in which the 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan underwent MS/MS in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell under normalized collision energy of 28 and 17,500 resolution with dynamic exclusion of 40s.  Temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set at 275 °C and the atomization voltage at 1.9 kV in positive mode and the radio frequency level of the S-lens at 50 AU, respectively.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Scientific). The LC–MS/MS data were searched against the UniProt Homo Sapiens protein database (February 2020, 20,303 entries), supplemented with a contaminant database (298 sequences). MS/MS spectra were searched with SequestHT search engine using the following settings: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.1 Da fragment mass tolerance; up to 4 missed cleavages; minimum peptide length 6 amino acids; methionine oxidation (+ 15.995 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (+ 57.021 Da), acetyl (+ 42.01 Da, N termini), met-loss (-131.040 Da, N termini) and met-loss + acetyl (-89.030 Da, N termini) as dynamic modifications. The search engine results were then filtered for 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm. At least two peptides were required for protein identification. Only the area of peptides that are not shared between different proteins or protein groups were used for the protein quantification.

METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Acquisition and Processing of PL
Human PL was obtained from the IdISBa Biobank with the approval of the Ethics Committee (IB1955/12 BIO ref 02/2021) upon ethical approval of the project by the CEI-IB (IB 4453/21 PI). To generate each platelet concentrate, a total of 50 buffy coats were used, rinsed with 0.9% NaCl, and centrifuged at 651g for 10 min. To generate PL, three freeze/thaw cycles (−80 °C/37 °C) and a freeze/thaw cycle (−80 °C/55 °C) were applied to platelet concentrates, followed by centrifugation at 5050g for 20 min and filtering via 40 μm porous membrane filters (Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany). The product was centrifuged at 1500g for 15 min at 4 °C, followed by centrifugation at 10,000g for 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was finally filtered through 0.8 and 0.2 μm porous membrane filters (Sartorius).
pEV Isolation
Size exclusion chromatography (SEC) using the KTA go system (Cytiva, Marlborough, MA, USA) in combination with the HiPrep 26/60 Sephacryl 400HR column (AKTA) and the F9-R fraction collector (Cytiva) served to isolate pEV samples. A total of 3 different PLs (PL 1–3) were used for pEV isolation by injecting 10 mL into the system loop. Two different isolates were performed from PL 1, resulting in pEV of 1.1 and 1.2 samples. At a flow rate of 1.3 mL/min using Plasmalyte pH 7.4 (Viaflo, Italy) as the mobile phase, fractions 8, 9, and 10 were collected, pooled, and stored at −80 °C until analytical procedures.
pEV Characterization
Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
Size distribution and concentration of pEVs were analyzed using the Nanosight NS300 (Malvern Instruments, Malvern, UK), and data was processed with nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) 3.2 Dev Build 3.2.16 Software. Five different videos were obtained for each diluted sample (1/1000) with a camera level of 16, green laser type, and 25 frames per second.
Transmission Electron Microscopy
Visualization of the pEV morphology was achieved by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Talos F200i, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Briefly, 4% formaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich, Sant Louis, MO, USA) was added to samples in a 1:1 ratio, incubated on Formvar-Carbon coated grids (Ted Pella, CA, USA), and fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich) for 5 min. After rinsing with deionized water, sample grids were stained with 2% tungstic acid (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA, USA) and washed with deionized water. Images were taken at a current of 80 kV.
Western Blot
Detection of pEV-related protein biomarkers was performed by Western blotting (WB). Total protein content of the samples was measured spectrophotometrically (NanoDrop 2000/2000c, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or by Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific), following manufacturer’s instructions. CD9 and CD63 tetraspanins were detected by loading 2.5 μg of protein in a 12% polyacrylamide gel. Standard SDS-PAGE was performed, followed by humid transference to a nitrocellulose membrane (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). The blocking process required 10% dry skimmed milk (Central Lechera Asturiana, Asturias, Spain) in TBS with 10% Tween-20 (Scharlab, Barcelona, Spain) and consecutive overnight incubation at 4 °C with either antihuman CD9 monoclonal antibody (clone Ts9 diluted 1:2000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) or antihuman CD63 monoclonal antibody (clone TS63, diluted 1:5000, Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Thereafter, membranes were incubated for 1 h with HRP-coupled secondary antibody (diluted 1:2000, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Revealing process was conducted as follows. Membranes were submerged in Clarity Western ECL Substrate reagents (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and exposed to photosensitive films (GE Healthcare), which were subsequently immersed in revealing and fixation solutions (Carestream, Rochester, NY, USA).
HSC70 and albumin were detected after samples were lysed with RIPA 1× (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) and prepared with loading buffer under reducing environment (2.5% of β-mercaptoethanol). A total of 15 and 5 μg of protein from each sample were loaded onto 10% and 8% polyacrylamide gels, respectively. SDS-PAGE and humid transfer were performed in the same manner as described above. Blocking process was realized with TBS Odyssey Intercept Blocking Solution (LI-COR, Lincoln, USA), and membranes were incubated overnight at 4 °C with either antihuman HSC70 monoclonal antibody (clone B-6, diluted 1:1500, Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA) or antihuman albumin monoclonal antibody (clone AL-01, diluted 1:2000, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). Finally, membranes were incubated with secondary antibody (IRDye 800CW Donkey anti-Mouse, LI-COR) diluted 1:8000 in the blocking solution TBS Odyssey with 0.1% Tween-20 for 1 h. Membranes revealing process was completed using the Odyssey Imaging System DiGit Blot scanner and Image Studio-Digits Software 4.0 (LI-COR).
Protein Isolation and Digestion
Organic Solvent Precipitation
Extraction of protein and metabolites from pEVs samples was performed as follows. Absolute methanol was added to each sample in a 70:30 ratio and centrifuged at 18,213 rcf for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatants containing metabolites were stored for future analysis, and the precipitates were resuspended with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor, phosphatase inhibitor and distilled water). Protein concentration was measured spectrophotometrically (NanoDrop 2000/2000c, Thermo Scientific). Pure isopropanol was added to 20 μg of protein from each sample, vortexed vigorously, and incubated at −20 °C overnight. The following day, samples were centrifuged at 18,213 rcf for 10 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were removed, and precipitates were allowed to dry on ice in a fume extraction hood. Pellets were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Scientific Laboratory Supplies, Dublin 9) and sonicated. Protein disulfide bridges were reduced by adding 1,4-dithiothreitol (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) for 30 min at 98 °C. Alkylation process involved the incorporation of 2-iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubation of samples for 30 min at room temperature. Protein digestion was achieved by the addition of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega Biotech Ibérica, Madrid, Spain) and overnight standing of the samples at 37 °C. Finally, 2% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) in 20% acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher) was added to the digested proteins.
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
Standard SDS-PAGE methodology was performed. A 10% polyacrylamide gel was prepared, and 20 μg of protein was loaded after samples were concentrated with a centrifugal filtration system (Nanosep Centrifugal Devices with Omega Membrane, Cytiva) and lysed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor, phosphatase inhibitor, and distilled water). 80 V for 30 min and 120 V for 10 min were programmed for short-term electrophoresis. Gels were stained following the Coomassie Blue staining protocol, and complete visible bands were cut out and transferred to deionized water. Cleanup and destaining of protein bands were performed by adding 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Scientific Laboratory Supplies) and acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubating the samples for 10 min with gentle agitation. This process was repeated thrice. Gels were allowed to dry at room temperature after a final rinsing step with 100 μL of acetonitrile. For on-gel protein digestion, sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega Biotech Ibérica) diluted in ammonium bicarbonate (Scientific Laboratory Supplies) was included and stored overnight at 37 °C. Digested proteins were extracted from the gel as follows. A mix of acetonitrile 50% (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and trifluoroacetic acid 5% (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to samples and incubated under agitation for 10 min. Diluent was stored, and the process was repeated by adding acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to the gels. All collected extractions containing the digested proteins were pooled and stored until further analysis.
Magnetic Beads
Lysed samples from the SDS-PAGE methodology were used to initialize the magnetic bead-based protocol (Figure  ). Protein reduction was conducted by adding 10 mM 4-dithiothreitol (Roche) and incubating the samples for 30 min at 58 °C under agitation. Subsequent alkylation process involved the addition of 10 mM 2-iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and the incubation of samples at room temperature for 30 min. Then, proteins were quenched with 10 mM 4-dithiothreitol (Roche). SpeedBeads magnetic carboxylate modified particles (Sigma-Aldrich) were conditioned according to manufacturer’s instructions. Stock beads were added to samples followed by the incorporation of absolute ethanol in 50:50 proportion. Samples were vortexed and incubated for 10 min at 25 °C and intense agitation. External magnetic force was applied and supernatants were removed. Magnetic beads (MB) were rinsed by adding 80% EtOH (Scharlab), vortexing, and centrifuging samples to remove supernatant. This step was repeated 3 times, and final precipitates were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Scientific Laboratory Supplies). Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega Biotech Ibérica) was added for protein digestion and incubated overnight at 37 °C under agitation. Digested proteins were obtained by using an external magnet and centrifugation process. Magnetic beads were additionally used for peptide purification along with the addition of pure acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were incubated in agitation for 10 min at 25 °C. Using external magnetic force and centrifugation processes, supernatants were discarded, and beads were rinsed with acetonitrile (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in combination with ultrasounds, centrifugation, and external magnet force.
Mass Spectrometry (Proteome) Analysis
All samples, including two technical duplicates for each, were loaded onto Pierce C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific), following the manufacturer’s instructions, and concentrated using an integrated vacuum concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 20 μL H2O/formic acid 0.1% (FischerScientific, Hampton, NH, USA), and 1 μL was used for sample acquisition; peptides present in the sample were not quantified before acquisition.
All analyses were performed by a Q-Exactive-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source and EASY-nLC 1200 peptide separation system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, a total volume of 1 μL was loaded onto a PePMap NeO C18 precolumn (5 μm, 300 μm × 5 mm, 1500 bar) interfaced with a self-packed analytical column (DNV PePMap Neo C18, 2 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, 100 Å, 1500 bar, Thermo Fisher Scientific), followed by a gradient elution of mobile phase (A: H2O 0.1% HCOOH and B: 80% CH3CN 0.1% HCOOH) with a constant flow of 300 nL/min (Figure S1). Complete MS scan acquisitions were performed over a 375–1500 m/z range with a 70,000 resolution.
Data-dependent mode was operated on the spectrometer, in which the 15 most abundant ions in each MS scan underwent MS/MS in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell under normalized collision energy of 28 and 17,500 resolution with dynamic exclusion of 40 s. Temperature of the ion transfer capillary was set at 275 °C, the atomization voltage was set at 1.9 kV in positive mode, and the radio frequency level of the S-lens was set at 50 AU, respectively.
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15 (Thermo Scientific). The LC–MS/MS data were searched against the UniProt protein database (February 2020, 20,303 entries), supplemented with a contaminant database (298 sequences). MS/MS spectra were searched with SequestHT search engine using the following settings: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.1 Da fragment mass tolerance; up to 4 missed cleavages; minimum peptide length 6 amino acids; methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), acetyl (+42.01 Da, N termini), met-loss (−131.040 Da, N termini), and met-loss + acetyl (−89.030 Da, N termini) as dynamic modifications. The search engine results were then filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Percolator algorithm. At least two peptides were required for the protein identification. Only the areas of peptides that are not shared between different proteins or protein groups were used for the protein quantification.
Statistics
Tests used for analysis of presented data include Shapiro–Wilk for normality test and student t-test or Mann–Whitney test for differences between groups with parametric and nonparametric distribution, respectively. GraphPad Prism 9 (La Jolla, CA, USA) software was used to perform all the analyses.
Data Repository
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the figshare repository () (10.6084/m9.figshare.25298638.v1) and to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD060357 and 10.6019/PXD060357.
Bioinformatics
Biological functional analysis of resulting proteins was performed using FunRich software (v3.1.3), supported by the Vesiclepedia database (), accessed on (February 20, 2024). A comparative analysis was performed including three studies collected in the Vesiclepedia database under the identifiers: Vesiclepedia_406 (PubMed ID: 19806257), Vesiclepedia_520 (PubMed ID: 23601281), and Vesiclepedia_369 (PubMed ID: 16212402). These were selected based on the type of sample used (“platelets”), biomolecules identified (“proteins”), species (“”), and analysis (“proteomics”).

RESULTS:
Results
pEV Isolation and Characterization
Isolation by SEC revealed enriched pEV fractions (8–10) identified by CD9 tetraspanin immunodetection (Figure S2). All samples reached a concentration order of 1011 particles per milliliter (Table  ) with significant differences between the different isolates, each from a different platelet lysate obtained from a pool of 50 donors (p < 0.05).
Morphology of pEVs evaluated by TEM (Figures  A and S3) was consistent with particle size results obtained by NTA, with statistical differences (p < 0.05) among pEV 1 and pEV 2 samples. Enrichment in pEV was demonstrated by an increased band intensity of CD9 and CD63 tetraspanins compared to the original LPs, when detected by Western blot. Similarly, pEV samples were positive for the cytosolic marker HSC70, showing a similar pattern for all samples. Additionally, coisolated albumin was considerably decreased in pooled fractions of pEVs (Figures  B and S4), evidencing the correct pEV enrichment process by means of SEC.
Proteomic Analysis and Bioinformatics
Principal component analysis (PCA) evidenced a clustering of the samples according to the performed protein extraction methodology, as shown in Figure  A. Similarly, technical duplicates of samples appeared close together in the plot, except for one pEV 1.1 duplicate, regarding MB methodology, which was considered outlier and excluded from analysis (data not shown). To perform an additional control quality assay, one technical duplicate from pEV 1.1 and two technical duplicates from pEV 1.2 samples, from MB, were acquired twice in LC–MS/MS (Table S1). Notwithstanding the grouping of samples, normalized abundances of identified proteins acquired similar patterns when protein extraction methodologies were compared since no statistically significant differences were found between groups (Figure  B). Equally, a total of 275 proteins were identified (258 using MB, 269 using SDS-PAGE, and 268 using OSP), revealing a reduced number of unique proteins per methodology and a value of 91.3% of commonly distributed proteins observed by all three procedures (Figure  C).
Resulting protein profiles (Tables S2–S4) were analyzed using Vesiclepedia database through FunRich 3.1.3 software using associated genes as data input. Four common immunoglobulin-related proteins (Immunoglobulin mu heavy chain, Immunoglobulin alpha-2 heavy chain, Immunoglobulin kappa light chain, and Immunoglobulin lambda-1 light chain) were excluded from the analysis as no recognized genes were associated. Concerning the total number of proteins in the data set, a total of 250, 252, and 243 proteins associated with SDS-PAGE, OSP, and MB, respectively, were present in the Vesiclepedia database (Figure  A). Similarly, the protein extraction methods analyzed allow the detection of proteins classified as Top 100 EV markers in the Vesiclepedia Database (Figure  B).
Functional enrichment analysis revealed exosome, cytoplasm, and extracellular environment as the most significant findings for cellular component category (Figure  C) and plasma, serum, and liver as the main expression site-associated outputs (Figure  D). As for both cases, percentage of genes involved in each category and the significance value were strongly comparable across methodologies.
To compare the proteomic profile of our study, we included published data from three studies reported in the Vesiclepedia database −   in which the proteome of pEVs had been analyzed. The SDS-PAGE methodology revealed 138 common proteins with any of the three studies mentioned above, of which 38 correspond to proteins included in the top 100 EV markers described in the Vesiclepedia database. The MB and OSP methodologies had 137 proteins in common with the other studies, of which 36 correspond to proteins included in the top 100 EV markers described in the Vesiclepedia database (Table S5). If we restricted the comparison criteria to common proteins in the three included studies together with our proteomic profiling, we found only 36 proteins for the SDS-PAGE and MB methodologies and 37 proteins for the OSP methodology (Table  ). Among this list, multiple proteins are considered EV markers and are included in the top 100 EV markers of the Vesiclepedia database.
Among these unique proteins, the methodologies differ from each other minimally in the proteins exclusively identified, being Filaggrin, Keratin 28, and Keratin Associated Protein 11 for SDS-PAGE; Keratin 6B and S100-A7 for the OSP; and Keratin 6A for the MB (Table S6).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Extracellular vesicles (EV) have gained significant attention in the last decades due to their multiple properties. These nanometer-sized vesicles with lipidic membrane are released by different cell types and can be detected in a variety of biofluids. The molecular cargo of EVs closely reflects the cell type of origin with lipids, nucleic acids, and a variety of proteins, being the main molecules enriching the vesicular content. The EVs’ importance rest on their ability to transfer information in a protected manner to distant locations from the vesicular origin and to interact dynamically with other cells, contributing to cell-to-cell communication. Thus, because of their role in the regulation of physiological and pathological processes, circulating EVs are constantly evolving, reflecting multiple biological processes occurring in the organism.   
At present, EVs obtained from blood samples are being further investigated as potential biomarkers, as it is possible to detect specific EV characteristics, including size, concentration, or content, from the most abundant sample acquired in the clinical field. Hence, platelet-derived EVs (pEVs) are of particular interest given their potent signaling functions, which are increasingly being elucidated. Over time, the multifunctionality of pEVs has been demonstrated, considering that they can diffuse through tissues inaccessible to platelets. Consequently, pEVs as well as other platelet preparations, such as human platelet lysate (PL) or platelet-rich-plasma (PRP) are emerging as a potential source for regenerative medicine and provide numerous therapeutic benefits in the field.   However, due to their intrinsic characteristics and involvement in modulating cell-to-cell signaling, pEVs have emerged as a superior alternative to other platelet concentrates. Several studies have proven the efficacy of pEVs enhancing wound healing, osteoinduction, hemostasis, and angiogenesis, among other biological functions, as well as their security when administered in humans in a phase I clinical trial. However, further research is still needed to establish pEVs in the clinical field.
Mass spectrometry (MS) is a powerful and valuable tool for characterizing the protein content of EVs, providing a key aspect in deciphering the biological role of EVs and exploring their potential use as diagnostic, screening, and therapeutic tool.   Overall, the analysis of EVs using omics technologies involves the generation of massive data sets that can be compiled in public databases, helping to expand EV research and discovery. Advances in this technology has provided a considerable improvement in the understanding of EV components, especially in the identification of a large number of biomarkers associated with physiological and pathological mechanisms. However, the development of reliable and applicable EV-based biomarkers for clinical use remains a challenge, as even for the same disease, the results of EV analyses of patients’ blood are often inconsistent between studies. One of the main reasons behind these results is the variability in the experimental procedures. It is mandatory to direct studies toward the development of new techniques and the establishment of standardized protocols for sample processing, allowing to improve reproducibility and comparability.   In this regard, a critical point is the utilization of an efficient method for EV cargo extraction, since it is essential that changes in the EV content profile accurately reflect biological conditions and are not influenced by technical limitations. Additionally, proper sample preparation prior to MS analysis is crucial, as chemical contaminants remaining from the preprocessing and isolation of EVs can be devastating. Thus, with the aim of contributing to the standardization of methodology in the field of pEV proteomics research, the present study provides a comparative analysis of different techniques for the extraction of pEV-derived proteins prior to MS analysis.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
We have submitted all relevant data of our experiments to the EV-TRACK knowledge (EV-TRACK ID: EV240022) and to the figshare repository () (10.6084/m9.figshare.25298638.v1).
Gradual elution of mobile phase (B: 80% CH3CN 0.1% HCOOH) into the mass spectrometer; characterization of CD9 tetraspanin in fractions (2–14) obtained by SEC using Plasmalyte as eluent and hPL as sample; additional images obtained by TEM for pEV samples acquired at 94,000× magnification; Western blot images of the entire membranes derived from the characterization of CD9, CD63, HSC70 of pEV samples, as well as their respective original samples (PL); analyzed samples per methodology and total runs performed; protein profile obtained for SDS-PAGE; protein profile obtained for OSP; protein profile obtained for MB; associated gene names of common proteins identified in other published studies; and associated gene names of unique proteins only identified in our study (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.5c00089. 
All authors contributed to the conception and design. J.C. and A.G. provided platelet lysate. A.M.A.-T. produced pEV samples. C.R.-M., A.M.A.-T., M.A.F.-G., R.M.G., and F.O.-P. performed the different assays, acquired and analyzed data. A.M.A.-T., C.R.-M., M.A.F.-G., R.M.G., F.O.-P., G.M.-C., and J.M.R. contributed to interpretation of the results. C.R.-M. wrote the main manuscripts text and A.M.A.-T., M.A.F.-G., R.M.G., G.M.-C., F.O.-P., J.C., A.G., M.M., and J.M.R. reviewed the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
This research was funded by Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, cofunded by the ESF European Social Fund and the ERDF European Regional Development Fund (PI20/00127), PROGRAMA JUNIOR del Proyecto TALENT PLUS, construyendo SALUD, generando VALOR (JUNIOR01/18), financed by the sustainable tourism tax of the Balearic Islands; the Mecanisme de Recuperació i Resiliència, intended to execute research projects of “Noves polítiques públiques per a un mercat de treball dinàmic, resilient i inclusiu”, collected in Pla de Recuperació, Transformació i Resiliència, financed by European Union-Next Generation EU and driven by SOIB and Conselleria de Fons Europeus, Universitat i Cultura i la Conselleria de Model Econòmic, Turisme i Treball (NG0421), the Direcció General d’Investigació and Conselleria d’Investigació, Govern Balear (FPI/87/2022) and the Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades (FPU22/04432); Instrumental subsidy agreement for a transmission electron microscope financed by the “Govern of the Balearic Islands” and with cofinancing from FEDER resources, “a way of making Europe”.
Platelet concentrates were provided by the IdISBa Biobank, with the approval of the Ethics Committee (IB1955/12 BIO ref 02/2021) after ethical approval of the project by the CEI-IB (IB 4453/21 PI).
The authors declare no competing financial interest.