PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Embryonic stem cell; Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Human; Tmt; Endosomes; Ineurons; Lysosomes

ABSTRACT:
We developed a toolkit for capturing endosomes (Endo-IP) and lysosomes (Lyso-IP) in human stem cell(hESC)-derived induced neurons (iNeurons). We target a sub-population of early endosomes marked by endogenously tagged EEA1 (Early Endosome Antigen 1) protein, which represents one of the earliest populations formed after endocytic vesicle uncoating. We demonstrated its utility by revealing the endolysosomal protein landscapes for cortical-like iNeurons and stem cells. This allowed us to globally profile endocytic cargo, identifying hundreds of transmembrane proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Endo-IP and Lyso-IP Toolkit for Endolysosomal Profiling of Human Induced Neurons

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were subjected to S-Trap micro-spin column digestion protocol as provided by the manufacturer (Protifi, C02-micro-80, version 4.7). Proteins were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with chloroacetamide and digested with Lys-C/trypsin. Peptides were labelled with TMTpro reagent for 1h at room temperature and the reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine for 15min. Equal peptide amounts for each sample were combined and fractionated using High-pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Lyso-IP and Endo-IP samples (dataset 1) were analyzed in an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribid mass spectrometer. Endo-IP samples from hESC and iNeurons (dataset 2) were analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were fractionated with a 90-min linear gradient of acetonitrile using 100-μm C18 capillary column. MS1 spectrum was acquired on the Orbitrap (resolution 60,000, scan range 350-1,350 m/z, standard automatic gain control (AGC) target, auto maximum injection time). MS2 was acquired on the Orbitrap (resolution 30,000, isolation window 0.6 m/z, TurboTMT, 36% normalized HCD collision energy, 200% normalized AGC, 120ms maximum injection time). FAIMS Pro was set to -30, -50 and -70 compensation voltage (CV).

DATA PROCESSING:
TMT-MS data was processed with MSconvert and searched using Comet against the human canonical proteome. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 50ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. TMTpro labels were set as fixed modification on lysines and peptide N-terminus (+304.207 Da), carboxyamidomethylation on cysteines (+57.021 Da) as fixed modification, and oxidation on methionine residues as variable modification. Linear discriminant analysis was performed and peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to 2% false discovery rate (FDR). TMT-reporter ions were quantified by picking the most intense peaks within 0.003 Da around the theoretical m/z, and corrected for isotopic impurity. Data summarization, normalization and statistics were performed using MSstats.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Detailed procedures related to cell culture, gene editing, biochemical procedures, MS, microscopy, and flow cytometry are described in SI Appendix, Materials and Methods. Statistical analyses were performed using MSstats and ggplot. All error bars represent SEM, and statistical significance was determined by t tests, as specified in the corresponding figure legends.
Data, Materials, and Software Availability
Cell lines reported here will be made available upon request with no restrictions. Proteomic data (.RAW files) are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD055978. The key resource table, uncropped blots, light microscopy images, data analysis scripts, source data for colocalization bar graphs, AF3 prediction PDB files, and supplementary datasets associated with this publication are available from Zenodo.org: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13955416, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13882568, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13882797, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 13885953, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13885853, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13882583, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.13984203. All other data are included in the manuscript and/or supporting information.

RESULTS:
Results and Discussion
Genetic Tagging of EEA1 and TMEM192 in Human Stem Cells.
To purify endolysosomal compartments from human neurons, we adopted the Endo-IP approach using EEA1 protein as an affinity handle, incorporating three copies of the FLAG epitope (Fig. 1A). Unlike gradient fractionation of endosomes which captures many classes of endosomes, the EEA1 affinity handle allows capture of a small population of endosomes that is expected to be enriched in newly endocytosed cargo. To avoid any effects of FLAG-EEA1 overexpression, we endogenously tagged both EEA1 copies using CRISPR-Cas9 in hESCs harboring an inducible AAVS1-NGN2 neurogenesis driver (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A). In parallel, we similarly edited FLAG-EEA1 in hESCs previously engineered to contain the Lyso-IP affinity handle—a triple HA epitope fused with the C-terminus of TMEM192 (in heterozygous form, see Materials and Methods) (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S1B). These cell lines were validated by sequencing and immunoblotting of cell extracts from hESCs and day 21 iNeurons (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 A–D). We refer to singly and doubly tagged cells as “H9-E” and “H9-EL”, with “E” referring to Endo-IP and “EL” referring to Endo- and Lyso-IP.
To ensure proper localization of Endo- and Lyso-IP tags, we performed immunofluorescence in combination with confocal microscopy on day 21 to 23 iNeurons. As expected, α-FLAG and α-EEA1 signals displayed a very high degree of colocalization (Mander’s coefficient >0.75) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1F). Consistent with EEA1 colocalization with a subset of early/sorting endosomes, small mean Mander’s coefficients were observed for α-RAB5 and α-FLAG (0.1 to 0.28) or α-RAB5 and α-EEA1 (0.2 to 0.24) in both H9-E and H9-EL cell lines (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 E and F). The extent of colocalization between EEA1 and RAB5 was slightly reduced in H9-E and H9-EL tagged cells compared to WT untagged controls (mean Mander’s coefficients of 0.2 to 0.24 vs 0.36 to 0.4) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 E and F). For Lyso-IP tagged iNeurons, TMEM192-HA puncta partially colocalized with the lysosomal marker LAMP1 with Mander’s coefficients in the range of 0.3 to 0.7. Mander’s coefficients were not significantly different between Lyso-IP-tagged and untagged iNeurons (mean Mander’s coefficients of 0.4) (SI Appendix, Fig. S1 E and F). The extent of RAB5 and EEA1 colocalization was in agreement with the broad range reported previously in HEK293 and HeLa cells. Cell line variability in the distribution of EEA1 between early/sorting endosomes and late endosomes has been observed previously. Taken together, these data indicate the validity of these cells for analysis of EEA1-positive populations of endosomes and of TMEM192-positive lysosomes.
Benchmarking Dual-Tagged EL Cells for Organelle Proteomics.
To initially benchmark H9-EL cells for organelle IP, we converted control (untagged H9) and H9-EL cells to day 21 iNeurons in biological triplicate and performed Endo- and Lyso-IPs followed by either immunoblotting or 12-plex Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT)-based MS (Fig. 1B). Immunoblotting of Endo- or Lyso-IP samples demonstrated selective enrichment of LAMP1 and PSEN2, with no enrichment of COX IV as a mitochondrial marker (Fig. 1C). We note that the FLAG-tagged EEA1 protein is retained on the affinity resin under the gentle elution conditions used here and is therefore not detected in the elution from the immunoprecipitate (Fig. 1C). Proteomic analysis revealed that Lyso-IP samples were substantially enriched in known lysosomal proteins, including catabolic enzymes (GNS, GUSB, GBA, GLA), among many others (Fig. 1 D and E and SI Appendix, Fig. S2A, and Dataset S1). Indeed, of the 132 proteins with Log2 FC>1.0, 104 were known lysosomal proteins and 7 others were annotated as secreted or PM-localized (Fig. 1D and SI Appendix, Fig. S2D). Moreover, analysis of several subcellular compartments demonstrated a high degree of selectivity in the enrichment of lysosomal proteins (Fig. 1E and SI Appendix, Fig. S2B). Of the 91 proteins enriched in Lyso-IPs from HEK293 cells, 56 were enriched in iNeurons (SI Appendix, Fig. S2C). Interestingly, the overall number of proteins enriched in the Endo-IP of iNeurons was ~4 times larger than with Lyso-IP and was substantially populated with PM proteins in addition to numerous proteins annotated as endosomal or lysosomal (Fig. 1 D–F and SI Appendix, Fig. S2 A and B, and Dataset S1). As expected, proteins found in common in both Endo-IP and Lyso-IP are typically core components of the endolysosomal system, including BORCS6, LAMTOR2, and ATP13A2 (Fig. 1F and SI Appendix, Fig. S2D). These results indicate the feasibility of endosome and lysosome proteome profiling in iNeurons and the capacity of Endo-IP to capture protein cargo.
Proteomic Landscape of EEA1-Positive Endosomes During In Vitro Neurogenesis.
Our previous studies have demonstrated large-scale proteome remodeling during NGN2-driven conversion of hESCs to iNeurons in vitro, including the induction of numerous factors that drive the neurogenesis program. A total of 476 endolysosome-related proteins (see SI Appendix, Materials and Methods and Dataset S2) were categorized in clusters based on their abundance profile during a 12-d differentiation, revealing that most proteins dramatically increased in abundance during neurodifferentiation (Fig. 2A). Moreover, many proteins annotated in Synaptic Gene Ontology (SynGO)—an evidence-based and curated database for synaptic proteins, a subset of which are also know to localize on endosomes —also displayed similar alterations in abundance during differentiation (SI Appendix, Fig. S3A and Dataset S2). This includes markers for synaptic vesicles (SYP), postsynaptic receptor (GRIA2), dendrites (MAP2), and adhesion (NCAM1) (Fig. 2B).
To identify endocytic factors and neuron-specific cargo, we performed TMT-MS on triplicate or quadruplicate Endo-IPs from H9 control or H9-E cells in either the stem cell state or iNeurons at day 21 of differentiation (Fig. 2C). As expected, immunoblotting of iNeuron Endo-IP samples revealed enrichment for LAMP1 as an endolysosomal marker, but not Golgi (GOLGA1) or ER (CALR) markers (SI Appendix, Fig. S3B). The reproducibility of the method was assessed by comparing two independent Endo-IP datasets, which revealed extensive overlap of enriched proteins identified and reproducible protein levels (SI Appendix, Fig. S3 C and D). Consistent with the results described above, Endo-IPs from both hESC and iNeuron populations displayed enrichment of numerous endolysosomal and PM proteins, but no enrichment in other cellular compartments (Log2 FC ≥ 1.0, q-value ≤ 0.01) (Fig. 2 D–F and SI Appendix, Fig. S3E). From the 611 and 566 proteins enriched in Endo-IPs in hESCs and iNeurons, respectively, 236 were common to both cell types (Fig. 2G). These included nutrient transporters (ECE1, SLC3A2), subunits of sorting complexes (AP2A1, VPS35, SORT1, SNX4, SNX2, and NAPG), v-ATPase subunits (ATP6V1B1 and ATP6V1E1), signal transduction factors (ZFVYE9), autophagy pathways components (TAX1BP1, GABARAP, GABARAPL1, and GABARAPL2), and other established endosomal factors or cargoes (PSAP, EEA1, HGS, and NCSTN) (Fig. 2G and Dataset S2). Enriched proteins that were selective for one or the other cell state tended to correlate with the relative levels of expression; 79% of hESC-selective proteins had higher abundance (50%) or were of equal abundance (29%) in hESCs while 97% of iNeuron-selective proteins had higher abundance (77%) or were of equal abundance (20%) in iNeurons (Fig. 2G). Similarly, 102 synaptic proteins were identified exclusively in iNeurons, while only 2 and 70 were identified only in hESCs or both hESCs and iNeurons, respectively. In addition, the fraction of transmembrane segment-containing proteins found specifically in hESCs or in iNeurons was comparable (54 and 58%, respectively). Taken together, these data indicate that hESCs and iNeurons have partially nonoverlapping EEA1-positive endosomal proteomes.
Endo-IP During Membrane Depolarization in iNeurons.
The endosomal system is highly dynamic and rapidly modulates the cell surface proteome. To capture the reorganization of proteins associated with EEA1-positive endosomes during neuronal dynamics, we tested whether alterations in protein levels could be detected in response to neuronal depolarization (Fig. 2C). Endo-IPs from iNeurons depolarized for 10 min with KCl revealed a small number of proteins whose abundance either increased or decreased compared to unstimulated iNeurons (Fig. 2H and Dataset S2). Among the proteins that increased in abundance was CACNA1H (also called Cav3.2), a voltage-sensitive calcium channel that gives rise to T-type calcium currents and is linked with epilepsy. In contrast, the levels of proteins involved in endocytosis (SNX9, DNM1, and DNM2) were reduced. Sorting nexin SNX9 was the most dramatically downregulated protein following depolarization (Fig. 2H and Dataset S2), which was validated by immunoblotting (Fig. 2I). Interestingly, SNX9 is highly enriched in Endo-IPs from iNeurons but not in hESCs (Fig. 2 E and F and Dataset S2). Taken together, these data indicate that Endo-IPs can be used to assess potentially rapid signal-dependent neuronal alterations in EEA1-positive endosomal proteins. This result parallels our previous experiments demonstrating the capture of endocytic cargo within 5 min of ligand stimulation in HEK293 cells.
Repertoire of Receptor and Synaptic Protein Cargo in iNeurons.
To characterize the endolysosomal proteins identified in iNeurons, we first organized Endo-IP enriched proteins into broad functional categories, encompassing many core endolysosomal functions, including sorting (Retromer, ESCRT), membrane fusion (SNAREs), positioning (BORC), and numerous core endolysosomal proteins (Fig. 3A). Many of these proteins, indicated by asterisks, are also present in SynGO, consistent with known roles for endosomal vesicle fusion and vesicle positioning within the synaptic compartment (Fig. 3B). SynGO analysis also revealed a significant enrichment of additional synaptic proteins in the iNeuron Endo-IP not previously linked with core endosomal functions, including several categories of pre- and postsynaptic subcellular locations, and functional categories (e.g., synaptic organization, signaling, and transport) (Fig. 3 B and C and SI Appendix, Fig. S4 A and B). Further mining of the synaptic proteins revealed numerous proteins linked with synaptic endosomes and synaptic membranes that most likely represent endocytic cargo, featuring diverse transmembrane receptors and adhesion proteins (Fig. 3C).
To further understand the repertoire of candidate cargo in iNeurons, we examined all proteins harboring one or more transmembrane segments which are also annotated as localized in the cell membrane based on Uniprot. We found 504 and 347 of such proteins in iNeurons and SynGO, of which 152 and 70 were also identified in Endo-IP, respectively (Fig. 3D). This indicates that 30% of all PM proteins in iNeurons and 20% of PM proteins with annotated synaptic localization are candidate cargo for endocytosis. We next identified 241 candidate cargo specifically in our Endo-IP in iNeurons, applying the same transmembrane and cell membrane localization criteria (Dataset S2), and further categorized candidate cargo by their annotated domains and protein families (Fig. 3E and SI Appendix, Fig. S4C). Of the 80 candidate cargo containing both an annotated domain and protein family (including 34 in SynGO), more than a dozen types of extracellular domains were represented. These included Ig-like C2-type, fibronectin, EGF-like, and protein kinase domains, found in members of the Nectin, low-density lipid receptor (LDLR), Neurexin, immunoglobulin, and tyrosine protein kinase families of proteins (Fig. 3E). Additionally, 89 further candidate cargo (including 24 in SynGO) with annotations for either a domain or a protein family, including channels, transporters, peptidases, and tetraspanin proteins, were identified (SI Appendix, Fig. S4C). Given the kinetics of protein recycling or degradation upon endocytosis (on the order of minutes), the diversity of proteins identified with Endo-IP enrichment suggests extensive ongoing remodeling of the PM proteome during in vitro neurogenesis.
Matching Candidate Cargo with Sorting Motifs.
Early endosomes function as sites of cargo sorting for recycling to the PM or Golgi and also further mature to late endosomes, whereas cargo destined for turnover are internalized into intralumenal vesicles for subsequent degradation in the lysosome. Retromer and Retriever function as sorting complexes in conjunction with a variety of sorting nexins, including SNX27 and SNX17, respectively. Mutations in the VPS35 subunit of Retromer have been linked with Parkinson’s disease, while mutations in the CCDC22 subunit of Commander (Retriever plus the CCC complex) are found in Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome. To initially examine the relationship between candidate cargo identified in the iNeuron system and known SNX17 and/or SNX27 cargo, we used previously reported datasets to ask to what extent our candidate cargo were among proteins whose abundance on the PM was altered in HeLa cells depleted of SNX17 or SNX27. For this purpose, we employed the 241 proteins in our iNeuron dataset that contained at least one transmembrane domain and that were annotated in Uniprot as being localized in the cell membrane (Dataset S3). The majority (75%) of iNeuron proteins were not previously identified in the SNX17/SNX27 studies, potentially reflecting cell type diversity, while 16 to 21 proteins (6.5 to 8.5%) were common to two or three datasets (Fig. 4A). The finding that many candidate cargo in iNeurons were absent from known cargo led us to examine these proteins for the presence of sorting motifs.
SNX27 uses its PDZ domain to bind [S/T]-x-Φ-C-terminal motifs in cargo (in which Φ represents any hydrophobic residue as the C-terminal residue in the candidate protein). This core interaction is frequently preceded by one or more acidic residues or phosphorylated Ser/Thr residues in a manner that enhances binding. In contrast, SNX17 uses its FERM (4.1/ezrin/radixin/moesin) domain to bind to ΦxNxx[F/Y] and related motifs (where Φ is a hydrophobic amino acid) in cargo. Motif searches revealed 25 and 60 candidate cargo containing potential SNX27 and/or SNX17 interaction motifs, respectively (Fig. 4B). For the 25 SNX27 candidates, we screened their C-termini as 15 amino acid peptides for interaction with the PDZ domain of SNX27 using AF3, within the context of full-length SNX27. In parallel, we screened a set of 47 potential SNX17 cargo that lacked an apparent SNX27 binding motif as controls for AF3 predictions (Fig. 4B). We identified 19 candidate cargo with AF3 ipTM scores >0.6 (Fig. 4C and Dataset S3). In contrast, the majority of control sequences lacking an SNX27 motif had ipTM scores <0.6. Importantly, of the candidate SNX27 cargo that were also identified previously in HeLa cells, the majority had ipTM scores of >0.6 (Fig. 4C). As expected, the motifs identified among the top 10 and bottom 10 AF3 predictions conform to the canonical SNX27 sorting motif (Fig. 4D). Examples of SNX27 PDZ domain-candidate sorting motif predictions for KCNJ6, KCNJ12, NCAM1, and NCAM2 are shown independently and together with the previously determined structure of SNX27 and 5HT4 (PDB 5EM9) (Fig. 4E and SI Appendix, Fig. S5A).
Similarly for candidate SNX17 cargo, a total of 70 potential cargo sorting motifs in 60 candidate proteins were screened by AF3, leading to the identification of 34 candidate SNX17 sorting motifs in 40 proteins with ipTM scores >0.6 (Fig. 4 B and F and Dataset S3). The distribution of ipTM scores for known and previously unidentified candidate cargo were similar, with many known cargo having ipTM scores less than 0.6 (Fig. 4F). As expected, the motif identified for the top scoring cargo fit the consensus for SNX17 FERM binding proteins (Fig. 4G). The predicted structures for several candidate cargo closely matched the previously determined structure for SNX17 and SELP (PDB: 4GXB) (Fig. 4H and SI Appendix, Fig. S5B). Taken together, these data uncovered unique neuronal-specific cargo in human neurons and showcase how Endo-IP can be used to enrich and identify candidate cargo for specific sorting pathways.

INTRODUCTION:
The endolysosomal system plays a critical role in controlling proteome abundance and quality in eukaryotic cells. First, specific plasma membrane (PM) proteins—referred to here as cargo—undergo the process of endocytosis, where they are concentrated into an inwardly budding membrane structure to form an endocytic vesicle, which matures to an endosome. Endosomes coordinate three primary protein trafficking systems: 1) recycling of cargo proteins back to the PM via sorting into recycling endosomes, 2) retrograde transport of cargo proteins to the Golgi, allowing recycling through the secretory pathway, and 3) trafficking into late endosomal intralumenal vesicles via the ESCRT pathway, ultimately leading to cargo degradation upon maturation into fully degradative lysosomes. These mechanisms collaborate to maintain and dynamically modulate the cell surface proteome while also coordinating intracellular signaling of multiple classes of ligand-activated receptors. Second, the endolysosomal system plays a key role in proteome quality control through the process of autophagy. Here, intracellular organelles and proteins are marked for capture within an autophagosome, which then fuse with degradative lysosomes, resulting in degradation of the cargo.
Arguably, among the most demanding settings for spatial control of the endolysosomal system are highly polarized cells such as neurons, which consist of complex dendritic arbors and axons that extend many times the length of the cell body (soma). Regulated abundance of PM proteins controls numerous aspects of neuronal function, ranging from axon guidance to the identity and function of pre- and postsynaptic compartments. The distinct dendritic and axonal cohorts of PM proteins are controlled by the axon initial segment and regulated endocytic degradation. Moreover, organelle quality control via autophagy especially within axons relies on the formation of endolysosomes which mature to form lysosomes that are capable of fusion with autophagosomes distally. Such autolysosomes are subsequently trafficked back to the soma and become sufficiently acidic for support of cargo degradation during transit to the soma. The importance of endolysosomal trafficking for neuronal health is indicated by the number and diversity of genes in the pathway that are risk variants across neurodegenerative diseases, ranging from Parkinson’s to Alzheimer’s diseases, including LRRK2, VPS35, BIN1, and PSEN1/2. Defects in such pathways may alter the location and abundance of critical PM proteins, as demonstrated for the VPS35 pathway.
A current limitation in the dissection of endolysosomal function is the lack of approaches for analysis of specific organelles within the endolysosomal system in neuronal systems. Here, we report the development of a toolkit for profiling a population of early/sorting endosomes, as well as lysosomes, in human ES cell (hESC)-derived cortical-like iNeurons. We target a subpopulation of early endosomes marked by endogenously tagged EEA1 (Early Endosome Antigen 1) protein, which represents one of the earliest populations formed after endocytic vesicle uncoating. EEA1 is a peripheral membrane protein containing a C-terminal FYVE domain that binds phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate, and an N-terminal zinc finger domain that interacts with RAB5. These interactions underly an early endosomal tethering function that facilitates vesicle fusion. In neurons, EEA1 is found in the cell body but can also be found on somatodendritic endosomes as well as on endosomes at the nerve terminal. Given the proximity of this population to uncoating, this “Endo-IP” approach allows detection of the largest repertoire of endocytic cargo, prior to degradation during maturation to lysosomes. Our work revealed broad remodeling of endocytic cargo during in vitro neurogenesis, reflecting programmed expression of a diverse repertoire of PM proteins involved in numerous neuronal functions. In contrast, lysosomes display a much simpler proteome rich in hydrolytic enzymes, reflecting both cargo sorting for retrograde transport or degradation during endolysosomal maturation. We demonstrate that this approach can be used to profile early endosomes dynamics, such as during iNeuron depolarization. Finally, we present a functional landscape of endocytic cargo, as well as a compendium of candidate cargo sorting motifs and structural predictions for two major sorting motifs linked with SNX27-Retromer and SNX17-Retriever. This work provides the tools for mechanistic interrogation of pathways controlling cargo selection and the impact of neurodegenerative disease risk alleles on this process.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Reviewers: P.V.D.C., Yale School of Medicine; and M.L., Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research.
Supporting Information