PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Oxidative phosphorylation; Mitochondria; Mitochondrial ribosome; Quantitative mass spectrometry; Hek293t cells; Gene expression; Label-free; Translation

ABSTRACT:
Mitochondria fullfill central functions in cellular metabolism and energy supply. They express their own genome, which encodes key subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation system. However, central mechanisms underlying mitochondrial gene expression remain enigmatic. A lack of suitable technologies to target mitochondrial protein synthesis in living cells has limited experimental access. Here, we silence the translation of specific mitochondrial mRNAs in living cells by delivering synthetic peptide-morpholino chimeras. This approach allows comprehensive temporal monitoring of cellular responses. Our study provides insights into mitochondrial translation, its integration into cellular physiology, and represents an innovative strategy to address mitochondrial gene expression in living cells. The tools that we present can readily be applied to analyze the mechanisms and pathophysiology of mitochondrial gene expression in a broad range of cellular model systems.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Silencing mitochondrial gene expression in living cells – COX1-KD data

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mitochondria-enriched fractions were prepared from HEK293T COX1-KD cells (treated with COX1 chimera for COX1 gene silencing for 8, 16, 24, 48, and 72 hours) and control cells (4 independent replicates each) as follows: HEK293T cell pellets were resuspended in THE buffer (10 mM HEPES/KOH, 300 mM Trehalose, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM EGTA, pH 7.4) supplemented with 1% BSA and 1 mM PMSF, and incubated for 10 min on ice. The suspensions were homogenized using a teflon-glass homogenizer by strokes at 800 rpm. Cell debris and unbroken cells were removed by centrifugation, first at 400 x g (10 min, 4°C), and then at 800 x g (10 min, 4°C). Mitochondria were collected by centrifugation at 11,000 x g (10 min, 4°C). The supernatants were discarded, and the mitochondrial pellets were washed by resuspension in THE buffer. Sample preparation for LC-MS analysis: Mitochondrial fractions were lysed in urea buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Cysteine residues were reduced and free thiol groups alkylated by incubation with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxy-ethyl)phosphine and 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of dithiothreitol (25 mM final concentration). Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach a urea concentration of 1 M, followed by tryptic protein digestion (overnight, 37°C) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50. Peptide mixtures were desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber et al. 2007, Nature Protocols 2) and analyzed by LC-MS on a Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using MaxQuant/Andromeda (version 2.0.2.0; Tyanova et al. 2016, Nature Protocols 11) and the UniProt human ProteomSet (including isoforms) for peptide and protein identification applying MaxQuant default settings. The option 'match between runs' was enabled. Relative protein quantification was performed using the 'LFQ' algorithm of MaxQuant. The minimum peptide number required for LFQ was set to 1. Missing LFQ intensities were replaced from a normal distribution using Perseus (version 1.6.2.2; Tyanova et al. 2016, Nat. Methods 13), applying a width of 0.3 and a down shift of 2.5. For each time-point, the mean of log2-transformed LFQ intensity ratios (COX1-KD versus control) was determined, and p-values were calculated using a one-sample two-sided Student's t-test.