PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
diseases: Type 1 diabetes mellitus
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Plasma proteomics; Remission; Biomarkers; Type 1 diabetes

ABSTRACT:
Partial remission (PR) occurs in only half of patients with new-onset type 1 diabetes (T1D) and correspond to a transient period characterized by low daily insulin needs, low glycemic fluctuations and increased endogenous insulin secretion. While identification of newly-onset T1D patients with significant residual beta-cell function may foster patient-specific interventions, reliable predictive biomarkers of PR occurrence currently lack. We analyzed the plasma of children with new-onset T1D to identify biomarkers present at diagnosis that predicted PR at 3 months post-diagnosis. We first performed an extensive shotgun proteomic analysis using Liquid Chromatography-Tandem-Mass-Spectrometry (LCMS/MS) on the plasma of 16 children with new-onset T1D and quantified nearly 1500 unique proteins with 98 significantly correlating with Insulin-Dose Adjusted glycated hemoglobin A1c score (IDAA1C). We next applied a series of both qualitative and statistical filters that yielded to the selection of 26 protein candidates that were associated to pathophysiological mechanisms related to T1D. Finally, we translationally validated several of the candidates using single-shot targeted proteomic (PRM method) on raw plasma. Taken together, we identified plasmatic biomarkers present at diagnosis that may predict the occurrence of PR in a single mass-spectrometry run. We believe that the identification of new predictive biomarkers of PR and β-cell function is key to stratify patients with new-onset T1D for β-cell preservation therapies

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Plasma proteomics in children with new-onset type 1 diabetes: a strong tool to identify partial remission biomarkers

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
All samples were prepared in parallel and with the same batch of reagents. Plasma samples were thawed on ice before being centrifuged for 15 min at 14.000 g to remove impurities. Plasma (1 mL) from each patient was depleted using ProteoMinerTM Protein Enrichment Kit (Bio-Rad) according to the manufacturer’s instructions 28. We performed a volume-based normalizing method on the input as (1) human plasmatic proteins remain in a tight concentration range 29 and (2) translation of the method to the clinic will be easier. ProteominerTM beads were washed three times before being eluted defining the eluate fraction. The eluate was collected and proteins were quantified using the Bradford method 30. The depleted proteins (i.e., 250 µg) were further reduced and alkylated in low-bind Eppendorf tubes (Eppendorf LoBind) as previously described 31, before undergoing cold acetone precipitation overnight (i.e., -20°C, 4:1 volume). Proteins were washed twice using cold acetone, resuspended in 50 mM TEAB and digested overnight using trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI) at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:100 (37°C under 750 rpm continuous agitation).  The resulting peptides were quantified using PierceTM kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides from each patient (100 µg per patient) were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT, TMTproTM16plex, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples from all 16 patients were pooled in one final sample that was washed on a C18 column (HyperSepTM 200 mg, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) to remove the excess TMT labeling and improve further analysis (i.e. reducing the background noise).  To further decrease the complexity of the proteome, we fractionated off-line by HPLC the pooled labelled sample into 51 different fractions using hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) 32,33. These were pooled two by two (i.e., 1+26, 2+27, …25+51) to reduce the number of samples while maintaining distinct hydrophilic characteristics, resulting in a total of 25 fractions  One µg of peptides dissolved in solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN) was directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA ) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was achieved using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 × 250 mm, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with a 140 min linear gradient of 4%–32% solvent B (0.1% TFA in 80% ACN) for 99 min, 32%–60% solvent B for 10 min, 60%–95% for 1 min and holding at 95% for the last 10 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Vienna, Austria). The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with enabled advanced peak determination (APD) and relative quantification was allowed by either MS2 or SPS MS3 scans. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 with a scan range m/z from 375 to 1500 and an AGC target of 4x105, maximum injection time was set to 50 msec. A data-dependent procedure of MS/MS scans was applied for the top precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 5×103 in the MS survey scan with 60 sec dynamic exclusion. The total cycle time was set to 3 sec. For MS2 identification of peptide sequence and quantification of the TMT reporter ions, MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 after HCD fragmentation at 35% with an AGC target of 1×105 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 msec. For MS3 quantification, MS2 spectra for identification were first acquired in the Ion Trap after CID fragmentation at 30%, for quantification 10 precursors from the MS2 scan were synchronously selected (SPS MS3) for HCD fragmentation at 55%, and the MS3 spectra was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 with an AGC of 2x105 and a maximum injection time of 120ms. MS/MS spectra were exported using the following settings: peptide mass range: 350–5000 Da, minimal total ion intensity: 500.

DATA PROCESSING:
For protein identification, MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 against a human protein reference target-decoy database obtained from Uniprot. Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide, and up to 3 charges. Relative quantification of proteins was performed according to the signal of the TMT reporter’s ions in MS2 or MS3 spectra. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at less than 1%. Statistical analysis was performed according to remission status All statistical analyses were performed with R (R Core Team [2021]. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL [https://www.R-project.org/]) including principal component analysis (PCA), volcano plots, linear mixed models and enrichment analysis. Preprocessed data (see above) were log-transformed, centered, and scaled to achieve a normal distribution. Influences of various cofactors (i.e., gender, puberty status, center, manipulation operator) were manually visualized on PCA plots. Protein abundance differences according to remission status at +3 months were analyzed both as a categorical (i.e., remitters vs non-remitters) or a continuous variable (i.e., IDAA1C score) using linear mixed models using statistical R package Limma 34. Models included the remission status or IDAA1C score as fixed effects, and patient gender and pubertal status as a random intercept. Residuals were visualized on Q-Q plots. The level of significance was considered as p value below 0.05 for every analysis