PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Spleen; Pancreas
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex reporter+balance reagent acylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Orbitrap fusion lumos; Mus musculus; Absolute proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Metabolic efficiency profoundly influences organismal fitness. Heterotrophs, from yeast to mammals, derive usable energy primarily through glycolysis and respiration. While respiration is more energy-efficient, some cells favor glycolysis even when oxygen is available (aerobic glycolysis, Warburg effect). A leading explanation is that glycolysis is more efficient in terms of ATP production per unit mass of protein (i.e. faster). Through quantitative flux analysis and proteomics, we find however that mitochondrial respiration is actually more proteome-efficient than aerobic glycolysis. This is shown across yeasts, T cells, cancer cells, and tissues and tumors in vivo. Instead of aerobic glycolysis being valuable for fast ATP production, it correlates with high glycolytic protein expression, which is valuable for hypoxic growth. Aerobic glycolytic yeasts do not excel at aerobic growth, but outgrow respiratory cells in oxygen limitation. Thus, aerobic glycolysis emerges from cells maintaining a proteome conducive to both aerobic and hypoxic growth.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mitochondrial ATP generation is more proteome efficient than glycolysis (M. musculus)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteomics samples were prepared as previously described with modification (Johnson et al. 2021). Yeast pellet equivalent to 20mL OD600 = 1 was grounded by a cryomill (Retsch, Newtown, PA) at 25Hz for 10min and lysed in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 4% SDS, and 1 mM DTT. Protein concentrations were determined in the supernatant of the lysate by BCA assay (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific), and 300 μg protein were aliquoted and spiked with 2.5 μg of UPS2 Dynamic Range Standard (Sigma). The sample was then reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 20 min at 60 °C and alkylated with 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide for 20 min at room temperature. 5 mM dithiothreitol was added to quench the excessive alkylating reagents. Proteins were purified by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The dried pellet was resuspended in 10 mM EPPS (N-(2-Hydroxyethyl)piperazine-N’-(3-propanesulfonic acid, pH 8.5) with 6 M guanidine hydrochloride). Samples were heated at 60 °C for 15 minutes, and the protein mixture was diluted 3-fold with 10 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). Then, the protein mixture was digested with 6 μg LysC (Wako) overnight at room temperature. Samples were further diluted 4-fold with 10 mM EPPS (pH 8.5) and digested with an additional 20 ng/μL LysC and 10 ng/μL sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega) at 37 °C for 16 hours. For samples with limited protein amount, proteins were precipitated following reduction and alkylation using the SP3 method as previously described (Hughes et al. 2019). After binding and washing the bead-bound protein, the protein-containing beads were resuspended in 2M guanidine hydrochloride and digested with LysC and trypsin in two steps as above. After precipitation in both methods, the peptide supernatant was cleared by ultracentrifugation at 100,000 rcf for 1 hour at 4 °C (Beckman Coulter, 343775), and then vacuum-dried. The dried peptides were resuspended and desalted using homemade stage tips with C18 material (Empore). The samples were resuspended in 1% formic acid to 1 μg/μL before LC-MS analysis. For TMT labeling, pre-mixed TMTpro tags (18-plex, Thermo Scientific, 20 μg/μL in dry acetonitrile stored at -80 °C) were added at a 5 μg TMTpro:1 μg peptide ratio to 20 μg of digested peptide supernatant, mixed, and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours. The reaction was then quenched by addition of 5 μL of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma, HPLC grade) at room temperature for 30 minutes. The resulting mixture was vacuum-dried, desalted, and resuspended as before for LC-MS analysis. For label-free quantification, one replicate of each yeast strain was also analyzed after prefractionation to detect a larger number of peptides. Specifically, prior to LC-MS analysis, the dried peptides were resuspended in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8) with 5% acetonitrile to a peptide concentration of 1 μg/uL. The dissolved peptides were separated into 96 fractions using a medium pH reverse phase separation (Zorbax 300Extend C18, 4.6 x 250 mm column) on a 1260 Infinity II LC system (Agilent) as described previously (Johnson et al. 2021). Each resulting 96-well plate was combined into 24 fractions (Edwards and Haas 2016), and each fraction was desalted and resuspended for LC-MS analysis as above. Samples were analyzed on an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Tune version 3.3. Peptides were separated on an Aurora Series emitter column (25 cm × 75 μm ID, 1.6 μm C18) (Ionopticks, Australia) and held at 60°C using an in-house built column oven. Solvent A consisted of 2% DMSO (LC-MS grade, Life Technologies), 0.125% formic acid (98%+, TCI America) in water (LC-MS grade, OmniSolv, VWR), solvent B of 80% acetonitrile (LC-MS grade, OmniSolv, Millipore Sigma), 2% DMSO and 0.125% formic acid in water. The following 90 min-gradient was applied at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min after thorough equilibration of the column to 0% B: 0% – 6%B in 5 min; 6 – 25%B for 70 min; 25% – 100% for 10 min; 100% for 5 min. For electrospray ionization, 2.6 kV were applied between 1min and 83min of the LC gradient. The Fusion Lumos was operated in data dependent mode. The survey scan was performed at a resolution setting of 120k in orbitrap, followed by MS2 duty cycle of 1.5 s. The normalized collision energy for CID MS2 experiments was set to 30%, and the HCD collision energy was set at 24%. The ion trap detector was used for MS2 scans of label-free and TMTproC samples. An orbitrap detector was used for MS3 scans of 18plex samples. To avoid carry-over of peptides, 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (>99% Reagent plus, Millipore Sigma) was injected in a 30 min wash between each sample. For fractionated samples, this wash was performed between every 3 fractions from the same original sample.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data was analyzed using GFY software licensed from Harvard University. Raw files were converted to mzXML using ReAdW.exe. MS2 spectra assignment was performed using the SEQUEST algorithm v.28 (rev. 12) by searching the data against the combined reference proteomes for S. cerevisiae (S288C: UP000002311,  2/24/2021; CEN.PK, UP000013192, 8/20/2021) and I. orientalis (UP000029867, 11/13/2019) acquired from Uniprot merged with the UPS2 Proteomics Standards FASTA file (https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/deepweb/assets/sigmaaldrich/marketing/global/fasta-files/ups1-ups2-sequences.fasta) along with common contaminants such as human keratins and trypsin. The target-decoy strategy was used to estimate the peptide false discovery rate (FDR) (Elias et al. 2007), and 1% FDR cutoff was used for MS2 spectral assignment. A 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance with the requirement that both N- and C- terminal peptide ends are consistent with the protease specificities of LysC and Trypsin was used for SEQUEST searches. One missed cleavage was allowed, and NEM was set as a static modification of cysteine residues (+125.047679 Da). Fragment ion tolerance in the MS2 spectrum was set at 1 Th. Filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis with the following features: Sequest parameters XCorr and unique ΔXCorr, peptide length, missed cleavages, adjusted PPM, fraction of ions matched, and charge state. Forward peptides within three standard deviations of the theoretical m/z of the precursor were used as positive training set. All reverse peptides were used as negative training set. Linear Discriminant scores were used to sort peptides with at least seven residues and to filter with the desired cutoff. Furthermore, we performed a filtering step on the protein level by the “picked” protein FDR approach (Savitski et al. 2015). Protein redundancy was removed by assigning peptides to the minimal number of proteins which can explain all observed peptide, with above-described filtering criteria (Chvatal 1979).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Metabolic efficiency profoundly influences organismal fitness. Nonphotosynthetic organisms, from yeast to mammals, derive usable energy primarily through glycolysis and respiration. Although respiration is more energy efficient, some cells favor glycolysis even when oxygen is available (aerobic glycolysis, Warburg effect). A leading explanation is that glycolysis is more efficient in terms of ATP production per unit mass of protein (that is, faster). Through quantitative flux analysis and proteomics, we find, however, that mitochondrial respiration is actually more proteome efficient than aerobic glycolysis. This is shown across yeast strains, T cells, cancer cells, and tissues and tumors in vivo. Instead of aerobic glycolysis being valuable for fast ATP production, it correlates with high glycolytic protein expression, which promotes hypoxic growth. Aerobic glycolytic yeasts do not excel at aerobic growth but outgrow respiratory cells during oxygen limitation. We accordingly propose that aerobic glycolysis emerges from cells maintaining a proteome conducive to both aerobic and hypoxic growth.