PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Aspc-1 cell; Pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line; Pancreatic duct
diseases: Pancreatic cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Mitochondria; Slc25a45; Methylated basic amino acids

ABSTRACT:
Methylated amino acids accumulate upon the degradation of methylated proteins and are implicated in diverse metabolic and  signalling pathways. Dimethylarginine inhibits nitric oxide synthase while trimethyllysine is metabolised in a  compartmentalised manner to produce the amino acid derivative carnitine. Consequently, disturbed methylated amino acid  homeostasis is associated with various disorders including cardiovascular disease and renal failure. Mitochondria are core  processing hubs in conventional amino acid metabolism but how they interact with methylated amino acids is unclear. Here, we  reveal that the orphan mitochondrial solute carrier SLC25A45 is required for the mitochondrial uptake of dimethylarginine and  trimethyllysine. Characterisation of SLC25A45 identified a non-synonymous mutation of SLC25A45 near its C-terminus (R285C) that  impacts solute carrier stability and associates with altered plasma methylated amino acid levels and cardiac alterations in  men. Metabolic tracing of trimethyllysine reveals that SLC25A45 is essential for the de novo biosynthesis of carnitine.  Suppression of SLC25A45 reduces intracellular acetylcarnitine levels and limits histone acetylation in carnitine-synthesising  ovarian cancer cells. We propose that SLC25A45 is an essential mediator of compartmentalised methylated amino acid metabolism  with diverse cellular roles that include epigenetic control.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
SLC25A45 is required for mitochondrial uptake of methylated basic amino acids and de novo carnitine biosynthesis (Part 2 =  Interactome AP-MS Analysis)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample preparation for Proteome analysis Proteins were reduced with 10mM DTT and subsequently alkylated in the dark with 55 mM Iodoacetamide, both reactions were  carried out at room temperature. Alkylated proteins were precipitated adding 4 volumes of Acetone at -20°C overnight. Washed  pellets were reconstituted in 50 µl of HEPES 200 mM and digested first with Endoproteinase Lys-C (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate) for  one hour, followed by a trypsin, overnight (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate). The details of the sample preparation are in a  manuscript in preparation from SL and SZ. The digested peptides from each experiment were differentially labelled using TMT10-plex reagent (Thermo Scientific). Each  sample was labelled with 0.1 mg of TMT reagent dissolved in 50 μl of 100% anhydrous acetonitrile. The reaction was carried out  at room temperature for 2 hours. Fully labelled Samples were mixed in equal amount and desalted using a 50 mg Sep Pak C18  reverse phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm i.d. - Kinetex  EVO (5 μm, 100 Å)) on a HPLC system (Agilent, LC 1260 Infinity II, Agilent). A two-step gradient was applied, from 1–28% B in  42 min, then from 28–46% B in 13 min to obtain a total of 21 fractions for MS analysis.  Sample preparation for Immunoprecipitation-Mass Spectrometry (IP-MS)  Flag-IP beads were resuspended in a 2M Urea and 100mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and stored at -20oC. On-bead digestion was  performed from the supernatants. Three biological replicates were digested with Lys-C (Alpha Laboratories) and trypsin  (Promega) on beads as previously described (Hubner, N.C. et al. J Cell Biol - 2010) and desalted using StageTip.   UHPLC-MS/MS analysis Peptides resulting from all samples were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II  1200 (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) for proteome samples, or to an Orbitrap  Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) for the IP-MS samples. Elution was carried out at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using a binary  gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded with  6 µl of buffer A into a 50 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr  Maisch GmbH). For both systems the packed emitter was kept at 50 °C by means of a column oven (Sonation) integrated into the  nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific), and the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific) was used for data acquisition. MS conditions for Proteome samples  MS conditions for Proteome samples Peptides were eluted using different gradients optimised for three sets of fractions: 1–7, 8–15, and 16–21. Each fraction was  acquired for a duration of 190 minutes. A full scan over mass range of 375–1400 m/z was acquired at 60,000 resolution at 200  m/z, with a target value of 3e6 ions for a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Higher energy collisional dissociation  fragmentation was performed on the 20 most intense ions selected within an isolation window of 0.8 m/z. Peptide fragments were  analysed in the Orbitrap at 45,000 resolution.  MS conditions for IP-MS samples Samples from each IP-MS replicate were acquired for a total duration of 135 minutes. A full scan was measured at a resolution  of 60000 at 200 m/z, over mass range of 350-1400 m/z. Fragmentation was triggered for the most intense ions detected in the  full scan and performed over a 3 sec cycle time. Ions were selected in the quadrupole, fragmented in the ion routing multipole,  and finally analysed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z. Ions were accumulated for a maximum time of 100 ms,  or when the normalised AGC target reach 150%. Ions that have been already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded  for 25 sec.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.6.14.0 (Proteome) or 2.3.5.0 (IP-MS) and searched with  Andromeda against Homo sapiens database(42,438 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances  of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids and  specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. The peptide, protein, and site false  discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %. Modification by iodoacetamide on Cysteine residues (Carbamidomethylation) were specified  as fixed, whereas Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation modifications were specified as variable. For the proteome  analysis, MaxQuant was set to quantify on “Reporter ion MS2”, and TMT10plex was chose as Isobaric label. Interference between  TMT channels were corrected by MaxQuant using the correction factors provided by the manufacturer. The “Filter by PIF” option  was activated and a “Reporter ion tolerance” of 0.003 Da was used. For the IP-MS experiment, protein abundance was measured  using the label-free quantification algorithm available in MaxQuant.  From both experiments, the proteinGroups.txt file from MaxQuant output was used for protein quantitation analysis using Perseus  software version 1.6.15.0. The “Reverse”, “Potential Contaminants” and “Only identified by site” protein, as specified in  MaxQuant, were removed, as well as protein groups identified with no unique peptides. Only proteins robustly quantified in all  replicates in at least one group, were allowed in the list of quantified proteins. Significantly enriched proteins were  selected using a permutation-based Student’s t-test with FDR set at 5%.