PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Nampt; nnmt; metastatic melanoma; resistance; extracellular vesicles; secretome; signaling; tumor microenvironment

ABSTRACT:
Drugs targeting mutant oncogenes are effective, even though resistance rapidly develops. This complex picture includes acquired intrinsic tumor and tumor microenvironmental -mediated mechanisms. Here we showed that melanoma cells resistant to BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) overexpressed the rate limiting enzymes involved in nicotinamide (NAM) metabolism nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) and nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT).  Importantly, NAMPT and NNMT are released by these cells, both in the free-form or loaded in extracellular vesicles (EVs). NAMPT is emerging as mediator of BRAFi resistance in melanoma, but to date mainly associated with its role as main NAD-biosynthetic enzyme. It had been previously identified as soluble factor, but never in EVs released from melanoma cells, which highlights an impact on the tumor microenvironment (TME). NNMT was revealed increased in melanoma compared to benign nevi, however we showed for the first time its overexpression in resistant cells at intracellular and extracellular levels (present in secretome and in EVs). NNMT increased in BRAF-mutated patients linking its expression with the BRAF oncogenic signaling and correlates positively with pro-inflammatory signaling, immune cell migration and chemokine-mediated signaling pathways opening to a future deeper exploration of its functional role. Lastly, we proposed a tetrameric NNMT:TLR4 binding model offering a plausible structural and mechanistic basis for their association. Overall, the identification of NAMPT and, surprisingly also NNMT, included in EVs and abundantly released from resistant melanoma cells supports the impact of these moonlighting proteins involved in nicotinamide metabolism as mediators of BRAF/MEK inhibitors resistance with tumor intrinsic and potentially tumor microenvironment-mediated mechanisms. Interfering with nicotinamide metabolism could be a valid strategy to counteract drug resistance acting on the multifactorial tumor-host interactions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
NAMPT and NNMT released via extracellular vesicles and as soluble mediators are distinguished traits of BRAF inhibitor resistance of melanoma cells impacting on the tumor microenvironment

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Isolated EVs were lysed in RIPA buffer for 30 minutes at 4 °C. Samples were then adjusted to a final concentration of 1% SDS, 50 mM HEPES, and benzonase (250 U/mL), and sonicated at 4 °C for 10 minutes using a Q700 Sonicator (30 seconds on/off cycles, amplitude 35). For secretome analysis, FBS-free media were collected, centrifuged at 2000×g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, and filtered through a 0.2 µm filter to ensure the removal of any dead cells. Secreted proteins in the culture medium were precipitated using the well-established TCA-DOC method. The resulting pellets were washed, air-dried, and dissolved in 2% SDS and 100 mM HEPES. Total protein content in EV lysates and secretome samples was assessed using the BCA assay. Subsequently, EV and secretome samples (20 μg) were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 56 °C and alkylated with 22.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed using a 1:1 ratio of magnetic carboxylate-modified beads (GE Healthcare). Briefly, washed beads were added to the samples at a ratio of 10 µg of beads per 1 µg of protein. Acetonitrile (ACN) was then added to reach a final concentration of 70% (v/v), and samples were mixed at room temperature for 18 minutes. Supernatants were discarded, and the beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with ACN (200 µL each). Beads were resuspended in 45 μL of 50 mM NH₄HCO₃ and 5 mM CaCl₂, supplemented with 1 µg of trypsin. Following overnight digestion at 37 °C, peptides were collected using a magnetic rack. Beads were washed with 15 µL of NH₄HCO₃, and the supernatant was pooled with the previously collected digest. For peptide cleanup, samples were processed using the SP2 method. Peptide mixtures were bound to magnetic carboxylate-modified beads (GE Healthcare) in a 1:15 ratio by adding one volume of ACN, then washed twice with 100% ACN. After drying, peptides were eluted using 2% ACN in water, acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  Peptide separation was performed using an Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 30 cm-long C18 column with an integrated electrospray emitter (CoAnn Technologies, ID 75 µm, 1.7 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, Richland, WA, USA), maintained at 40 °C. The flow rate was set to 200 nL/min. A two-component mobile phase system was used, consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (buffer B). Peptides were eluted with a gradient from 5% to 25% buffer B over 52 minutes, from 25% to 40% over 8 minutes, and from 40% to 98% over 10 minutes. Peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode. Full MS scans were acquired at a resolving power of 120,000 FWHM (2100 V), across a mass range of 350–1200 m/z, with an AGC target of 1 × 10⁶ ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Each full scan was followed by HCD MS/MS scans in a 3-second cycle, using a normalized collision energy of 27%. Fragment ions were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer with an AGC target of 5 × 10⁴ ions and a maximum injection time of 150 ms. The ion transfer tube temperature was set to 200 °C. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 40 seconds with a mass tolerance of ±5 ppm. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.3 and Tune 3.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Instrument performance was monitored throughout the project using QCloud (57), with regular quality control standards. Proteomic data were searched against an in-silico digested UniProt Mus musculus database (downloaded January 2024), including common contaminants and reversed decoy sequences. Protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer v2.2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the MASCOT search engine (v2.6.2, MatrixScience, London, UK). Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da. Trypsin/P was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, allowing up to 5 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a static modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were included as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of <1% was applied at both peptide and protein levels. Identified contaminants were filtered out from the final dataset.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS downstream analysis was performed using the ProTN proteomics pipeline (www.github.com/TebaldiLab/ProTN and www.rdds.it/ProTN). In summary, peptide intensities were log2 transformed, normalized (median normalization) and summarized into proteins (median sweeping) with functions in the DEqMS Bioconductor package (58). Imputation of the missing intensities was executed by the PhosR package. Differential analysis was performed with the DEqMS package, proteins with absolute log2 FC > 0.75 and P-value < 0.05 were considered significant. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed proteins was performed with ClusterProfiler function EnrichGO and using Enrichr https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/ and https://appyters.maayanlab.cloud/Enrichment_Analysis_Visualizer ref Enriched terms with p-value lower than 0.05 were considered significant.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
TCGA and CCLE analysis
Genomic data shown in this paper are in whole or part based upon data generated by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research Network and The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE).
The association between NAMPT and NNMT expression was evaluated using gene expression data for cutaneous melanoma cohort of patients (TCGA-SKCM) and melanoma cell lines selected from a CCLE dataset based on clinical annotations (In particular, cell lines with primary_disease “Skin Cancer” and Subtype containing the term “Melanoma” were considered). For TCGA data, normalized RNA-Seq data (DESeq2), transformed into log2(normalized counts + 1) were plotted for NAMPT and NNMT genes. Both the non-parametric Spearman correlation and the Pearson test were applied to the entire cohort. Statistical significance was assessed using cor.test, and results were visualized with scatter plots including a linear regression line (ggplot2), reporting the Spearman’s rho coefficient, Pearson’s r coefficient, and corresponding p-values. For CCLE dataset expression data for NAMPT and NNMT were extracted, and both parametric (Pearson) and nonparametric (Spearman) correlation analyses were performed for NAMPT-NNMT pair. The results were represented by a scatter plot with a linear regression line. The coefficient (R) and associated p-value were reported for each correlation.
NNMT association with BRAF mutations
Somatic mutations in the BRAF gene were extracted from TCGA-SKCM Masked Somatic Mutation (MAF) files, including all annotated variants (missense, synonymous, nonsense) without filtering for functional impact. Patients were classified as “Mutated” if at least one BRAF mutation was detected in any sample (primary or metastatic).
NNMT expression (log2(normalized counts + 1)) was compared between BRAF-mutated and wild-type groups using the non-parametric Wilcoxon test. Data distributions were visualized using violin plots generated with ggplot2, reporting the p-value for statistical significance.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
RNA-Seq gene expression data for cutaneous melanoma (TCGA-SKCM) were retrieved using the TCGAbiolinks package, selecting samples classified as “Primary Tumor” and “Metastatic.” Raw data were preprocessed by filtering out low-expression genes (counts > 1 in at least 20% of the samples) and normalized using the median of ratios method in DESeq2. Samples were then stratified into two groups (NNMT_high and NNMT_low) based on the median NNMT expression.
Differential expression analysis was performed using DESeq2 with the design ~ NNMT_group. Genes with an FDR-adjusted p-value < 0.05 were used for Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), focusing on biological processes from Gene Ontology (GO). The analysis was conducted using clusterProfiler, filtering for FDR < 0.05 and selecting terms related to selected categories as shown in the results. Results were visualized using enrichplot and ggplot2.
Cell culture
M14, A375 an SK-MEL-28 BRAFV600E-mutated melanoma cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 (Corning Inc., Cat #10-040-CV, Corning, NY, USA) and DMEM (Corning Inc., 10-013-CV) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS, Capricorn Scientific, FBS-11 A, #CP21-4466, Ebsdorfergrund, Germany), 1% MEM Non-Essential Amino Acids Solution (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, #11140035, Segrate, MI, Italy), 1% MEM Vitamin Solution (Gibco, #11120037), 10 mM HEPES Buffer Solution (Capricorn scientific, HEP-B, #CP24-7334), Sodium pyruvate solution 100 mM (Capricorn scientific, NPY-B, #CP23-6474) and 1% Gentamycin (Gibco, #15750-037). Cells were maintained in these culture conditions for all experiments except where specifically indicated. All cell lines were routinely tested for Mycoplasma contamination. During the generation of BRAFi resistance as described in, parental cell lines were exposed to increased concentrations of the (Dabrafenib or Vemurafenib). Cells were considered fully resistant when they could grow in the presence of 1.6 µM of BRAFi.
THP-1 cell line was provided by Prof. Nadia Raffaelli (Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy), and cultured in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% FBS, following the manufacturer’s instructions.
RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCR (qRT‐PCR)
RNA was isolated from cells using NucleoSpin® RNA (Macherey-Nagel, #FC140955N, Düren, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and quantified using kit/Qubit (Qubit™ RNA BR Assay Kits #Q10210, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
RNA was converted to cDNA using the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 4368814). qRT-PCR was performed using the CFX384 (Bio-Rad Laboratories Srl, Segrate MI, Italy) Real-time System using commercially available primers [TaqMan Gene Expression Assays (Thermo Fisher Scientific): Hs00237184_m1 (NAMPT), Hs00196287_m1 (NNMT) and Hs99999903_m1 (ACTB, used as housekeeping gene)]. Comparative CT methods was used to calculate the relative expression of the gene under analysis.
Western blot analysis
Cells were lysed with cold lysis buffer (HEPES 20 mM, NaCl 150 mM; 1mM EGTA; phenylarsine oxide 50 µM) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 50 mM NaF, 1X complete Protease Inhibitors Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich S.r.l., #P8340-5ML Milan, Italy), 10 mM iodo-acetamide and 1% NP-40. Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and protein concentration was measured using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, #5000006). Lysates were diluted in Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad, #161–0747) and boiled for 5 min at 95 °C. Equal amounts of proteins were loaded on 4–20% Mini- PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gels (Bio-Rad, #4568084) and transferred to Nitrocellulose Transfer Membrane (Trans-Blot Turbo RTA Midi 0.2 μm Nitrocellulose Transfer Kit, for 40 blots #1704271). Membranes were blocked in 5% non-fat dry milk (SERVA Electrophoresis GmbH, #42590.01, Heidelberg, Germany) in Tris-buffer saline, 0.1% Tween20 (ITW Reagents S.R.L., #A4974,0500, Monza, MB, Italy) and incubated with the indicated antibodies following the manufacturer’s instructions. The following antibodies were used: NAMPT (Bethyl Laboratories, #A300-779 A, Montgomery, Texas, USA); NNMT #E6N22 and Phospho-NF-κB p65 (Ser536) #3033 (both from Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, Massachusetts, USA; and OriGene Technologies, #TA502624, Rockville, MD, USA); TSG101 #GTX70255 and Vimentin #GTX100619 (both from GeneTex, Irvine, CA, USA); CD9 ab236630; Calnexin ab22595 and Syntenin ab133267 (all from Abcam, Cambridge, UK); β-Actin sc-47,778, TLR4 sc-293,072, Vinculin-HRP sc-73,614 and NF-κB-p65 sc-8008 (all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA).
Secondary Abs were mouse anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-2357); Peroxidase AffiniPure goat Anti-Rabbit IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch West Grove, Pennsylvania, USA, #111-035-003), mouse-IgGκ BP-HRP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-516102) and Peroxidase AffiniPure goat Anti-Mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch, 115-005-003).
Western blot chemioluminescence reactions were visualized with ECL (Clarity Western ECL Substrate, Bio-Rad, #170–5060) using iBright™ CL1500 Imaging System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or the ChemiDoc XRS imaging systems (Bio-Rad). Densitometric analyses performed using Bio-Rad Image lab software 6.1 version and iBright Analysis Software V5.3.0. Total proteins were normalized over actin or calnexin levels.
Confocal microscopy
A375 and M14 (S and BiR) cell lines were seeded in a 96-well cell carrier plate (PerkinElmer), and fixed and permeabilized the day after with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 12 min, and 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min, respectively, always at room temperature. Following incubation with blocking solution (3% BSA in PBS) for 30 min, cells were incubated with the primary antibodies for 2 h. The primary antibodies used were: Anti-NNMT (OriGene, #TA502624, 1:250) and Goat Anti-Mouse AF467 (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific, #A-21235, 1:500).
Hoechst (Invitrogen, H1399; 1.5 µg/ml) in PBS + BSA 0.6% was used to detect nuclei. Fluorescence images were acquired using the PerkinElmer image plate reader Operetta and evaluated using the Harmony 3.5.2 software. For each well, images were acquired in seven preselected fields of view with a 10× objective over two channels: blue [fluorescence excitation (λEx), 377/54 nm; fluorescence emission (λEm), 432/36 nm] and far red (λEx, 635/22 nm; λEm, 692/40 nm). Three biological replicates were acquired.
Preparation of culture supernatants (SN) for eNNMT quantification and secretome analysis
2,5 million MM cells (M14, A375 and SKMEL-28 in S and BiR variant) were seeded in 10 cm culture dishes. After 48 h, cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated for additional 24 h with FBS-deprived medium. The collected media was centrifuged at 2,800 rcf for 15 min to eliminate cell debris and larger cellular-derived particles. The culture supernatant (SN) was then concentrated 10x using Amicon Ultra − 0.5 ml Centrifugal Filters cutoff 10 kDa (Ultracel, UFC501024, Merk Life Science S.r.l., Milan, Italy). The collected 50ul of 10x SN, resuspended in Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad, #161–0747) and boiled for 5 min at 95 °C, was loaded in SDS-PAGE followed by western blot analysis to evaluate eNNMT (same Abs used for lysates). The intensity of the bands corresponding to eNNMT was normalized over the protein concentration (µg/µl) of specific samples.
The SNs (FBS free-media) for secretome MS-analysis were collected, centrifuged at 2000 × g at 4 °C for 10 min and filtered through a 0.2 μm filter to ensure the removal of any dead cells and then ultracentrifuged at 100,000 x g for 70 min at 4 °C to eliminate extracellular vesicles (EVs) and subsequent processed for proteomic analysis as described below.
In a set of experiments, we treated or not SNs from A375 and SK-MEL-28 BiR variants with 100 ng/ml of Proteinase K (ProK, EO0491, Thermo Fisher) for 1 h at 37 °C after ultracentrifugation (100,000 x g for 70 min at 4 °C). Collected SNs were concentrated 10X using Amicon Ultra − 0.5 ml Centrifugal Filters cutoff 10 kDa, as previously described. ProK digestion degrades the free-soluble proteins (Vimentin was used as positive control) while leaving almost unaffected the exosomes’ integrity (Syntenin was used as exosome control).
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) isolation
For EVs isolation, 2,5 million of MM cells (M14 and A375 in S and BiR variant) were seeded in 10 cm culture dishes. After 48 h, cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated for additional 24 h with FBS-deprived medium. The collected media was centrifuged at 2,800 rcf for 15 min to eliminate cell debris and larger cellular-derived particles. The supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 rcf for 70 min at 4 °C in an Optima XE-90 ultracentrifuge with a SW 32 Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter). Finally, the supernatant was kept at -80 °C until further processing, while the EVs pellet was resuspended in 0.22 μm-filtered sterile PBS and stored at 4 °C.
EVs characterization and quantification
Particle size distribution and concentration were determined by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) with NanoSight NS300 (Malvern Panalytical, Malvern, UK). Individual samples were recorded in 3–5 consecutive 1-minute videos at camera level 15, gain 1, and analyzed with NTA 3.4 Build 3.4.003 (Malvern Panalytical), setting 4 as a detection threshold. The quality of isolated particles was also assessed by western blot analysis using dedicated markers (see specific Abs used in the western blot analysis section).
Proteomics analysis
Sample Preparation
Isolated EVs were lysed in RIPA buffer for 30 min at 4°C. Samples were adjusted to a final concentration of 1% SDS, 50 mM HEPES, benzonase 250U/ml, and sonicated at 4°C for 10 min using a Q700 Sonicator (30’’ on and 30’’ off, amplitude 35).
For secretome analysis, the secreted proteins in the culture media were precipitated by well-established TCA-DOC method. The washed pellets were air-dried and dissolved in 2% SDS, 100 mM HEPES.
The total protein content EV lysates and secretome samples was assessed using a BCA assay. Afterward, EVs and secretome samples (20 µg) were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated for 30 min using 22.5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature. Protein digestion was performed using a 1:1 ratio of magnetic carboxylate-modified beads (GE Healthcare) as described before. Briefly, washed beads were added to the samples in a ratio of 10 µg of beads to 1 µg of protein. Afterward, acetonitrile (ACN) was added to a final concentration of 70% (v/v), and samples were mixed at room temperature for 18 min. Supernatants were removed, and beads were washed twice with 70% ethanol and once with ACN (200 µl each). Beads were then resuspended in 45 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 5 mM CaCl2 supplemented with one µg of trypsin. After overnight digestion at 37 °C, the peptide mixture was collected by incubation on a magnetic rack. The beads were then washed with 15 µl of NH4HCO3, and the supernatant was pooled with the previously collected. For peptide cleanup, samples were processed using SP2 method. Peptide mixtures were bound to magnetic carboxylate-modified beads (GE Healthcare) in a ratio of 1:15 by the addition of one volume of acetonitrile and washed twice with 100% acetonitrile. After drying, elution was performed using 2% ACN in water. Peptides were then acidified at a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and stored at -20° C for further processing.
nLC‑MS/MS analysis
An Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 30 cm long C18 column and integrated electrospray emitter (CoAnn Technologies, ID 75 μm, 1.7 μm, 100Å, Richland, Washington, USA), heated to 40 °C, was used for peptide separation at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. The separation was carried out with a two-component mobile phase system consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile (buffer B). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 5 to 25% buffer B over 52 min, followed by 25–40% over 8 min, and 40–98% over 10 min.
The peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent mode, with the full scans performed at a resolving power of 120.000 FWHM (2100 V, mass range: 350–1200 m/z, AGC target value: 1 × 10e6 ions, maximum injection time: 50 ms). Each full scan was followed by a set of (HCD) MS/MS scans within a 3 s cycle time, with a collision energy of 27%. Fragment data were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer (AGC target: 5e4 ions, maximum injection time: 150 ms). The Ion transfer tube temperature was set at 200 °C. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 40 s, with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.3 and Tune 3.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). QCloud was used for all acquisitions to control long-term instrumental performance during the project, using quality control standards.
All proteomic data were searched against the in-silico digested UniProt Homo sapiens (downloaded in January 2024) with major known contaminants and reversed versions of each sequence. Proteome Discoverer v.2.2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and MASCOT search engine (v.2.6.2, MatrixScience, London, UK) were used to identify proteins (precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, product mass tolerance: 0.6 Da). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme with 5 missed cleavages. Static modification of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modification of oxidation (M) and N-terminal protein acetylation were incorporated in the search. FDR was set to < 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. Contaminants were filtered out.
MS computational analyses
MS downstream analysis was performed using the ProTN proteomics pipeline (www.github.com/TebaldiLab/ProTN and www.rdds.it/ProTN). In summary, peptide intensities were log2 transformed, normalized (median normalization), and summarized into proteins (median sweeping) with functions in the DEqMS Bioconductor package. Imputation of the missing intensities was executed by the PhosR package. Differential analysis was performed with the DEqMS package, proteins with absolute log2 FC > 0.75 and P-value < 0.05 were considered significant. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed proteins was performed with ClusterProfiler function EnrichGO and using Enrichr https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/ and https://appyters.maayanlab.cloud/Enrichment_Analysis_Visualizer. Enriched terms with p-value lower than 0.05 were considered significant.
MS data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD063060 and 10.6019/PXD063060.
Cell transfection and lentivirus infection
Specific siRNA for NNMT (siNNMT, sc-61213) and negative control siRNA (siCTR, siRNA-A: sc-37007) both from Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were transfected (0.02 µg/transfection) in 96-w plate using Lipofectamine 2000 Transfection Reagent (Invitrogen, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 48–72 h of transfection, the cells were harvested for subsequent experiments. Silencing efficacy was tested by RT-PCR analysis.
For NNMT knockdown experiments, the shNNMT RNA cassette (Target sequence: 5’ GCTCAAGAGCAGCTACTACAT 3’) was cloned into the pLKO plasmid (Addgene, Plasmid #10879). The PLKO shNNMT plasmid was amplified and sequence was confirmed through Sanger sequencing. Lentiviral particles were produced by EffeCtene (QIAGEN, cat. 301425) as described in http://tronolab.epfl.ch/. Viral supernatants were collected and filtrated 72 h post-transfection. Puromycin selection (2 µg/mL) was performed for 3 days before starting the experiments. pLKO empty vector was used as control. Silencing efficacy was tested by western blot analysis.
Cell proliferation assay
Cell viability was determined using Cell Counting Kit-8 (96992-500TESTS-F, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To test the capacity of NNMT inhibitor (NNMTi, HY-131042, MedChemExpress, Sollentuna, Sweden) to block cell proliferation, we treated cells with the indicated concentrations (25-50-100 µM) for 72 h, as previously used in other tumor models. NAMPT inhibitor FK866 (S2799, Selleckchem, Munich, DE) 50 nM was used as positive control of cell growth arrest.
For the colony formation assay, 500 cells were plated into a six-well plate and maintained in culture media supplemented with 10% FBS for 10–12 days. At the same time, the medium with or without NNMTi was changed every three days. Then the clones were fixed with methanol, stained with 0.1% crystal violet and photographed. The percentage of occupied colony areas was calculated with ImageJ/Fiji software. All the experiments were repeated as indicated.
NNMT: TLR4 binding prediction
Structural models of the human NNMT: TLR4 hetero-tetramer were built using AlphaFold-Multimer v2.3.0, accessed through ColabFold. The sequences of TLR4 (accession ID: O00206) and NNMT (accession ID: P40261) were taken from the UniProt database. Five predictions were obtained, one for each neural network model, and we selected the one with the highest combined predicted Template Model (pTM) and interface pTM score for Fig. 8C. All images were generated using Molsoft ICM 3.9-4.
Signaling experiment using NNMT Recombinant protein
THP-1 monocytes are differentiated into macrophages by 48 h of incubation with 150 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA, HY-18739, MedChemExpress) in complete RPM1, and then recovered for 24 h in medium without serum. Differentiated THP-1 were treated for 30 min at 37 °C in medium without FCS with indicated doses (ng/ml) of recombinant human NNMT (Catalog # 7736MT, R&D System, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and, as positive control, with the same concentration of recombinant human NAMPT provided by Prof. Raffaelli’s lab and previously characterized. In a set of experiments A375 BiR were starved for 24–30 h in medium without serum and then treated with the recombinant proteins as described for THP-1.
Cells were then lysed and p65 phosphorylation status, as a readout of NF-κB signaling activation, was analyzed by western blot.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism version 9.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Statistical significance was assessed using an unpaired or paired Student’s t-test, following a Shapiro-Wilk test to evaluate the normality of data distribution. One-way ANOVA was also used where indicated. Unless otherwise indicated, data in the Figures are presented as the mean ± SEM.
For all statistical tests, the 0.05 level of confidence was accepted for statistical significance. Significance was represented as: * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001, **** p ≤ 0.0001.

RESULTS:
Results
Proteomic characterization of EVs derived from BRAF inhibitor-resistant cells
The presence of eNAMPT in EVs was previously described in the context of ischemic injury, in mice to extend longevity, and in humans following moderate-intensity exercise. Exosomal NAMPT was recently identified in leukemia with the effect of orchestrating monocyte survival, in aggressive brain tumor glioma as a mediator of radioresistance and in colorectal cancer as biomarker. To our knowledge, in melanoma, even if soluble eNAMPT was previously detected, evidence of eNAMPT in EVs is missing. These observations provided an intriguing rationale to investigate the presence of eNAMPT in EVs in melanoma, with a special focus on molecular mechanisms behind melanoma resistance. Therefore, we conducted a proteomic analysis to compare EVs derived from BRAF inhibitor-sensitive (S) and -resistant (BiR) melanoma cells. This approach aimed to assess global proteomic alterations in EVs from resistant cells and to specifically investigate whether NAMPT is selected as EV cargo, potentially representing a mechanism for sharing active metabolic enzymes between tumor, inflammatory, and immune cells. Culture supernatants from two different BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines, previously characterized were collected, and EVs were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation. Representative nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) profiles of particles recovered from individual conditions are shown (Fig. 1A) and revealed that EVs mode (Fig. 1B) and mean size (Fig. 1C) as well as the number of released EVs (Fig. 1D) were comparable between S and BiR for both melanoma cell lines. Interestingly, A375 S cells secrete a smaller but slightly higher number of particles than M14 S (Fig. 1B-D). Immunoblotting of these particles, as shown in Fig. 2E, confirmed the presence of Syntenin, TSG101 and CD9 EV markers, expected with the ultracentrifugation protocol applied.
To characterize the protein cargo of recovered particles, we performed a proteomic analysis which revealed 1834 proteins significantly upregulated (p-value < 0.05) in A375 BiR compared to A375 S, and 1610 proteins downregulated in the same condition (Supplementary Material 1). Instead, 446 and 574 proteins were found respectively up- and down-regulated in M14 BiR compared with M14 S (Supplementary Material 1).
To investigate a common EVs signature in resistant MM cells we examined whether certain proteins were commonly modulated in EVs derived from both A375 and M14 BiR cell lines compared with the respective counterparts (S cells). We found 173 and 306 proteins, respectively up and down-regulated in BiR cells as shown in Venn diagrams (p-value < 0.05, Fig. 1E-F, Supplementary Material 2), which were independently subjected to gene set enrichment analysis. The gene ratio was determined by the number of modulated terms in each condition, that were part of a particular gene set, divided by the total number of terms annotated for that gene set. Through functional annotation databases such as gene ontology (GO), KEGG and Reactome, we observed an upregulation of terms associated mainly with protein translational processes and metabolism, in BiR cells (Fig. 1G, Supplementary Fig. 1A). Instead, downregulated terms point out a significant downregulation of endosomal transport pathway and ESCRT-dependent vesicular trafficking (Fig. 1H, Supplementary Fig. 1B). In line with the non-significant differences in the relative abundance of particles released by these cells, this observation indicates that resistant cells secrete a dramatically deranged EV quality.
Interestingly, the GSEA of proteins specifically up-regulated in EVs derived from the A375 BiR cells compared with their sensitive counterparts, additionally revealed an upregulation of the citrate cycle (Supplementary Fig. 2A-B), in line with the observed increased mitochondrial activity of these cells. Instead, particles from M14 BiR samples presented an upregulation of proteins involved in several metabolic processes, such as purine, ribonucleotide and aminoacid metabolism (Supplementary Fig. 3A-B). Downregulated terms are similar in the two cell lines, mainly involving cytoskeleton organization and endocytosis (Supplementary Figs. 2 and 3 panels B).
Overall, these data revealed that the acquisition of resistance to BRAF inhibitors does not influence EVs diameter or number, but is rather cell-line specific, with M14 releasing fewer but slightly larger EVs than A375 cells. The EVs cargo, instead, revealed that BiR-derived EVs are enriched in terms associated with translational processes, along with distinct metabolic signatures unique to each cell line, but mirroring common pathways activated/deactivated in BRAFi resistance.
NAMPT, but also NNMT proteins are enriched into EVs released from BiR cells
A closer analysis of the proteomics results revealed a significant enrichment of NAMPT in BiR cells-derived EVs (both in A375 and M14), reflecting its increased intracellular expression (Fig. 2A-C). The presence of NAMPT suggests an alternative mechanism of NAMPT exchange within the TME between tumor cells as well as between tumor cells and between tumor and immune cells. Surprisingly, a second enzyme, NNMT, involved in the catabolism of nicotinamide (i.e., methylation of nicotinamide) was concomitantly found in EVs from both BiR cell lines (Fig. 2A-B, D, Supplementary Material 2). NNMT transfer via EVs could represent an intriguing and novel hallmark in cancer cell communication. Interestingly, we revealed additional common up-regulated proteins in EVs, from both BiR cell variants. Nucleophosmin 1 (NPM1), which is associated with immune evasion and tumor progression, forces the expression of PD-L1. Proteins involved in stress granule (SGs) assembly, including ATXN2L, OGFOD1, FMR1, PRRC2C, EIF2S1, and PUM2 were highlighted. SGs emerged as regulators of the tumor immune microenvironment, leading to immune escape in tumor cells. Interferon-gamma inducible protein 16 (IFI16), a DNA sensor protein, which triggers interferon-beta (IFN-β) production and inflammasome complex and IL-1β production, has recently been linked with M1-macrophage infiltration in melanoma. Lastly, we found enriched in EVs also signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), linked with TLR4 signaling in melanoma, and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1). Notably, EVs isolated from A375 BiR cells exhibit strong upregulation of CD274/PD-L1, a key molecule involved in immune escape and associated with shorter overall survival in melanoma. PD-L1 expression, increased in BRAFi-resistant melanoma, was recently associated with the NAD/NAMPT axis.
To validate the proteomics data, we performed an immunoblot with independent EV isolated from both S and BiR A375 and M14 cell lines. Importantly, the EVs positive markers Syntenin, TSG101 and CD9 were enriched in the EVs fractions but not in the respective cell lysates, differently from the Golgi marker GM130, which is not sorted into EVs (Fig. 2E). We confirmed the up-regulation of both NAMPT and NNMT in EVs isolated from BiR cells (Fig. 2F-H).
NNMT is upregulated in cell extract from resistant melanoma cells
NAMPT was previously reported to be overexpressed in resistant cells, acting as the master regulator of NAD synthesis and playing a key role in metabolic reprogramming during the acquisition of BRAFi resistance in melanoma. NNMT results overexpressed in melanoma compared to benign nevi; however, it was never associated with BRAFi resistance. Therefore, we focused on this enzyme to compare its intracellular and extracellular expression in BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines sensitive and resistant to BRAFi. We found that NNMT gene was significantly upregulated in three different BiR cell lines (M14, A375, and SK-MEL-28; Fig. 3A). Parental (sensitive) M14 and SK-MEL-28 expressed low basal levels of NNMT compared to A375, strongly induced in BiR cell variants. Moving to the NNMT protein expression, immunoblot (for all BiR lines, Fig. 3B) and confocal microscopy (for A375, Fig. 3C and M14, Fig. 3D) analyses confirmed selective and robust upregulation of NNMT in BiR cells. Overall, this evidence demonstrated for the first time that, as for NAMPT, also NNMT is overexpressed at mRNA and protein levels in resistant cells, opening future studies investigating its role in the onset of BRAFi resistance and corresponding TME.
eNNMT is released as a soluble protein by melanoma cells, increasing in resistant cells
We detected NAMPT and NNMT in EVs, increasing in BiR cells. eNAMPT is an established soluble factor released as free protein from different cellular models, especially in inflammatory and metabolic conditions, and in tumors. Melanoma cell lines and patients release eNAMPT, becoming a novel marker of tumor burden. Circulating NNMT was identified in NSCLC and colon cancer. For the first time, we revealed the presence of eNNMT by western blot, analyzing 10x concentrated conditioned media without serum for 24 h from the same 3 representative BRAF-mutated melanoma cell lines S vs. BiR (Fig. 4A-C). eNNMT detected in western blot could be secreted either in EVs or as a free protein in the supernatant. The quantification of the relative proportion of free versus EV-containing protein is a difficult task that we tried to address experimentally. We ultracentrifuged supernatants from A375 and SK-MEL28 BiR variants and then treated or not with Proteinase K (ProK, 100 ng/ml, 1 h at 37 °C). Supernatants were concentrated 10X and loaded into the gel. ProK digestion is expected to degrade free-soluble proteins (vimentin used as positive control) while leaving almost unaffected the vesicles’ integrity (assessment of syntenin levels as EVs marker). As reported in Fig. 4D-E, ProK digestion completely degraded Vimentin. Syntenin levels were unaffected by the treatment in SK-MEL-28 BiR, while partially reduced in A375 BiR, suggesting cell-dependent differences. eNNMT showed the same behavior: it was partially reduced after ProK treatment in both cell line SNs, suggesting at least the experimentally detectable dual secretion paths.
Overall, our data revealed the presence of soluble eNNMT released by melanoma cells, increased in BRAFi-resistant cells derived either from exosomes and released as a free protein.
eNNMT was confirmed highly enriched in the secretome of BiR cells
To confirm that the protein detected in culture supernatants (SN) was indeed NNMT, we used MS, selecting the A375 cell line (higher levels of eNNMT detected, Fig. 4B) to obtain and compare all the proteins “secretome” from SN derived from A375 S and BiR (4 biological replicates). Proteomics analysis revealed a significant upregulation (p-value < 0.05) of 397 secreted proteins, in contrast to 382 downregulated ones (Supplementary Material 3). Importantly, we were able to confirm the presence of NAMPT (log2FC 1.82 BiR vs. S) and NNMT (log2FC 2.3) significantly enriched in SN from BiR cells (Fig. 5A-C). In addition to NAMPT and NNMT, we found up-regulated in SN from BiR cells also kynureninase (KYNU, log2FC 2.26) and NAD(P)HX epimerase (NAXE, log2FC 2.89) belonging to NAD network. Interestingly, the tryptophan (TRP) degradation (de-novo NAD biosynthetic route) along the kynurenine pathway (KP) plays a critical role in the regulation of immune response. Among KP metabolites, kynurenine (KYN) production has been linked to cancer immune escape. In melanoma, it has been demonstrated that the KP pathway mediates T-cell dysfunction.
Performing enrichment analysis, we identified an upregulation of translational and metabolic processes as purine, amino-acids, and carbon metabolism among the most significant (Fig. 5D). Moreover, an immune signature emerged, linked with TGF-β signaling, signaling by Rho GTPases, IL-12 signaling and neutrophil degranulation (Supplementary Material 3). Other interesting proteins belonging to these categories, found enriched in SN from A375 BiR, are superoxide dismutase (SOD2), the most up-regulated protein with a log2FC of 4.3, part of the superoxide dismutase family of redox enzymes that metabolize superoxide radicals into hydrogen peroxide. SOD2 expression increases in tumors, including in melanoma, as a mechanism to scavenge oxygen-reactive species (ROS); however, serum SOD2 levels may increase in melanoma patients and correlate with disease progression. Interleukin-6 (IL-6, log2FC 1.76), a cytokine involved in immune regulation, was previously detected in serum from melanoma patients. NEDD8 ubiquitin-like modifier (NEDD8, log2FC 2.43), a key element of the inflammasome caspase-1-dependent activation in primary macrophages. We also identified different small Rab GTPases, conserved key regulators of membrane trafficking, also crucial for skin and hair pigmentation. The most up-regulated is RAB6A (log2FC 2.29) involved in the secretory pathway. Several members of the serpin family, the most differentially expressed SERPINB2, log2FC 3.45); the serine/threonine-protein kinase PAK2 (log2FC 1.35), that plays an important role in cancer cell metastasis.
Downregulated terms point out a differential expression of proteins modulating the extracellular matrix formation and organization, collagen formation and integrin cell surface interactions (Fig. 5E, Supplementary Material 3). The rewiring of the proteins included in these terms could be associated with the metastatic process. Moreover, we also found cluster-differentiation (CD) proteins down-regulated, including CD44, CD59, CD58 and CD109. Among these, elevated soluble CD44 was previously associated with melanoma growth inhibition; while a loss of CD58 expression confers immune evasion through multiple mechanisms, as recently reported.
NNMT correlates with NAMPT in melanoma patients and is more expressed in the BRAF-mutated ones, decreasing upon BRAFi/MEKi exposure
Herein, our objective is to elucidate the relationship between these two NAM-modulating enzymes, found overexpressed in resistant melanoma, with a subsequent focus on NNMT, which has been less extensively studied in this tumor model. Focusing on melanoma patients [Skin Cutaneous Melanoma (SKCM) TCGA cohort] we first analyzed the correlation between NAMPT and NNMT expression (metastatic samples n = 368). The analysis revealed a positive and significant correlation between the two NAM-modulating enzymes using both Spearman and Pearson tests (Fig. 6A). No correlation was detected in primary tumor samples (not shown). We confirmed the positive correlation (R or rho 0.3) also analyzing annotated melanoma cell lines (n = 104, filtered for primary disease “Skin Cancer” and subtype containing the term “Melanoma”) in the cancer cell line encyclopedia (CCLE, Fig. 6B).
We previously knew that NAMPT expression increased in BRAF-mutated MM patients and decreased following BRAFi treatment in vitro and in patients. To highlight a possible association between NNMT expression and BRAF mutations we dissected the SKCM TCGA cohort (primary and metastatic samples) in BRAF wild-type (WT, n = 235) and BRAF-mutated (MUT, n = 232) patients. All annotated BRAF mutations were considered, with V600E being the most frequently represented, as expected. NNMT expression was significantly higher in patients harboring BRAF mutations (p-value = 4.99 e-05, Fig. 6C).
These data suggest a molecular connection between BRAF oncogenic signaling and the dysregulation of both NAMPT and NNMT enzyme. To corroborate this regulation, we treated the MM cell lines M14 BiR and A375 BiR with a combination “combo” of BRAF/MEK inhibitors (10 µM) for 24 h. Western blot analysis showed a downregulation of NNMT protein expression in response to drugs treatment (Fig. 6D).
NNMT is positively associated with immune-related signature and signaling pathways in melanoma patients
By analyzing the gene expression profiles of these SKCM TCGA tumor samples using GSEA with respect to high vs. low NNMT expression (based on the median NNMT expression), we observed an increase in pro-inflammatory and immune-related signatures (including inflammation response, interferon response genes, humoral immune response, leucocyte migration, cell chemotaxis), and signaling pathways (MAP-kinase, NF-κB, chemokine-mediated signaling) correlated with higher NNMT expression (Fig. 7). Interestingly, high NNMT levels positively associated with neutrophils, granulocytes and myeloid cells migration (Supplementary Fig. 4), suggesting and increased immune infiltration and increased inflammatory status within the melanoma TME correlated with elevated NNMT. Moreover, we also observed a positive correlation between elevated NNMT and epithelial to mesenchymal transition and stemness (Supplementary Fig. 5A), as previously highlighted, while a strong negative association with mRNA processing and cytoplasmic translation (Supplementary Fig. 5B).
Overall, these data indicate that, similarly to NAMPT, NNMT expression is associated with oncogenic BRAF signaling and shows a positive correlation with signaling and inflammatory signatures, suggesting its potential involvement in immune cell infiltration and modulation of the inflammatory response within the TME.
Pharmacological inhibition or genetic knockdown of NNMT reduces BiR cells growth
To start to define the role of NNMT, previously unknown, as a driver of MM progression and drug resistance, we adopted two different strategies: (i) we used a NNMT pharmacological inhibitor (NNMTi, HY-131042) and (ii) we silenced NNMT in BiR cells transiently and stably using NNMT-specific siRNA and viral particles to express NNMT shRNA, respectively.
NNMT inhibition (~ 50 µM) led to a significant block of cell proliferation after 72 h as reported in Fig. 8A-C in all three BiR cell variants. NAMPT inhibitor (FK866 50 nM) was used a positive control of cell growth arrest. A375 BiR cells are more sensitive to NNMT inhibition consistently with their higher expression of the enzyme. Colony formation assay was performed in A375 BiR and SK-MEL-28 BIR. Results showed a significant reduction of the colony-formation capability over a period of 10–12 days (Fig. 8D and Supplementary Fig. 6A) in both cell lines treated with NNMTi at 50 µM and more strongly with 100 µM. A375 BiR cells were more able to generate colonies compared with SK-MEL-28 BiR as depicted in representative images (Fig. 8D and Supplementary Fig. 6A), however the effect of NNMTi was comparable with a reduction of colonies of ~ 30% with NNMTi at 50 µM, increasing up to 70% with 100 µM. The impairment of cell growth was confirmed also by silencing NNMT gene as reported in Fig. 8E-F in M14 BiR cell line transiently transfected with siNNMT after 72 h, and in SK-MEL-28 BiR stably silenced for NNMT. Colony formation assay with SK-MEL-28 BiR stably silenced for NNMT corroborated this significant reduction of cell growth (Fig. 8G). NNMT silencing in BiR cells was highlighted by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis (Supplementary Fig. 6B-C).
Selecting A375 and M14 we then compare the sensitivity of S and BiR cells to NNMTi. Data showed that A375 BiR were more sensitive than S variant to NNMTi (low dose of 50 µM, Fig. 8H), while in M14 cell line the increased sensitivity in BiR cells was appreciated at 100 µM (Fig. 8I).
Overall, these data suggest that NNMT inhibition in BiR cells could be a vulnerability of BRAF-resistant melanomas, supporting a previously uncharacterized function of this enzyme in BRAF/MEK resistance.
eNNMT activates NF-κB signaling: exploring the possible involvement of TLR4
Based on the evidence that soluble NAD-biosynthetic enzymes (i.e., eNAMPT and eNAPRT) bind to TLR4, we started to speculate that the newly identified eNNMT could bind TLR4 exerting a signaling function mediated by the engagement of the same receptor of eNAMPT/eNAPRT.
Using in silico methods, we investigated whether NNMT could form a stable complex with TLR4 to induce the homodimerization necessary for downstream signaling. Given that human NNMT (~ 30 kDa) shares a molecular size comparable to the MD-2/LPS complex—a known ligand responsible for TLR4 activation—we hypothesized that hNNMT might act analogously by mimicking its mechanism. Specifically, we speculated that hNNMT could facilitate TLR4 dimerization and signaling by forming a heterotetrameric complex similar to MD-2/LPS. To investigate the possible structural arrangement of the heterotetrameric NNMT: TLR4 complex, we modelled it using AlphaFold Multimer. The five predicted models consistently converged toward the same heterotetramer conformation, which resembles TLR4:MD2 (Fig. 9A-B). Figure 9C presents the highest-ranked model, which, based on the combined pTM + ipTM score of about 0.8, supports a reasonable prediction of the complex’s overall fold and protein-protein interactions. Notably, each NNMT monomer (in green) makes electrostatic contact with both TLR4 subunits, potentially stabilizing TLR4 homodimerization. Our tetrameric NNMT: TLR4 model offers a plausible structural and mechanistic basis for their association. Lastly, we demonstrated that eNNMT is able to trigger NF-κB pathway, the main signaling activated by TLR4 binding, and previously reported for eNAMPT. To do this we used commercial full-length and enzymatic active recombinant (r)NNMT protein (endotoxin-free). We decided first to exploit monocyte THP-1 model, as monocytes/macrophages are previously used to test eNAMPT signaling functions.
THP-1 cells can differentiate into macrophages in the presence of PMA and are a good model to test TLR4 agonists’ activities, expressing high levels of the receptor (Fig. 9D). Treatment of differentiated THP-1 with rNNMT for 30 min activated the NF-κB pathway, as determined by western blot analysis showing increased phosphorylation of the p65 subunit (Fig. 9D-E), evident with the low dose of rNNMT 50 ng/ml (Fig. 9D-E). rNAMPT treatment was included as positive control as known TLR4 ligand that robustly activates NF-κB signaling (Fig. 9E).
Then we moved to validate our data in melanoma cells. We checked TLR4 expression in S and BiR MM cells. Western blot analysis reveals abundant expression of TLR4 on the surface of MM cells without significant differences in its expression in BiR cells compared to S cells (Fig. 9F). A375 BiR cells are highly TLR4-expressing cells, for this reason we used this cell line to repeat the treatment with rNNMT and rNAMPT, highlighting the activation of NF-κB pathway (Fig. 9G).
Overall, these data demonstrated, for the first time, that eNNMT triggers NF-κB activation in macrophages and in melanoma cells, supporting the idea that this signaling function could be mediated at least in part by TLR4 binding as reported by our prediction model of NNMT: TLR4 complex. Further studies will be necessary to verify this functional and physical interaction, as previously described for NAMPT.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Tumors are characterized by a complex microenvironment composed of immune, stromal, and cancer cells. Soluble mediators released within this tumor microenvironment (TME) can promote tumor growth and therapy resistance. This concept also emerged in metastatic melanoma (MM), where increasing evidence has demonstrated that extracellular proteins secreted by tumor cells (secretome), as well as proteins carried in the extracellular vesicles (EVs) originating from MM cells, shape the TME and drive the expansion of drug-resistant cells. Therefore, in addition to resistance mechanisms relying on metabolic, epigenetic and gene expression reprogramming, it is emerging that an altered secretome and the molecular cargo of EVs contribute to acquired resistance to both BRAF/MEK targeted therapy, effective in BRAFV600E-mutant MM patients (about 50% of MM patients), and immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs; anti PD-1/PD-L1 or CTLA-4 antibodies).
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) biosynthesis is essential to support tumor energetic needs, and to regulate the NADPH-mediated detoxification system. Moreover, it provides NAD to various NAD-consuming enzymes, including sirtuins and poly-ADP-ribose-polymerases (PARPs), activating epigenetic circuits and regulating DNA repair. To support NAD synthesis, required for metabolic adaptation mechanisms, proliferation, and invasion, several types of cancer show up-regulation of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT), the rate-limiting enzyme controlling NAD biosynthesis from nicotinamide (NAM). For these reasons, patients bearing tumors addicted to NAMPT activity benefit from the NAMPT-targeting strategy. In MM, we and others previously demonstrated that NAMPT is over-expressed during BRAFi resistance and patient relapse/progression, becoming a driver of targeted-therapy resistance, modulating metabolic reprogramming. Moreover, BRAFi-resistant MM cells are uniquely sensitive to NAMPTi in vitro and in vivo, supporting a molecular connection between NAMPT and BRAF oncogenic pathways.
The amount of NAM inside the cell, available for energy metabolism, can be regulated by a second emerging enzyme, i.e., the nicotinamide N-methyltransferase (NNMT). NNMT catalyzes the N-methylation of NAM using S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) as the donor of the methyl group to generate 1-methylnicotinamide (MNA) and release S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine (SAH). The deregulation of NNMT levels and activity has been observed in various tumor types, promoting tumor development and progression and directly and indirectly impacting gene expression by influencing the SAM/SAH ratio inside the cell. However, a clear functional role of this enzyme in tumor biology should be investigated more deeply, as well as the interplay between NAMPT and NNMT in regulating nicotinamide metabolism and NAD availability in cancer cells.
NNMT was previously detected in skin cancer. Ganzetti et al., first showed significantly higher NNMT expression in melanoma compared with benign nevi. In addition, a significant inverse relationship was found between the enzyme levels and Breslow thickness, Clark level, the presence/number of mitoses, and ulceration. They suggested that NNMT could represent a molecular biomarker for melanoma, thus highlighting its potential for both diagnosis and prognosis of this neoplasia. High NNMT levels were also detected in aggressive oral malignant melanoma (OMM), where univariate analysis showed a negative effect of NNMT expression on the disease-free survival rate. Interestingly, NNMT was also highly expressed in metastatic lymph nodes compared to both primary melanomas and nevi. The mentioned papers confirmed the overexpression of NNMT in melanoma, also highlighting the impact of NNMT inhibition or silencing in decreasing melanoma cells’ proliferation and migration, as well as increasing cell sensitivity to chemotherapeutics, such as dacarbazine, leading to the hypothesis that NNMT might be involved in promoting mechanisms of chemoresistance. However, the function of NNMT was never linked with targeted-therapy resistance in MM.
Intriguingly, various enzymes involved in NAD metabolism are considered moonlighting proteins, exhibiting multiple functions depending on their localization in different cellular compartments or their role as soluble factors. This is the case of NAMPT that can be secreted in the extracellular space, where it behaves as a mediator of inflammation, like danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), through binding to cell membrane receptors, including toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Extracellular (e)NAMPT levels, increased in many tumors, regulate tumor-host interactions. Once secreted, eNAMPT can act as a cytokine-like protein that modulates the immune response, triggering intracellular signaling that promotes differentiation/polarization of myeloid cells, activation of inflammasome, and secretion of pro or anti-inflammatory cytokines. Circulating NNMT was found to be increased compared with healthy donors in non-small cell lung cancer and colorectal cancer, and in exosomes of gastric cancer patients, highlighting the potential function of eNNMT in the tumor microenvironment (TME), yet systematically unexplored. In addition, NAM and MNA metabolites are emerging as factors that can shape immune cells.
The aim of this work is to characterize the proteins differentially enriched in EVs and in the secretome of BRAFi-resistant melanoma cells compared to the sensitive ones. In this study, we show that NAM-metabolic enzymes NAMPT and NNMT were indeed highly deregulated, with increased abundancy in EVs and in culture media derived from resistant melanoma cell lines. Focusing on NNMT, we identified this enzyme as a pivotal protein increased as an intracellular and extracellular factor upon drug-resistance acquisition and correlated with the BRAF mutational status of MM patients. NNMT pharmacological inhibition and genetic silencing significantly reduced resistant melanoma cell growth. In addition, we found that resistant cells are more sensitive to NNMT inhibition, indicating an unraveled role of this enzyme in BRAF inhibitor resistance. Through bioinformatic analysis on the melanoma cohort from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we found that NNMT expression positively correlates with pro-inflammatory signaling, immune cell migration, and chemokine-mediated signaling pathways. Moreover, based on our predictive modeling and functional validation, NNMT—when acting as a soluble protein—represents a potential novel ligand for TLR4, the same receptor recognized by NAMPT, and is able to trigger NF-κB signaling. These findings pave the way for future investigations into the potential role of eNNMT in TME remodeling, acting on both tumor and immune cells.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD063060 and 10.6019/PXD063060.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
All authors read and are consent for the publication of this manuscript.