PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Pluripotent stem cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Orbitrap Exploris 480; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Autophagy; Neurons; Tnk1; Phosphorylation

ABSTRACT:
TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase 1) is a ubiquitously expressed IKK-related kinase implicated in diverse cellular processes, including interferon signaling, apoptosis, and autophagy. Loss-of-function variants in TBK1 are strongly associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). However, the targets of TBK1 in neurons are unknown, and how haploinsufficiency for TBK1 leads to age-related neurodegeneration remains unresolved. Here, we utilized sets of isogenic induced pluripotent stem cells (iiPSCs) for unbiased, quantitative phospho-proteomics across tens of thousands of phospho-sites, normalized to protein abundance, in proliferating stem cells and induced excitatory neurons. We found that TBK1 primarily regulates the phosphorylation of selective autophagy proteins, particularly phospho-serine residues within cargo receptors, and endo-lysosomal pathways.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Phospho-proteome profiling in human induced pluripotent stem cells and derived human neurons reveals targets of TBK1 in ALS/FTD-1 associated autophagy networks

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells (20 to 40 million cells per sample) were harvested and pelleted at 200g, washed 3 times in PBS, and after removing the supernatant, pellets were flash-frozen and stored at -80°C until processing. For protein extraction and tryptic digestion, samples were thawed and homogenized in 1000 μl 8 M Guanidine Hydrochloride (GndHCl), using a probe sonicator (ThermoFisher Scientific). Protein concentration in the extracts was measured using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) in triplicates, taking 2 μl aliquots of this solution. Aliquots of the samples containing 300 μg of protein were added 9X the sample volume of ethanol and allowed to precipitate at -80C overnight. After that, pellets were centrifuged at 15000g 10min, the supernatant was removed, and the samples were allowed to dry. The pellets were resuspended in 12.5 μl 6.25 M guanidine hydrochloride containing 6.25 % V/V of Sigma-Aldrich Phosphatase inhibitors cocktails 2 and 3, plus 78 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.0, and 7.8 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride. Samples were sonicated in a bath sonicator for 5 min, then incubated at 56°C for 15 minutes, followed by a 30-minute incubation at room temperature in the dark with 20 mM iodoacetamide. The samples were added 62.5 μl TEAB containing 2 μg Lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (FUJIFILM-Wako), and incubated at 37C o/n. After that, the samples were added 5% (W/W) modified trypsin (TPCK-Trypsin, Thermo Scientific), and incubated overnight at 37 ºC. Digested Samples were labeled according to TMTProTM-18 label plex kit instructions  (ThermoFisher Scientific), with some modifications. Briefly, TMT reagents were dissolved in acetonitrile at 25 μg/μl, and 20 μl of these stocks added to the samples (500 μg reagent, 1.7 fold the peptide mass amount). After incubation for 1 h at room temperature samples were quenched with 2 μl 5% hydroxylamine, then all samples were combined adding them over 20 ml 0.1% formic acid, and desalted using a C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters). The Sep Pak eluate was dried in preparation for phosphopeptide enrichment. Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides using titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment was performed in an AKTA Purifier (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) using 5 μm titanium dioxide (TiO2) beads (GL Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) in-house packed into a 4.0 mm x 3 cm analytical column (Upchurch Scientific, Oak Harbor, WA). Combined TMT labelled tryptic digests were resuspended in 240 μl buffer containing 35% MeCN, 200 mM NaCl, 0.4% TFA and loaded onto the TiO2 column at a flow rate of 2 ml/min. The non adsorbed peptides (non-phosphorylated material, flow though fraction) were recovered. The column was then washed for 2 min with 35% MeCN, 200 mM NaCl, 0.4% TFA to remove non phosphorylated peptides. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the column using 1 M potassium phosphate monobasic (KH2PO4) at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min for 30 min, directly onto an on-line coupled C18 column (Luna 10 μm C18(2) 100 Å, LC Column 30 x 4.6 mm, Phenomenex) This column was washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 14 min, and the adsorbed material was eluted in 400 μl of 50% MeCN, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 0.25 ml/min. The eluate was solvent evaporated and then resuspended in 240 μl 20 mM ammonium formiate pH 10.4 for fractionation of the peptide mixture by high pH RP  chromatography. The flow through fraction of the TiO2 column was solvent evaporated, desalted in a C18 SepPak  cartridge (Waters), then resuspended in 240 μl 20 mM ammonium formiate pH 10.4 for fractionation of the peptide mixture by high pH RP chromatography. The TiO2 enriched sample and the TiO2 flow through were fractionated on an AKTA purifier system utilizing a Phenomenex Gemini 5u C18 110A 150 x 4.60 mm column, operating at a flow rate of 0.550 mL/min. Buffer A consisted of 20 mM ammonium 688 formate (pH 10), and buffer B consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile (pH 10). 689 Gradient details were as follows: 1 % to 30% B in 49 min, 30% B to 70% B in 4 min, 70% B down 690 to 1% B in 4 min. Peptide-containing fractions were collected, evaporated and resuspended in 0.1% formic combining early and late chromatographic fractions to produce between 48 and 52 samples for LCMSMS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peak lists were generated using PAVA in-house software (Guan, S., Price, J.C., Prusiner, S.B., Ghaemmaghami, S., and Burlingame, A.L. (2011). Mol Cell Proteomics 10, M111 010728.).  All generated peak lists were searched against the human subset of the SwissProt database (SwissProt.2019.07.31), using Protein Prospector (Clauser, K.R., Baker, P., and Burlingame, A.L. (1999). Analytical chemistry 71, 2871-2882) with the following parameters: Enzyme specificity was set as Trypsin, and up to 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, and, in the case of TMT labelled samples, TMT16plex labeling of lysine residues and N-terminus of the protein, were allowed as fixed modifications. N-acetylation of the N-terminus of the protein, loss of protein N-terminal methionine, pyroglutamate formation from of peptide N-terminal glutamines, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were allowed as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was 5 ppm in MS and 30 ppm in MS/MS. The false discovery rate was estimated by searching the data using a concatenated database which contains the original SwissProt database, as well as a version of each original entry where the sequence has been randomized. A 1% FDR was permitted at the protein and peptide level. In the accompanying paper, this was adjusted independently for the sets of unphosphorylated, monophosphorylated and doubly phosphorylated peptides. For quantitation only unique peptides were considered; peptides common to several proteins were not used for quantitative analysis. Relative quantization of peptide abundance was performed via calculation of the intensity of reporter ions corresponding to the different TMT labels, present in MS/MS spectra. Intensities were determined by Protein Prospector. Summed intensity per sample on each TMT channel for all identified spectra were used to normalize individual intensity values. Relative abundances were calculated as ratios vs the average intensity levels in the channels corresponding to the relevant control samples. Spectra representing replicate measurements of the same peptide were kept. Individual spectral ratios were aggregated to the peptide level using median values of the log2 ratios. Non-phosphorylated peptides were used to estimate relative protein levels. For total protein relative levels, peptide ratios were aggregated to the protein levels using median values of the log2 ratios. Phosphopeptide ratios were corrected by the available protein ratios. Statistical significance was calculated at the phosphopeptide and protein levels by comparing the values for the 3 biological replicates of the relevant groups in the TMT experiment with a 2-tailed t-test.