PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brain
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Pcbp1; Rna processing; Mbnl1; Rna-protein interactions; Rna granules; Dysmyelination; Rna binding proteins

ABSTRACT:
We applied RNA-protein interactome capture method called XRNAX to shed light on RNA-bound proteome in the brain affected with dysmyelination. We found that sets of canonical RBPs that are known to regulate alternative splicing and being engaged in the formation of cytoplasmic granules are perturbed at the level of their RNA interactome in the mouse brain with the inborn deficit of myelin. This dataset contains the whole brain proteomics data as well as LC-MS/MS data from XRNAX extracts enriched in brain RBPs following UV crosslink of RNA-protein interaction in the brain tissue homogenates from wildtype C57BL6/N (experiments 1 and 2) and shiverer mouse model (experiment 3). Whole brain tissues were homogenized using two different methods: biopulverization of the flash-frozen tissue in liquid nitrogen  (experiments 2 and 3), and alternatively, tissues submersed in PBS buffer immediately after dissections were disintegrated with Dounce homogenizer (experiment 1).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Interrogation of RNA-bound proteome with XRNAX illuminates molecular alterations in the mouse brain affected with dysmyelination

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Whole brain protein extracts were obtained with Trizol protein extraction protocol and chloroform-methanol precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES pH 8.0 by vigorous vortexing and sonication, reduced and alkylated with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) / 10 mM chloroacetamide and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (1 μg per sample) overnight at 37°C, with shaking at 950 rpm in a thermomixer. The digestion was terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1% final concentration. The digested proteins were labelled using an on-column TMT labelling protocol. TMT-labelled samples were compiled and concentrated using SpeedVac concentrator. Peptides in the compiled samples were fractionated (6-8 fractions) using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit. Prior to LC-MS measurement, the peptide fractions were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. For XRNAX samples, tissue homogenates were irradiated with UV-light at 254 nm, 400 mJ/cm2 , and  lysed with Trizol reagent by pipetting up and down and syringed with 20G needle. After the phase separation, interphase samples were collected to a fresh tube, washed, and disintegrated in low SDS buffer (Tris-HCl 50 mM, EDTA 1 mM, SDS 0.1%),  further in high SDS buffer (Tris-HCl 50 mM, EDTA 1 mM, SDS 0.5%), and depleted for DNA (DNase treatment) according to XRNAX protocol (Trendel et al., 2019, Cell). XRNAX extracts were further subjected to silica-based purification of crosslinked RNA-protein complexes, removal of RNA with RNase A treatment, and digested with Trypsin in two-step protocol (partial and complete digestion). After complete tryptic digestion step, peptides were subjected to on-column TMT labeling, TMT-labelled samples were compiled and concentrated using SpeedVac concentrator.  Prior to LC-MS measurement, the peptide fractions were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 15 cm or 50 cm long (2 µm particle size, 75 µm id) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 55 °C by applying 90 min, 105 min, 120 min or 150  min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in TMT mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 15 or 18 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 32, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 30s or 35 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 30,000 or 45,000 at m/z 200) were 50 and 96 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0 and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot Mouse Reference Proteome (UP000000589) using the built-in Andromeda search engine. For three individual experiments (experiments 1, 2, or 3), raw data related to the XRNAX enriched and the corresponding input samples were processed together using MaxQuant software. In addition, raw data from two separate experiments (experiments 2 and 3) were processed together in MaxQuant with weighted ratio to the reference channel normalization (all channels used in the experiments selected as the reference) to allow a more accurate comparison between these datasets; the MaxQuant output from this analysis is provided in the folder reanalysis-normalized. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was applied with reporter mass tolerance = 0.003 Da and min. reporter PIF = 0.75. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.