PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Endothelial colony forming cell; Endothelial cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Hemostasis; Cell signaling; Phosphoproteomics; Endothelial cells

ABSTRACT:
The vascular endothelial cell (EC) monolayer plays a crucial part in maintaining hemostasis. An extensive array of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) allows ECs to dynamically act on key hemostatic stimuli such as thrombin and histamine. The impact of these individual stimuli on EC signal transduction has been the subject of various studies, but insight into discordant and concordant EC signaling between different GPCRs remain limited. Using mass spectrometry- based phosphoproteomics, we delineated the unbiased signaling response for histamine stimulation in the endothelium and observed highly similar responses between different protease activated receptors (PAR1-4). Finally, we compare both histamine and PAR agonists, indicating uniquely activated proteins between both stimuli, but a general overlapping activation of cell-junction and actin cytoskeletal proteins. Thus, we provide an integrative phosphoproteomic analysis of histamine and PAR agonist in the endothelium that highlights the endothelial response programs that are at the bases of regulating hemostasis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Integrative phosphoproteomic analysis reveal hemostatic-endothelial signaling interplay

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
SILAC labeling and stimulation BOECs were metabolically labeled with Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) as described previously29. Stable isotopes used were; light: Arg0 & Lys0, medium: Arg6 & Lys4, heavy: Arg10 & Lys8 (Cambridge Isotopes). Prior to the experiment, cells were serum-starved for 2h in SILAC EBM(Lonza). Next, cells were stimulated with PAR agonist peptides: 10/50 µM SFFLRN-NH2, 10/50 µM TFLLR-NH2, 50/100 µM SLIGKV-NH2, 10/50 µM 2-furoyl-LIGRLO-NH2, 50 µM TRFGAP-NH2, 50 µM AYPGKF-NH2, or 100 µM histamine for 2 or 10 minutes (1x15 cm culture dish per condition). Cells were washed, lysed in SDS lysis buffer, processed and stored at -80°C as described previously29. Experiments were performed in triplicate or quadruplicate , where the different SILAC labels were swapped between conditions.  Phosphopeptide isolation and mass spectrometry analysis Phosphopeptides were isolated as described previously29. Digested peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific), using the same settings as described by van den Eshof et al. 29 All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS data analysis and processing The RAW mass spectrometry (MS) files were processed with MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.2.10)30. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (release 2019-02) 31. Maxquant configuration was as described previously 29. The MS dataset was supplemented with MS data of PAR1 peptides, APC and thrombin- stimulated BOECs from our previously published dataset (available in the PRIDE repository: PXD004264)29. This resulted in the following multitudes of stimulation conditions (3 replicates per condition) : 3x (SFLLRN-NH2), 2x (TFLLR-NH2, SLIGKV-NH2, 2-furoyl-LIGRLO-NH2, thrombin) or 1x (TRFGAP-NH2, AYPGKF-NH2, histamine). Class I phosphosites 32 (localization probability >0.75 and score difference >5) were filtered and phosphosites for which a SILAC ratio was accurately measured in all replicates were considered as quantified. Statistical analysis was performed using a linear model without intercept 33. A Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing corrected p < 0.05 and |logFC| ≥1 was considered statistically significant and relevant. Gene ontology (GO) and Reactome Pathway enrichment analysis was performed using the clusterProfiler package 34. Kinase inference was performed using Rokai 35. Network visualization was constructed using Cytoscape 3.9.1. The .raw MS files and search/identification files obtained with MaxQuant have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium36 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/cgi/GetDataset) via the PRIDE partner repository