PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Escherichia coli
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; formylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: SRM/MRM; Top-down proteomics; Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Orbitrap eclipse; Proteomics; Prm; Top-down; Escherichia coli

ABSTRACT:
Small proteins or microproteins, despite long being ignored, have important roles in the regulation of larger protein complexes, metabolic pathways and gene expression. However, these proteins remain underrepresented in proteomics studies due to low detection efficiency in traditional mass spectrometry workflows. Their inherent characteristics often lead to depletion during sample preparation and a low detection efficiency in liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). To improve detection and quantitation, we took advantage of the large set of documented small proteins in Escherichia coli and systematically compared and optimized different sample preparation and LC-MS approaches. We evaluated different top-down and bottom-up approaches, including data-dependent acquisition (DDA), data-independent acquisition (DIA) and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM). Our data highlight the benefit of top-down proteomics for identifying new small proteins and bottom-up preparation coupled with PRM acquisition for quantitation of protein levels in different growth conditions. Our systematic comparison can serve as a guideline for MS detection of small proteins in all organisms.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Detection and quantitation of small proteins using mass spectrometry

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
E. coli cell pellets were digested in three different approaches. In the SPEED protocol, cells were mixed (1:5) with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubated for 5 minutes before neutralization with 2 M Tris.HCl-buffer (pH 10.5). For the in-solution digest, they were mixed in the same ratio with UA20 buffer (6M Urea in 80% MS-grade water and 20% ACN), supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, CAT#04693124001) and subjected to cell lysis using a rod sonifier for three cycles of 30 s on 30% power, 50% duty cycle and 30 sec cooling on ice. For the S-Trap protocol pellets were mixed with of lysis buffer (10% SDS, 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5), supplemented with protease inhibitors and subjected to the same cell lysis using a rod sonifier. Samples were then cleared from cell debris by centrifugation (500g, 5 min). The supernatants were collected and reduced by addition of 4 µl TCEP for 30 min at 37°C with mild agitation, followed by alkylation with 8 µl IAA for 30 min in the dark with mild agitation. For the SPEED protocol, pH was adjusted to neutrality with 1% TFA and MS-grade Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 using 100 µl digestion buffer (50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8,5). For the in-solution workflow, trypsin in the same ratio was added using 488 µl digestion buffer (50mM ABC, pH 8.5). In the S-Trap, the samples were acidified with 12 µl 12% phosphoric acid, diluted with 750 µl of the S-Trap binding buffer (1 M TEAB Buffer and Methanol (10:90)) and transferred to S-Trap mini columns (Protifi). SDS removal was conducted by three washing cycles with 400 µl S-Trap binding buffer prior to digestion. Trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 using 125 µl digestion buffer (50mM ABC, pH 8.5). For all workflows, the digested peptides were diluted 1:1 with 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18-SPE cartridges (25 mg, Biotage). After equilibration with 2 mL acetonitrile (ACN), 1 mL 50% ACN/1% acetic acid and 2 mL 0.1% TFA the samples were loaded onto the cartridge, washed with 2 mL 0,1% TFA and eluted with 1 mL 80% ACN/0,1% TFA. The eluted fractions were dried using an Eppendorf concentrator and stored at -20°C. Samples were reconstituted in 5% ACN with 0.1% formic acid (FA), loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 capillary trapping column (particle size 3 µm, L = 20 mm) and trapped for 6 min with a flow rate of 6 μL/min using a loading buffer composed of 0.05% TFA in H2O. Separation was carried out on a ReproSil C18-PepSep analytical column (particle size = 1.9 µm, ID = 75 µm, L = 25 cm, Bruker Corporation, Billerica, USA) using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) at a temperature of 55 °C. For top-down LC-MS, Proteins were separated by a gradient of buffer A (100% H2O and 0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, and 0.1% FA) with a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min. The gradient went from 4% to 33% buffer B in 75 min, 33-65% B in 15 min, 65-95% B in 1 min followed by constant flow at 95% B for 11 min. Eluate was analyzed in data-dependent mode employing splitted MS1 windows for precursor selection as well as a modified BoxCar as described by Meier-Credo et al. (2023) on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer coupled to the nano-HPLC by a Nano Flex ESI source. The gradient for bottom-up LC-MS went from 4% to 48% buffer B in 90 min. For data-dependent acquisition, MS1 survey scans were acquired over a scan range of 350–1400 m/z in the Orbitrap detector (resolution = 120k, automatic gain control (AGC) = 2e5, and maximum injection time: 50 ms). Sequence information was acquired by a “ddMS2 OT HCD” MS2 method with a fixed cycle time of 5 s for MS/MS scans. MS2 scans were generated from the most abundant precursors with a minimum intensity of 3e4 and charge states from two to five. Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole using a 1.4 Da window and HCD fragmented at 30 % normalized collision energy. For Orbitrap MS2, an AGC of 5e4 with dynamic maximum injection time were used (resolution = 30k). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Peptides were also analysed in data-independent acquisition mode on the same instrument. MS1 survey scans were acquired over a scan range of 350 – 1650 Th in the Orbitrap detector (resolution = 120k, AGC = 5e5, and maximum injection time: 100 ms). Sequence information was acquired by a tMS2 method with the following settings. MS2 scans were generated in a scan range of 350 – 2000 Th with isolation windows proposed by Muntel et al. (2019). Fragmentation was induced by HCD at 27% normalized collision energy. For Orbitrap MS2, an AGC of 1e6 with dynamic injection time and a minimum of 6 desired points per peak (resolution = 30k). The analysis in parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode was acquired using the “tMS2 OT HCD” MS2 method. Targets were isolated in the quadrupole with a window of 1.6 Th for fragmentation induced by HCD at 27 % normalized collision energy. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution = 15k, AGC = 2e5).

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw data were matched against a FASTA file downloaded from UniProtKB (May 2024) for E. coli K-12 (UP000000625) using different software according to the type of data acquired in the mass spectrometer. For all database searches, a minimum of one unique peptide was set as a requirement for protein identification. To compare the search tools in an unbiased manner, we kept most settings unchanged, only selecting relevant PTM’s and changing the minimum number of amino acids in identified peptides from seven to six. In all searches, a false discovery rate of 1% was applied at all levels. For all bottom-up searches, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a static modification, and acetylation on the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine residues were included as variable modifications. For FragPipe top-down searches, the 22.0 version was used applying the nonspecific-peptidome workflow. Default settings were employed allowing peptides of 7 - 65 amino acids and nonspecific digestion. No changes were made on precursor mass tolerance (40 ppm) and fragment ion tolerance (7 ppm). Acetylation on the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine residues were included as variable modifications. For PEAKS top-down searches, the 10.6 version was used applying the unspecific digestion settings. No changes were made on precursor mass tolerance (15 ppm) and fragment ion tolerance (0.02 Da). A maximum of 3 variable PTM’s were allowed per peptide. For MaxQuant DDA searches, version 2.5.2.0 was used with the following settings. Minimum tryptic peptide length of six amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. According to the standard settings, precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. For FragPipe DDA searches, version 22.0 was used with the following settings. Minimum peptide length of six amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, considering semi specific digestion. According to the standard settings, precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm. For PEAKS DDA searches, version 10.6 was used with standard settings in the semi specific digest mode. No changes were made on precursor mass tolerance (15 ppm) and fragment ion tolerance (0.02 Da). A maximum of 3 variable PTM’s were allowed per peptide.  For DIA-NN DIA searches, version 1.9 was used with the following settings. Library-free search was conducted with tryptic peptide lengths of 6 – 30 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites. Precursors charges of 1 – 6 and precursor m/z set from 300 to 1800. Matching between runs was enabled with heuristic protein inference. The raw report.tsv output file was analysed in R using the r/diann package and the data was filtered for proteotypicity, and a 1% FDR cut-off on the Q.Value, PG.Q.Value, Lib.Q.Value and Lib.PG.Q.Value, following the instructions from the developers. For PEAKS DIA searches, version 10.6 was used with standard settings in the semi specific digest mode. No changes were made on precursor mass tolerance (15 ppm) and fragment ion tolerance (0.02 Da). A maximum of 3 variable PTM’s were allowed per peptide. For FragPipe DIA searches, version 22.0 was used with the default workflows DIA_DIA-Umpire_SpecLib_Quant and DIA_SpecLib_Quant. For both workflows, a minimum peptide length of six amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites was employed. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 20 ppm. For Spectronaut DIA searches, version 19.0 was used in directDIA mode. Peptides with up to 2 miscleavages were allowed in the search settings with N-terminal methionine stripping activated. To identify potential modifications in peptides deriving from small proteins we ran open searches using the “Open” default workflow from FragPipe in version 22.0 in our DDA dataset. Precursor mass tolerance was set to a window of -150 to 700 Da to cover mass shifts deriving from PTMs, losses, and mutations. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Protein digestion was selected as nonspecific with peptide length range from 6 to 50 aa or 500 to 10000 Da. Up to two miscleavages were tolerated. MSFragger was set with localization-aware open search (LOS) algorithm, with deisotoping, mass calibration, parameter optimization, and monoisotopic correction enabled. PTM-Shepherd was used for mass shift summarization.

METHODS:
Experimental procedures
Database and In Silico Analysis of Known E. coli Small Proteins
The reference E. coli K-12 MG1655 was downloaded from UniProt (UP000000625, May 2024, 4402 entries) and used as the main database for this entire study. From this proteome, all proteins with up to 50 aa (166 entries) were filtered for in silico analysis. The expression of approximately 95% of these small proteins has already been demonstrated. For all the small proteins, the Gravy score was calculated using the alakazam R package, isoelectric point was calculated using Expasy, and relevant annotations were downloaded from UniProt (Supplemental Table S1).
Strains and Plasmids
E. coli K-12 MG1655 crl+ was used as the parental strain for all experiments. The mntS deletion was moved into the parental strain from GSO167 via P1 phage transduction to generate MG1655 ΔmntS::kan (GSO1287). The clpP deletion was moved into the parental strain from GSO303 via P1 phage transduction to generate MG1655 ΔclpP::cm (GSO1288). The lon deletion was moved into the parental strain from GSO384 via P1 phage transduction to generate MG1655 Δlon::tetR (GSO1289). Deletion of yceO was created by recombineering following published procedures. The ORF of yceO was replaced with a kanamycin cassette using λ red recombineering in the NM400 E. coli strain. The yceO deletion was then moved into the parental strain via P1 phage transduction to generate MG1655 ΔyceO::kanR (GSO1313). The kanamycin resistance cassette was removed using FLP recombinase to generate the markerless deletion MG1655 ΔyceO (GSO1314). The chromosomally sequential peptide affinity (SPA)–tagged yceO was moved into the parental strain from GSO312 via P1 phage transduction to generate MG1655 yceO-SPA kanR (GSO1315).
The plasmids used in this study were generated by isothermal assembly into the vector pBAD24. Briefly, gene synthesis products (Integrated DNA Technologies) were generated for the ORF of YceO and a tagged version of YceO-SPA with flanking vector complementary sequences. The products were inserted at the same multiple cloning site in the pBAD24 plasmid. Plasmids with correct inserts were transformed into DH5α cells to give DH5α/pBAD24 YceO (GSO1316) and DH5α/pBAD24 YceO-SPA (GSO1317). All strains and plasmids were confirmed by PCR or whole plasmid sequencing (Plasmidsaurus, Inc).
Cell Growth
Cells were grown with 250 rpm shaking at 37˚C. For LB growth and ethanol stress experiments, an overnight culture grown in LB medium (10 g tryptone, 5 g yeast extract, and 10 g of NaCl per liter) was diluted 1:100 into two separate flasks with LB and allowed to grow for 1 h at which time, 3% ethanol was added to one flask, and cells were incubated an additional 3 h (final absorbance at 600 nm ∼2.0 in LB without ethanol and ∼1.0 with ethanol). For growth in low magnesium, a single colony of wildtype cells was used to inoculate a culture in N-minimal media (7.5 mM (NH4)2SO4, 0.5 mM K2SO4, 1 mM KH2PO4, 5 mM KCl, 100 mM Tris–HCl [pH 7.5], 0.0004% vitamin B1, 0.1% casamino acids, and 0.4% glycerol) supplemented with high (1 mM) or low (15 μM) MgSO4, which were grown overnight (final absorbance at 600 nm = 2.0 and 1.2, respectively). For growth in low manganese, a single colony of wildtype and ΔmntS cells was used to inoculate a culture in M63 media (40 mM KH2PO4, 4 μM Fe3SO4, 80 mM K2HPO4, 30 mM (NH4)2SO4, and 0.4% glucose) supplemented with high (10 μM) or low (no addition) MnCl2, which were grown overnight (final absorbance at 600 nm = 3.2 and 2.8, respectively). For growth of protease deletion strains, a single colony was used to inoculate LB media and grown overnight until saturation (final absorbance at 600 nm ∼3). All cells were harvested by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 1 min at 4 °C. Pelleted cells were resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline, cells were aliquoted, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C prior to sample preparation.
YceO Protein Expression and Immunoblot Analysis
The parental MG1655 and YceO-SPA (GSO1315) strains were transformed with pBAD24. The ΔyceO (GSO1314) strain was transformed with either pBAD24 YceO or YceO-SPA. Following transformation, all cells were grown in LB supplemented with 100 μg/ml ampicillin. Two separate colonies were grown overnight with 250 rpm shaking at 37 °C. Overnight cultures were back diluted into LB supplemented with 0%, 0.002%, or 0.2% arabinose. Cells were collected for immunoblot or MS analysis following 2 h of induction. For immunoblot analysis, cell samples were normalized by an absorbance at 600 nm and immediately resuspended in 1x Laemmli loading buffer and stored at −20 °C before immunoblot analysis. Frozen cell lysates were boiled at 95 °C for 10 min followed by centrifugation at 15,000 RCF for 10 min. Resulting supernatant was run on precast 4 to 20% Tris–glycine gels at 200 V for 40 min. Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes at 100 V for 1 h. To prevent nonspecific antibody interactions, the blots were blocked for 1 h at room temperature with Tris-buffered saline with Tween-20 + 5% milk and probed overnight with 1:1000 anti-FLAG (anti-FLAG M2-peroxidase [horseradish peroxidase]). Following overnight incubation, blots were washed 3X with Tris-buffered saline with Tween-20 for 5 min and imaged. For MS analysis, cells were treated as described previously.
Synthesis of Target Peptides
Thirty preselected small proteins (highlighted in gray in Supplemental Table S1) were in silico digested using AlphaPeptDeep using standard settings and allowing for a maximum of one miscleavage and peptides ranging from 6 to 25 aa in length. The generated peptide list was submitted to JPT Technologies GmbH for spot peptide synthesis (SpikeTides). The ordered peptides contained no stable-isotope labels, were modified with cysteine carbamidomethylation when present, and were unpurified. After the removal of peptides that could not be synthesized, 125 peptides were delivered pooled and lyophilized in an amount of 7 nmol/peptide/tube.
To verify the purity of the crude mixture of peptides, four additional peptides were synthesized and purified with isotope labels by Peptide Specialty Laboratories GmbH. The C-terminal arginines of LLHYLINNIR, LAMPSGNQEPR, and MKVLNSLR were labeled with 13C and 15N, leading to a 10 Da increase in mass, and the C-terminal lysine of GVGEDISDGGNAISGAATK was labeled similarly, with an 8 Da mass increase.
Prediction of Peptide Properties for PRM
Using AlphaPeptDeep, we predicted tryptic peptides for all small proteins in our UniProt E. coli database (166 small proteins). Default settings were used, selecting the Orbitrap Eclipse as the mass spectrometer, and allowing for a maximum of one miscleavage in peptides ranging from 6 to 25 aa in length. For each peptide, precursors with one to four charges containing up to two variable modifications, namely methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and stripping of methionine initiator were allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. The predicted iRT, m/z, and charge of each precursor was added to an inclusion list for the PRM method. For spectral matching using Skyline (MacCoss Lab Software), a spectra library was generated in Prosit (ProteomeTools), based on a peptide library generated by DIA-neural network (NN), version 19.0 using the same parameters as described previously.
Top–Down Small Proteomics
E. coli cell pellets (200 μl) were mixed with 800 μl of UA20 buffer (6 M urea in 80% MS-grade water and 20% acetonitrile [ACN]), supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma–Aldrich; catalog no.: 04693124001) and subjected to cell lysis and homogenization using a probe sonicator (Sonifier, Branson) for three cycles of 30 s on 30% power, 50% duty cycle, and 30 s cooling on ice. The protein extracts were centrifuged for 10 min at 4000g for removal of insoluble material. For the removal of larger proteins, a Microcon-30 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) filter (Sigma–Aldrich) was preconditioned with 400 μl of UA20 and centrifuged for 20 min at 14,000g. Afterward, samples were loaded in these filters and centrifuged twice for 20 min at 14,000g. The flow-through containing small proteins was desalted and further purified with C18-SPE cartridges (Biotage). After equilibration with 2 ml ACN, 1 ml 50% ACN/1% acetic acid, and 2 ml 0.1% TFA, the samples were loaded onto the cartridge, washed with 2 ml 0.1% TFA, and eluted with 1 ml 80%ACN/0.1%TFA. The eluted fractions were dried using an Eppendorf concentrator (Eppendorf) and stored at −20 °C.
Top–Down LC–MS
Small protein extractions were reconstituted in 5% ACN with 0.1% formic acid (FA), loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 capillary trapping column (particle size 3 μm, L = 20 mm), and trapped for 6 min with a flow rate of 6 μl/min using a loading buffer composed of 0.05% TFA in H2O. Separation was carried out on a ReproSil C18-PepSep analytical column (particle size = 1.9 μm, ID = 75 μm, L = 25 cm; Bruker Corporation) using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) at a temperature of 55 °C. Proteins were separated by a gradient of water (buffer A: 100% H2O and 0.1% FA) and ACN (buffer B: 80% ACN, 20% H2O, and 0.1% FA) with a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min. The gradient went from 4% to 33% buffer B in 75 min, 33 to 65% B in 15 min, 65 to 95% B in 1 min followed by constant flow at 95% B for 11 min. All solvents were LC–MS grade and purchased from Riedel-de Häen/Honeywell. Eluting peptides and proteins were analyzed by two methods in data-dependent mode employing splitted MS1 windows for precursor selection as well as a modified BoxCar as described by Meier-Credo et al. on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the nano-HPLC by a Nano Flex electrospray ionization (ESI) source. In the splitted windows method, MS1 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with mass ranges from 350 to 800 m/z and 800 to 2000 m/z (maximum injection time [IT]: 50 ms, automatic gain control [AGC]: 50%, and resolution: 120 K) with individual fixed cycle times of 2 s. Charge states of 2 to 15 and minimum intensity (≥2.5e4) were selected for precursor filtering. Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole (windows: 1.4 Th [low mass range], 1.6 Th [high mass range]) and fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (normalized collision energy [NCE]: 30%). MS2 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap (maximum IT: 54 ms, AGC: 80%, and resolution: 30 K). A dynamic exclusion list was used with a cycle time of 30 s and 10 ppm mass tolerance. In the modified BoxCar method, MS1 scans were acquired with a mass range of 350 to 2000 m/z (maximum IT: 50 ms, AGC: 50%, and resolution: 120 K), which were further split into bins of 45 Th and distributed into three multiplexed tSIM scan events (maximum IT: 118 ms, AGC: 400%, and resolution: 60 K) with a fixed total cycle time of 4.5 s. Precursor filtering was set as described for the splitted MS1 method. To enhance the detection of highly charged and/or high mass compounds, an additional scan was enforced upon a detected charge state >5 or mass >1500 Da. Selected precursors were then isolated in the quadrupole (window: 1.6 Th) and subjected to HCD fragmentation at 35% NCE. MS2 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap (maximum IT: 54 ms, AGC: 100%, and resolution: 30 K). A dynamic exclusion list was used with a cycle time of 60 s and 10 ppm mass tolerance.
SPEED
E. coli cell pellets (20 μl) were mixed with 80 μl TFA (Sigma–Aldrich) and incubated for 5 min before neutralization with 2 M Tri–HCl buffer (pH 10.5). A small aliquot of each sample was diluted 1:10 in water for protein concentration estimation using the Nanodrop device, and the remaining was snap-frozen using liquid nitrogen.
A volume of SPEED-lysate containing 200 μg of proteins was diluted to a final volume of 100 μl with 2 M Tris–HCl buffer, placed in the ultrasonic bath for 10 min, and cell debris was cleared by centrifugation (500g, 5 min). The supernatants were collected and reduced by addition of 4 μl Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) for 30 min at 37 °C with mild agitation, followed by alkylation with 8 μl iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark with mild agitation. pH was adjusted to neutrality with 1% TFA, and MS-grade trypsin (Serva) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 using 100 μl digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate [ABC], pH 8.5). The samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C with light agitation. The digested peptides were diluted 1:1 with 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18-SPE cartridges (25 mg; Biotage). After equilibration with 2 ml ACN, 1 ml 50% ACN/1% acetic acid, and 2 ml 0.1% TFA, the samples were loaded onto the cartridge, washed with 2 ml 0.1% TFA, and eluted with 1 ml 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were dried using an Eppendorf concentrator (Eppendorf) and stored at −20 °C.
In-Solution Digest
E. coli cell pellets (200 μl) were mixed with 800 μl of UA20 buffer (6 M urea in 80% MS-grade water and 20% ACN), supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma–Aldrich; catalog no.: 04693124001) and subjected to cell lysis and homogenization using a probe sonicator (Sonifier, Branson) for three cycles of 30 s on 30% power, 50% duty cycle, and 30 s cooling on ice. Samples were then spun at 1000g for 5 min, and the supernatants were collected. A small aliquot was diluted 1:10 in water for protein concentration estimation using the Nanodrop device, and the remaining was snap-frozen using liquid nitrogen.
A volume of UA20-lysate containing 200 μg of proteins was diluted to a final volume of 100 μl with UA20-buffer, placed in the ultrasonic bath for 10 min, and cell debris was cleared by centrifugation (500g, 5 min). The supernatants were collected and reduced by addition of 4 μl TCEP for 30 min at 37 °C with mild agitation, followed by alkylation with 8 μl IAA for 30 min in the dark with mild agitation. MS-grade trypsin (Serva) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 using 488 μl digestion buffer (50 mM ABC, pH 8.5) as media, and the samples were incubated overnight at 37 °C with light agitation. The digested peptides were diluted 1:1 with 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18-SPE cartridges (25 mg, Biotage). After equilibration with 2 ml ACN, 1 ml 50% ACN/1% acetic acid, and 2 ml 0.1% TFA, the samples were loaded onto the cartridge, washed with 2 ml 0.1% TFA, and eluted with 1 ml 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were dried using an Eppendorf concentrator (Eppendorf) and stored at −20 °C.
For in-solution digestion of the flow-through from the 30 kDa MWCO filters used in top–down proteomics, protein concentration of 1:10 diluted flow-throughs were estimated using a Nanodrop device. A volume containing 100 μg of proteins was diluted to a final volume of 100 μl with UA20 buffer, and the workflow was carried out as described before.
S-Trap Digestion
E. coli cell pellets (200 μl) were mixed with 200 μl of lysis buffer (10% SDS, 100 mM tetraethyl ABC [pH 8.5]), supplemented with protease inhibitors (Sigma–Aldrich; catalog no.: 04693124001), and subjected to cell lysis and homogenization using a probe sonicator (Sonifier, Branson) for three cycles of 30 s on 30% power, 50% duty cycle, and 30 s cooling on ice. Samples were then spun at 1000g for 5 min, and the supernatants were collected. A small aliquot was diluted 1:10 in water for protein concentration estimation using the Nanodrop device, and the remaining was snap-frozen using liquid nitrogen.
A volume of SDS-lysate containing 200 μg of proteins was diluted to a final volume of 100 μl with lysis buffer, placed in the ultrasonic bath for 10 min, and cell debris was cleared by centrifugation (500g, 5 min). The supernatants were collected and reduced by addition of 4 μl TCEP for 30 min at 37 °C with mild agitation, followed by alkylation with 8 μl IAA for 30 min in the dark with mild agitation. The samples were acidified with 12 μl 12% phosphoric acid, diluted with 750 μl of the S-Trap binding buffer (1 M tetraethyl ABC buffer and methanol [10:90]), and transferred to S-Trap mini columns (ProtiFi). SDS removal was conducted by three washing cycles with 400 μl S-Trap binding buffer prior to digestion. MS-grade trypsin (Serva) was added in an enzyme to protein ratio 1:50 using 125 μl digestion buffer (50 mM ABC, pH 8.5) as media, and the column incubated overnight at 37 °C with light agitation. Peptides were eluted stepwise in 80 μl 50 mM ABC, 0.2% FA, and 50% ACN. The pooled fractions were diluted 1:1 with 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18-SPE cartridges (25 mg, Biotage). After equilibration with 2 ml ACN, 1 ml 50% ACN/1% acetic acid, and 2 ml 0.1% TFA, the samples were loaded onto the cartridge, washed with 2 ml 0.1% TFA, and eluted with 1 ml 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were dried using an Eppendorf concentrator (Eppendorf) and stored at −20 °C.
Bottom–Up LC-MS With DDA
Dried peptides were reconstituted in 5% ACN with 0.1% FA. Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 capillary trapping column (particle size 3 μm, L = 20 mm) and separated on a ReproSil C18-PepSep analytical column (particle size = 1.9 μm, ID = 75 μm, L = 25 cm; Bruker Corporation) using a nano-HPLC (Dionex U3000 RSLCnano) at a temperature of 55 °C. Trapping was carried out for 6 min with a flow rate of 6 μl/min using a loading buffer composed of 0.05% TFA in H2O. Peptides were separated by a gradient of water (buffer A: 100% H2O and 0.1% FA) and ACN (buffer B: 80% ACN, 20% H2O, and 0.1% FA) with a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min. The gradient went from 4% to 48% buffer B in 90 min. All solvents were LC–MS grade and purchased from Riedel-de Häen/Honeywell. Eluting peptides were analyzed in DDA mode on an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the nano-HPLC by a Nano Flex ESI source.
MS1 survey scans were acquired over a scan range of 350 to 1400 m/z in the Orbitrap detector (resolution = 120 K, AGC = 2e5, and maximum IT: 50 ms). Sequence information was acquired by a “ddMS2 OT HCD” MS2 method with a fixed cycle time of 5 s for MS/MS scans. MS2 scans were generated from the most abundant precursors with a minimum intensity of 3e4 and charge states from two to five. Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole using a 1.4 Th window and fragmented using HCD at 30% NCE. For Orbitrap MS2, an AGC of 5e4 with dynamic maximum IT was used (resolution = 30 K). Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.
Bottom–Up LC–MS With DIA
Liquid chromatography hardware and settings were the same as described for DDA. Peptides were also analyzed in DIA mode on the same instrument. For this method, MS1 survey scans were acquired over a scan range of 350 to 1650 Th in the Orbitrap detector (resolution = 120 K, AGC = 5e5, and maximum IT: 100 ms). Sequence information was acquired by a tMS2 method with the following settings. MS2 scans were generated in a scan range of 350 to 2000 Th with isolation windows proposed by Muntel et al. (Supplemental Table S2). Fragmentation was induced by HCD at 27% NCE. For Orbitrap MS2, an AGC of 1e6 with dynamic IT and a minimum of six desired points across the peak (resolution = 30k).
Bottom–Up LC–MS with PRM
Liquid chromatography hardware and settings were the same as described for DDA with the following changes. LC gradient went from 4% to 48% buffer B in 45 min. The analysis in PRM mode was acquired using the “tMS2 OT HCD” MS2 method. Targets from an inclusion list (Supplemental Table S3) were isolated in the quadrupole with a window of 1.6 Th for fragmentation induced by HCD at 27% NCE. Scheduled windows of 5 min around the specified retention time in the precursor lists were used to account for potential retention time shifts. Product ion spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap detector (resolution = 15 K, AGC = 2e5 [400%], and maximum IT mode = auto).
Top–Down Data Analysis
For the analysis of top–down proteomics data, searches were performed against the UniProt database using FragPipe and PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). For FragPipe top–down searches, the 22.0 version was used applying the nonspecific-peptidome workflow. Default settings were mostly employed, except that a false discovery rate (FDR) below 1% was applied not only at the peptide level but also at the protein level. The default settings included peptides of 7 to 65 aa and nonspecific digestion. No changes were made on precursor mass tolerance (40 ppm) and fragment ion tolerance (7 ppm). Acetylation on the protein N terminus and oxidation of methionine residues were included as variable modifications.
For PEAKS top–down searches, the 10.6 version was used applying the unspecific digestion settings. No changes were made on precursor mass tolerance (15 ppm) and fragment ion tolerance (0.02 Da). Acetylation and formylation on the protein N terminus and oxidation of methionine residues were included as variable modifications. A maximum of three variable PTMs were allowed per peptide. An FDR below 1% was applied at peptide and protein levels.
PTM Screening Using Top–Down Proteomics
To investigate the presence of PTM sites from top–down samples, MS raw data were matched to the UniProt E. coli database using PEAKS (10.6 version). The unspecific digestion mode was employed with no changes made on precursor mass tolerance (15 ppm) and fragment ion tolerance (0.02 Da). PEAKS PTM was used to search for 312 different built-in modifications. In addition, SPIDER was used to look for mutations. A maximum of two variable PTMs were allowed per peptide. An FDR below 1% was applied at the peptide and protein levels.
Bottom–Up Data Analysis
MS raw data were matched against the UniProt E. coli database using different software packages according to the type of data acquired in the mass spectrometer. For all database searches, a minimum of one unique peptide was set as a requirement for protein identification. Searches were performed in MaxQuant, FragPipe, and PEAKS, for DDA; and DIA-NN, FragPipe, and Spectronaut for DIA. The enzyme Trypsin/P was selected in all database searches.
To compare the search tools in an unbiased manner, we kept most settings unchanged, only selecting semispecific digestion and reducing the lower peptide limit from seven to six amino acids. The full overview of database search engine settings is described in Supplemental Table S4.
Open Searches in Bottom–Up Proteomics
To identify potential modifications in peptides deriving from small proteins, we ran open searches using the “Open” default workflow from FragPipe in version 22.0 in our DDA dataset. Precursor mass tolerance was set to a window of −150 to 700 Da to cover mass shifts deriving from PTMs, losses, and mutations. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Protein digestion was selected as nonspecific with peptide length range from 6 to 50 aa or 500 to 10,000 Da. Up to two miscleavages were tolerated. MSFragger was set with localization-aware open search algorithm, with deisotoping, mass calibration, parameter optimization, and monoisotopic correction enabled. PTM-Shepherd was used for mass shift summarization.
Proteogenomics Database Searches
To investigate the presence of potential novel small proteins, not annotated in the UniProt reference proteome, we ran database searches against an integrated proteogeonomics database (iPtgxDB) for E. coli MG1655. The tryptic iPtgxDB hierarchically combined protein sequences from the National Center for Biotechnology Information RefSeq, ab initio gene predictions from Prodigal, ab initio gene predictions from ChemGenome v2.0, and in silico ORF annotations as described by Omasits et al.. The database version 1 from 10.08.2020 was employed and contained 123,548 entries. Searches against DIA data were performed using DIA-NN, and searches against DDA data were performed using FragPipe as described in bottom–up data analysis.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
To enable a large-scale experiment, benchmarking analyses based on one biological replicate with two technical replicates. Nevertheless, encompassing cells grown under six distinct conditions, which allowed for more comprehensive coverage of the proteome and ensured that any observed effects were not limited to a single condition.
For the analysis of top–down proteomics, we analyzed in single injection cells gown in six conditions: LB, LB with ethanol stress, minimal media with and without Mn2+ starvation, and minimal media with and without Mg2+ starvation (n = 1 per condition). After analysis, outputs from PEAKS and FragPipe were manually curated and identified small proteins, and proteins with 51 to 100 aa were reported. For each small protein with detected modifications, spectra were manually curated. In our bottom–up proteomics benchmarking, samples from cells grown in the six conditions described previously were injected in technical duplicates, and their respective raw data were processed by each of the software packages described previously (n = 1 per condition). The outputs report.tsv from DIA-NN, proteingroups.txt from MaxQuant, combined_protein.tsv from FragPipe, proteins.csv from PEAKS, and the Pivot Report Protein Quant from Spectronaut were imported to RStudio for follow-up analysis. The output from DIA-NN was imported using the diann-rpackage, and the recommended filters were employed to the data (Q.Value ≤ 0.01, PG.Q.Value ≤ 0.01, Lib.Q.Value ≤ 0.01, Lib.PG.Q.Value ≤ 0.01, and Proteotypic = 1). All other outputs were analyzed directly as FDR filters were already in place. All plots were generated using ggplot2.
For quantitative analysis of small proteins using PRM, cells grown in the six conditions described previously were used (n = 3 per condition). Targeted MS data were imported into Skyline (version 24.1) for data analysis, in accordance to tier 3 guidelines. As reference libraries, we used outputs from Prosit and from S-Trap digested E. coli samples spiked with the synthetic peptides analyzed by DDA and processed by FragPipe. Precursors with charges 2 and 3, and fragments with charges 1 and 2 were selected for analysis. Precursor ions, b-ions, and y-ions were selected as matching transitions. All matching scans were allowed in the full scan settings.
The detected peaks were evaluated in terms of retention time difference to the synthetic peptide standards, in which a maximum of 1 min difference was tolerated and spectral similarity to the generated libraries, allowing for a minimum 0.75 dotp. For adequate peaks, the top five fragment ions based on intensity were selected for quantitation. If the peak shapes indicated interference from other peaks, up to two fragment ions were acceptably removed. Detected matching transitions were manually curated, reintegrated when needed, and exported as a .tsv file for follow-up analysis with R. Calibration curves were calculated using the least squares method for samples identified as standards, that is, E. coli S-Trap digested samples spiked with synthetic peptides in the range of 10 amol to 10 fmol in column. All plots were generated using ggplot2.
Differential Expression Analysis of Protease Deletion Strains
To validate the changes in protein levels in the protease deletion strains Δlon and ΔclpP, data were acquired with DIA and processed with DIA-NN as described previossly. The DIA-NN report.tsv output was imported with the matching FASTA file (downloaded from UniProt (UP000000625, May 2024, 4402 entries)) in RStudio using the MS-DAP package for differential expression analysis. After data import, protein identifications were filtered for only those present in both replicates of each strain. Data were normalized with the vsn and modebetween_protein algorithms as recommended by the original publication. The MSqRob algorithm was used for differential expression analysis with an FDR of 1%.

RESULTS:
Results
Top–Down Proteomics Improves Detection of Small Proteins
Top–down proteomics has significant advantages in circumventing issues related to tryptic digestion and peptide size associated with small protein detection. While we are not aware of previous top–down analyses of the E. coli small proteome, this approach has been successfully used to detect novel small proteins in, for example, Pseudomonas stutzeri, Methanosarcina mazei, and microproteins in mouse.
To assess the detection of small proteins by top–down proteomics, we generated protein samples from E. coli cells grown under multiple conditions: in standard LB media, in LB with ethanol stress, and in minimal media with or without manganese or magnesium starvation. We employed a workflow, which was previously developed in-house, optimized to remove larger proteins while retaining smaller protein products. Samples were lysed, passed through a 30 kDa MWCO filter to remove larger proteins, and measured using a top–down LC–MS method developed in-house on an Orbitrap Eclipse. The search tools Peaks Studio and FragPipe were used for raw data analysis (Fig. 2).
We observed that our top–down sample preparation led to the detection of 19 small proteins, outperforming previous bottom–up analysis (Fig. 3A). We observed a high degree of sequence coverage with 100% coverage for YpfM (19 aa), CydH (29 aa), CydX (37 aa), and Sra (45 aa). Only three small proteins, YkgO (46 aa), RpmH (46 aa), and YohO (35 aa), were detected with less than 50% coverage. Eight small proteins are only identified by one proteoform or proteolysis product. To be stringent and avoid the detection of one-hit wonders, we manually inspected the spectra for the eight proteins and only retained candidates with a minimum of five consecutive b- or y-ions (Supplemental Fig. S1). Only two candidates failed to pass this criterion, YmiD (42 aa) and YbgU (35 aa). To validate these identifications, we compared their spectra to spectra obtained from synthetic peptides matching their sequence (Supplemental Fig. S2). Among the 19 small proteins detected (Table 1 and Supplemental Table S5) are CydH (29 aa), a small transmembrane subunit of the bd-II-oxidase (Fig. 3B), previously not detected by shotgun LC–MS/MS and MgtS (31 aa), a transmembrane protein that regulates the stability of the magnesium transporter MgtA, also previously undetected by MS. We detected 128 proteins of 51 to 100 aa, a size range that, although not always classified as small proteins in bacteria, is also under-represented in MS analysis.
For these proteins, we were able to exploit another advantage of top–down proteomics: the ability to detect different proteoforms, that is, different protein species with PTMs or truncations. For example, we detected the ribosomal subunit RpmG with and without N-terminal methylation (Supplemental Fig. S3). This modification was previously suggested at the time of its structural characterization. Methionine initiator formylation, a common PTM in prokaryotes, was observed for six small proteins (MgtL, YpfM, CydH, MgtS, CydX, and RpmH).
Although top–down-based analyses improves small protein detection and identification of proteoforms, there are also drawbacks. First, top–down sample preparation can introduce proteoform byproducts that are not physiologically relevant. These byproducts can arise when proteins undergo unspecific proteolysis during sample preparation, because of, for example, insufficient endogenous protease inhibition despite the addition of protease inhibitors or chemical side reactions. This leads to a high number of protein species (over 13 on average) detected for small proteins and proteins of 51 to 100 aa (Fig. 3C). Furthermore, the large number of molecular species is a major limitation for top–down quantitation of small proteins, as the proteoforms and products from unspecific proteolysis make the grouping into one protein identifier convoluted and statistically complex. For example, top–down analysis of Sra yields up to 66 different molecular species, including the full-length protein, various fragments, and fragments with modified residues, making it extremely challenging to accurately quantify.
To better understand which of the identified molecular species are likely to originate in vivo and which might be byproducts of sample preparation, we intentionally increased sample resting periods in our top–down workflow and monitored proteoform detection over time. One set of cells was lysed immediately after thawing and then incubated on ice overnight, and a second set was lysed after cells were incubated on ice overnight. A control set of samples was lysed and prepared immediately after thawing. All lysates were then processed according to our top–down workflow. Overall, we detected a higher number of molecular species in the two sets of samples incubated on ice overnight in comparison to the control (Supplemental Table S6). For instance, for the ribosome-associated protein Sra (45 aa), the number of detected fragments increases from nine in the control to more than 20 in the overnight sample. Thus, a significant number of the observed species indeed are derived from degradation during sample preparation and likely are not physiologically relevant proteoforms. Surprisingly however, in the lysates and cells incubated on ice, we also detected a truncated form of EcnB (48 aa), which was previously undetected by top–down approach. We hypothesize that EcnB is nonspecifically degraded during sample preparation, releasing the sequence containing a lipidated amino acid (C22, N-palmitoyl, and S-diacylglycerol modifications have been asserted by curation on UniProt [P0ADB7]) and enabling its detection by MS. It is likely that the high hydrophobicity of the lipid modifications prevent EcnB from eluting from the reversed-phase column in its intact form.
In general, bottom–up proteomics remains superior to top–down proteomics for studies requiring accurate quantitation of protein expression levels, despite limitations in effectively capturing the small proteome. Thus, we next evaluated whether different methods of data acquisition or sample preparation could improve the ability to detect small proteins by bottom–up proteomics.
Small Protein Properties Provide Hints About Limits of Detectability by Bottom–Up Proteomics
To better understand the limitations of small protein detection by MS, we compiled a list of verified small proteins based on extensive work carried out for this organism and examined the properties of these proteins (Supplemental Table S1). Different factors could contribute to the poor detectability in bottom–up proteomics, including loss during sample preparation because of size, lack of tryptic cleavage sites, and thus high-quality peptides, and incomplete annotation in the genome (reviewed in Ref.). Approximately one-third of all small proteins in E. coli are predicted or have been shown to contain a transmembrane helix. This hydrophobicity might prevent their detection by MS. In addition, many small proteins do not yield tryptic peptides in a size range suitable for MS-based detection. The default settings of most database search engines have seven amino acids as the minimum size of a peptide. Analysis of the list of verified small proteins showed that approximately 30% (51 small proteins) do not yield any tryptic peptides in a size range usable for MS-based detection (7–30 aa). Another 39 small proteins would only yield a single peptide in this usable size range. The remaining 75 small proteins listed could be cleaved to generate at least two peptides, allowing identification and quantitation without failing the typically used filter of two-peptide minimum per protein. Adapting the settings to allow inclusion of peptides of six amino acids in theory would increase the number of identifiable small proteins in E. coli from 114 to 148 (Fig. 1B) without any noticeable impact in the percentage of unique peptides (96.52% of six aa long peptides in E. coli are unique, and 97.80% of seven aa long peptides are unique).
Impact of Data Acquisition on Bottom–Up Proteomics of Small Proteins
Most attempts to detect small proteins by bottom–up proteomics and most of the recently published bottom–up proteome studies of E. coli (Fig. 1A) acquire data utilizing DDA (the exception is Mori et al., where DIA/sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra was used). Thus, we wanted to evaluate whether DIA could improve detection of small proteins in our pipeline. To this end, we digested E. coli samples using a suspension trapping protocol (S-Trap), one of the most widely used platforms for bottom–up proteomics, and analyzed all samples using DDA and DIA modes on an Orbitrap Eclipse. For these comparisons, we used DIA-NN as the search engine for DIA data and FragPipe for DDA data. With DIA, we observed a 36% improvement on the total number of detected precursors for the entire proteome, from around 31,500 in DDA mode to more than 42,900 in DIA mode. This leads to a gain of almost 15% in detected proteins in each sample, from ∼2240 in DDA to ∼2480 in DIA (Fig. 4A). As expected, overall data quality was also clearly superior in our DIA dataset, reflected by a higher degree of data completeness (Supplemental Fig. S4A), and a lower average CV between samples, greatly improving quantitation (Supplemental Fig. S4B). We observed a comparable improvement for proteins in the 51 to 100 aa range, from 102 to 116 candidates per sample. However, for small proteins <50 aa, we reliably only detected an average of four small proteins in each sample using both methods.
Having showed that DIA is in fact superior for detection in bottom–up proteomics for proteins in general, we next evaluated the impact of raw-data processing and sample preparation in small protein studies.
Impact of Data Processing on Bottom–Up Proteomics of Small Proteins
A critical step in each bottom–up proteomics pipeline is the processing of MS data and the subsequent protein database search. Continuous, community-driven software development provides multiple software packages making use of different computational strategies in their search engines. Recently, machine learning algorithms making use of in silico predicted intensities of fragmentation patterns to create reference libraries have been providing excellent results, often outperforming libraries derived from experimental data. Currently, no study has systematically evaluated the performance of these packages comparing fixed protein inputs and contrasting DDA versus DIA acquisition strategies for small protein detection. Thus, we compared the different data processing pipelines on the datasets described previously. For direct comparisons, we set the FDR threshold at 1% at peptide and protein levels in all search engines (Supplemental Table S4).
For DDA, some of the most widely used search engines are MaxQuant, FragPipe, and PEAKS Studio. MaxQuant follows a probabilistic peptide-spectra match scoring, making it useful for well-defined quantitative studies, where the search space is predetermined. FragPipe is based on fragment ion indexing, making it effective in identifying novel PTMs and variants. PEAKS Studio combines database searches with de novo sequencing using a proprietary deep NN model that iteratively predicts consecutive amino acids. This enables the detection of noncanonical peptides like mutant peptides, peptides with novel PTMs, or semitryptic peptides.
In our DDA datasets, FragPipe provided the highest overall detection rate (Table 2). For small proteins, three proteins, EcnB, Sra, RpmH, are consistently identified by all search engines, whereas FragPipe additionally reports YkgO, and MaxQuant additionally reports RpmJ. It should be noted that all proteins uniquely identified by only one search engine had a very low number of peptides and PSMs, leading to a low confidence identification. In these instances, follow-up validation is advised.
For DIA, FragPipe, DIA-NN, and Spectronaut are commonly employed. FragPipe provides two different workflows for the analysis of DIA data, Fragger-DIA, which performs the database search on the DIA data directly, and DIA-Umpire, which first extracts pseudo MS/MS spectra and then performs a DDA search using MSFragger. The highest proteome coverage was achieved by Spectronaut, supported by a higher number of precursors (Table 2). This substantial increase in identification however is not as measurable for smaller proteins (Supplemental Table S7). The same five small proteins, RpmJ, Sra, EcnB, RpmH, and YkgO, are identified by Spectronaut, DIA-NN, and FragPipe/MSFragger, whereas only three small proteins, RpmH, Sra, and EcnB, were identified by FragPipe/Umpire.
Taken together, our analyses show that for detecting small proteins and proteins of 51 to 100 aa, there is little difference between commonly used software packages for database searches. While a number of these proteins can be identified using one but not another package, we did not detect a systematic bias, and the proteins detected by only one software are often lower confidence identifications and would require follow-up validation. The differential detection is likely related to how PSMs are scored and FDR are calculated in each engine. We thus recommend the use of multiple software packages for small protein analysis.
Another important consideration is that small proteins are poorly annotated across different organisms. To investigate the impact of this limitation, we searched our S-Trap digested, DIA data (using DIA-NN) and DDA data (using FragPipe) against the E. coli MG1655 iPtgxDB. From this database, we have obtained 20 additional matches for potential novel small proteins and 16 matches for potential novel proteins of 51 to 100 aa. However, only two of those hits were based on two or more peptide sequences, and these match sequences that cannot be distinguished from other proteins (Crl and PrfB). The remaining 34 hits were based on a single peptide with limited spectral quality. Thus, we were unable to confidently identify any small proteins not already annotated in the RefSeq or UniProt databases.
Impact of Sample Preparation on Bottom–Up Proteomics of Small Proteins
We next examined the impact of alternative sample preparation workflows for the study of the small proteome. We applied the S-Trap protocol above bbecause of its frequent use in bottom–up studies. However, we wanted to determine if the use of a filter for protein trapping and clean-up prior to digestion in the S-Trap protocol could lead to an undesired depletion of small proteins. Thus, we tested two different in-solution approaches, the SPEED protocol and an in-house optimized in-solution digest (in-Sol), based on the small protein extraction buffer used for the top–down workflow (Fig. 2). While several enrichment strategies for small proteins have been published in recent years, we focused on the most feasible “full proteome” methods, that is, not involving any fractionation or enrichment steps. Given that the same extraction buffer is used in our in-Sol and top–down proteomics workflows, we also coupled these strategies. This enabled us to investigate if more small proteins can be detected by enriching the low molecular-weight fraction of the lysates prior to digestion. We digested E. coli samples grown in standard LB media, in LB with ethanol stress, and in minimal media with and without manganese or magnesium starvation (two technical replicates in each group). The peptides obtained were analyzed in injection duplicates in an Orbitrap Eclipse using DIA.
While the S-Trap protocol outperforms both the SPEED and in-Sol workflows at the whole proteome level (Fig. 4B), we see different patterns for proteins of 51 to 100 aa and for small proteins. For proteins of 51 to 100 aa, we found an average number of 116 proteins using S-Trap, 142 proteins using SPEED, and 134 proteins using the in-Sol approach. The three sample preparation approaches showed a 61% overlap of identified proteins in this size range, the highest similarity observed between the in-solution digest and the SPEED workflow (overlap of 75%, Supplemental Fig. S5A). There were no biases in the types of proteins detected using these methods as indicated by similar Gravy scores and polarity profiles (Supplemental Fig. S5B). For small proteins of 50 aa and below, the S-Trap and SPEED approaches performed similarly with only three to four small proteins detected. With the in-Sol workflow, we detected five small proteins. Overall, we detected nine small proteins and 199 proteins of 51 to 100 aa (Supplemental Table S7) with DIA across all our studied conditions. We also observed that while the SPEED workflow leads to a higher number of identified proteins, they are supported by a fewer number of peptides. On average, we detected 4.1 peptides per protein (<50 aa and 51–100 aa length, combined) with the SPEED approach, compared with 5.7 using the in-Sol and 5.0 using the S-Trap approach (Supplemental Table S8).
Compared with the data acquired for whole-cell lysates, the digests from the 30 kDa MWCO flow-throughs showed a clear enrichment toward shorter sequence proteins (Supplemental Fig. S6). We identified a total of six small proteins, with the leader peptides MgtL (17 aa) and TnaC (24 aa) not detected previously with the whole-cell workflows. However, we only detected TnaC in one of three replicates, limiting the confidence in its identification. In addition to these small proteins, we identified 139 proteins of 51 to 100 aa with only CroE (66 aa) being uniquely detected by this sample preparation strategy.
Generally, different data-processing and sample preparation approaches did not lead to a pronounced increase in the detection of small proteins by DDA or DIA. We detected the highest number of small proteins using the in-Sol digestion with DIA detection (eight small proteins in total, Table 1). The DIA data highlight the low abundance of small proteins in E. coli based on their intensity: when ranking all detected proteins by their intensity, only two small proteins are among the top 150 most intense proteins, the ribosomal subunit RpmH and the ribosomal accessory protein Sra. Another small ribosomal protein RpmJ is in the top 20%. Focusing on the lowest intensity proteins, four of the eight detected small proteins, YkgO, YhiY, YpfM, and MntS, are present among the bottom 20% (Supplemental Fig. S5C).
We also evaluated the identifiable peptides when changing the lower peptide size limit from seven to six amino acids in the database search. While this setting change would in theory allow for more identifiable proteins by adding over 7000 unique peptides to the search space, we have not observed any additional peptides matching small proteins by changing this parameter. Furthermore, we investigated whether small proteins could be systematically modified by alternative PTMs, hindering their detection in standard search protocols. We thus conducted “open searches” (see Experimental procedures section) on our data but did not detect any unexpected modifications or new proteins.
PRM Improves the Sensitivity of Small Protein Detection
With the goal of detecting more small proteins by bottom–up proteomics and quantitating their levels, we set out to develop and apply a PRM-based workflow. PRM requires information, in the form of transitions, about the set of targets to be analyzed to allow the mass spectrometer to filter, fragment, and detect selected ions based on their m/z values and chromatographic retention time. Commonly, DDA or DIA survey runs are used to collect this information and create a precursor list for selected candidates. However, these survey runs often fail to detect small proteins. To circumvent this problem, we opted to use synthetic peptides as standards for obtaining the required parameters for a precursor list for a set of small proteins.
Based on previous biological data, we selected 30 representative small proteins of different sequence lengths, subcellular localizations, and functional characterization (known or unknown function) for peptide synthesis (Supplemental Table S9). Of the 30, three are commonly identified by LC–MS/MS experiments: EcnB, YkgO, and YpfM. A total of 125 synthetic peptides, corresponding to 24 small proteins, were obtained as a mixture. Peptides could not be generated for six of our small protein candidates because these tryptic-like peptides were either too long or no useful peptides could be generated based on the short protein sequence. To verify whether the synthesized peptides could be detected by LC–MS/MS, we first solubilized the peptides in sample buffer (5% ACN and 0.1% FA in MS-grade water) at a concentration of 10 fmol and injected them into our nanoLC coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse in DDA mode. We extracted the detected peptides peaks using Skyline and generated a precursor list for PRM (Supplemental Table S3). Of the 125 peptides, we detected signal for 98 at an injection amount of 10 fmol on column. Overall, we found that the synthetic peptides preferentially eluted in the early phase of the LC gradient in comparison to the complete set of E. coli detectable peptides, indicating that they are on average more hydrophilic (Supplemental Fig. S7). Next, we tested different collision energies for our target list, since it has been shown that product ion intensity can be boosted by collision energy optimization. However, we only observed minimal changes in signal intensity and thus sensitivity by varying the default collision energy by ±20%.
We next prepared two calibration curves, mixing different amounts of the synthetic peptide sample with either a HeLa or an E. coli cell lysate to evaluate their dose–response curves. The HeLa cell lysate was chosen as a more complex control background to test for matrix interference. For both background lysates, amounts injected on column were 10 amol to 10 fmol. We successfully obtained linear response curves for 54 peptides, matching 18 small proteins (Supplemental Fig. S8). We observed no noticeable differences in the calibration curves for eight of the 54 peptides when comparing both matrices. For the remaining 46 peptides, we observed either different limits of quantitation or distinct slopes, indicating that the composition of the lysate affected quantitation. To minimize this effect, we carried out all quantitative experiments by using the synthetic peptides spiked in an E. coli digest to generate the standard curves. Peptides matching six of the proteins were not detected in any of our standard injections, possibly because of either the LC–MS conditions or poor ionization efficiencies.
To measure the impact of the sample preparation on the number of detected peptides per small protein and the intensities of the detected ones, we spiked E. coli cell lysates with the mixture of synthetic peptides before carrying out the three sample preparation workflows described previously, S-Trap, SPEED, and in-Sol. From this experiment, we observed that there are pronounced differences between the different workflows: after adding 54 detectable synthetic peptides to the samples, we detected a maximum of 51 with the in-Sol protocol but <20 with the S-Trap (Fig. 5A). We then compared the intensities in the samples spiking in the peptides before sample preparation and clean-up or after preparation and clean-up, immediately before analysis. When adding the peptides to the lysates before digestion, we see a fourfold decrease in intensity with the in-Sol protocol (i.e., a recovery of approximately 25%) and a 100-fold decrease in intensity with the S-Trap (Fig. 5B). The substantial decrease in intensity and peptide detectability with the S-Trap method likely is due to elution of the proteins and peptides from the resin during the washing steps before the digestion. The few peptides that were retained and later detected have significantly higher GRAVY scores than the ones presumed to be lost through washing (0.356 versus −0.118, p < 0.05). The SPEED protocol, which led to the highest number of endogenous proteins detected in our bottom–up experiments, is intermediate with 40 of 54 peptides detected, with a recovery of approximately 5% based on intensity. These results underscore the need for continued optimization of sample preparation for the detection of small proteins.
We used our data to assess the sensitivity that can be obtained for small proteins in PRM compared with DIA by measuring S-Trap digested samples spiked with the synthetic peptides after clean-up in a range from 10 amol to 10 fmol on column. We observed that DIA can successfully identify and quantify all small proteins based on their synthesized peptides for concentrations as low as 200 amol. At lower concentrations, some small proteins are missed by this approach (Fig. 5C). Using PRM for the same samples, we are still able to detect all small proteins at 100 amol, and for each further dilution, PRM consistently detects more proteins than DIA. This demonstrates that PRM can reach lower detection levels, facilitating the detection of the lowest abundance proteins. At 5 amol, no protein could be detected by DIA, but seven still showed reproducible signal by PRM, although their intensity is too low for proper quantitation. In summary, we were able to verify the presence of small proteins in amounts as low as 5 amol and quantify several small proteins at 10 amol or higher with PRM, a more than 20-fold boost compared with DIA.
Another important advantage of targeted approaches, such as PRM, over untargeted approaches is the ability to quantify peptides against a synthetic peptide reference. To test how accurately we can quantify small proteins based on the bulk preparation of synthetic peptides, we compared four selected synthetic peptides, LLHYLINNIR, LAMPSGNQEPR, MKVLNSLR, and GVGEDISDGGNAISGAATK, with their purified heavy-labeled counterparts. For the same theoretical amount injected, we observed that the intensities of the unlabeled, bulk peptides were only, respectively, 24%, 37%, 6%, and 82% of the heavy-labeled purified peptides. This indicates that, while absolute quantitation with these peptides is not possible, a minimum number of protein copies per cell can still be estimated. Assuming that 1 ml of E. coli cell culture at an absorbance of 1 at 600 nm is equivalent to approximately 7 × 108 cells, 10 amol translates to at least 172 copies of a small protein per cell for the injection of 0.25% of a 1 ml digested sample under our sample preparation and analysis conditions (see Supplemental Table S10 for calculations).
PRM Detection of Small Protein–Derived Peptides Based on Predicted Properties
While PRM is promising for the detection and quantitation of small proteins at low abundance, the need for synthetic peptides to build the precursor lists is a limitation. Recent advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence enable the prediction of peptide fragmentation patterns and retention times that can be used for PRM method development without the need for synthetic peptides. We utilized AlphaPeptDeep for predicting the retention times of peptides and Prosit to generate a peptide spectral library that is compatible with Skyline to use as a control. As a starting point, we compared the in silico predicted retention times to the observed retention times of the synthetic peptides and noticed that they are, on average, less than 1 min apart across the 45 min effective gradient time (amounting to less than 2% retention time shift, Supplemental Fig. S9). This is well within the windows of 2 to 5 min usually set in PRM methods.
We then compared the spectral similarity of our detected targets to the Prosit library by the Skyline built-in dot product (dotp) calculation. We initially tested this approach for the E. coli samples digested with the S-Trap protocol, because of its lower level of contamination, focusing on peptides with no miscleavages. This allowed us to minimize the search space and maximize the effective instrument acquisition time. We verified the signals of small proteins known to be present: YkgO, EcnB, Sra, and RpmH are all identifiable with a dotp of at least 0.88 (on a scale of 0–1). RpmJ and YqfH were detected with slightly lower dotp values, that is, 0.82 and 0.78, respectively, still above the defined threshold of 0.75 for the quantitation based on synthetic peptides. All small proteins were detected within the predicted retention time windows. The high correlation between predicted and observed retention times in our experiments, as well as the spectral quality correlation measured by the dotp, shows that it is possible to use a PRM method for small proteins without the need for synthetic peptides. We were, however, unable to detect any additional small proteins based on predictions alone, indicating that further development is needed for detecting small proteins by PRM based only on in silico generated data.
To better understand the limitations of this technique and why we could not detect more small proteins based on predictions, we generated precursor lists for 20 small proteins for which we had no synthetic peptides (Supplemental Table S11). These proteins were selected based on previous biological validation of their expression. This new precursor list covered all potential peptides with up to two miscleavages (Supplemental Table S11). The lack of signal in our data led us to the conclusion that either the expression of these small proteins is close to zero under the conditions we tested, or that these small proteins are inaccessible to proteolytic digestion. We can rule out the possibility of these small proteins being lost in our sample preparation as we demonstrated that comparable, matching synthetic peptides pass through the workflow with reasonably low loss (Fig. 5, A and B).
PRM-Based Assessment of Small Protein Expression in E. coli
With our optimized PRM method, we wanted to determine for how many small proteins we could determine the minimum number of copies per cell in cultures grown as aforementioned (n = 3 biological replicates for each condition). All cell lysates were digested using the in-Sol method and analyzed using our PRM workflow.
We observed reproducible peaks for almost all small proteins that were detected using the DDA or DIA workflows and for which we had synthetic peptides (YpfM, YhiY, YkgO, EcnB, and MntS). We also detected and quantified AzuC (28 aa) and YmiA (46 aa), previously missed by untargeted MS. Furthermore, we detected YqhJ (19 aa) and YmiD (42 aa), but not in all biological replicates (Table 1). A visual evaluation of the EcnB peak and spectra (Fig. 5D) highlights two advantages of PRM compared with untargeted methods: peaks with less interference on the chromatogram and much clearer spectra because of fewer coisolated ions. This allows for a more in-depth and sensitive quantitation of the small proteome of E. coli.
Ribosomal profiling and biochemical assays have shown that the levels of some small proteins are elevated under certain environmental and growth conditions. For example, the small proteins, MgtS and MntS, are induced in media with limited Mg2+ and Mn2+, respectively, providing clues that they associate with the transporters for these ions. In our experiments, we also detected MntS exclusively in Mn2+ starvation conditions, at, however, low signal intensities. To validate our findings, we studied an E. coli ΔmntS strain grown in minimal media with low manganese (Fig. 6A) and compared the intensities to wildtype data. We found four matching transitions for MntS with low mass error in wildtype data. In the ΔmntS strain, three transitions were completely absent. The fourth transition only displayed intensities outside our normal mass accuracy tolerance (−34.8 ppm, normal mass tolerance = ±15 ppm) and can thus be attributed to interference from the matrix. These findings demonstrate the validity of our MntS identification.
Then, we investigated the differential expression of small proteins for the different growth conditions and quantified them against an external standard to yield the minimum number of copies per cell in the sample (Fig. 6B). Four proteins, EcnB, YhiY, YkgO, and YmiA, were detected in multiple growth conditions. We observed the highest expression of the entericidin B lipoprotein EcnB (up to ∼70,000 copies per cell) and the ribosomal subunit YkgO (up to ∼450,000 copies per cell), in cells grown in minimal media. While YkgO is known to be strongly expressed in cells grown in minimal media and induced during stationary phase, this was previously unknown for EcnB. The levels YhiY and YmiA were lower, at approximately 1000 to 3000 copies per cell on average. These estimates of copies per cell are similar to what has been observed by Li et al., despite somewhat different growth conditions (different media: LB, M63, and N-minimal media in our experiments and Mops in Li et al., as well as different growth stages). As mentioned previously, these estimates are also impacted by the purity of the synthetic peptides, leading to an underestimation of the actual expression value, as well as intrinsic factors of MS-based proteomics, such as incomplete cell lysis, protein solubilization, and digestion.
The small protein MntS was detected at ∼6000 copies per cell when strains were grown in minimal media with low Mn2+, but as expected, the signal was too low to be detected in minimal media with high Mn2+. AzuC and YpfM were also identified in all biological replicates for the low Mn2+ samples but not under other growth conditions, indicating these small proteins might be important under this growth condition. The identification of these small proteins is supported by a high correlation between transition intensities in the samples and in the synthetic peptides (Supplemental Fig. S10). Furthermore, we exploited the boost of detectability enabled by PRM to examine the TnaC leader peptide, which was only identified in one of three replicates by DIA. Using peptide information extracted from the DIA output (retention time and detected masses), we were able to detect the peptide WFNIDNK in all three replicates for cells grown under ethanol stress (Supplemental Fig. S11).
Despite the significant increase of small protein detectability with PRM, some small proteins are not present or are at such low abundance that their levels only reached our detection thresholds under certain conditions and not in all replicates. A peak matching YmiD was only detected in cells stressed by ethanol (Supplemental Fig. S12) in a single replicate, and at levels below our qualified limit of quantitation, preventing reliable quantification. The small protein YqhJ was also identified in a single replicate across all different conditions.
We wondered whether the levels of some small proteins are low because of degradation in the cell. We thus applied the PRM workflow to compare small protein abundance and detection in cells lacking the Lon or ClpP protease with wildtype cells. The only noticeable difference was for EcnB, which increased over 100-fold in the ΔclpP strain and 10-fold in the Δlon strain, in a similar fashion to what we observe in the DIA data acquired for the same samples (Supplemental Table S12). While these increased levels could reflect some differences in EcnB degradation, the increase in abundance could also be explained by the fact that ecnB transcription is induced by RpoS, a known target of ClpP. Notably, our experiments focused on two energy-dependent proteases. It is not clear if small proteins are targeted by these or by other proteases such as FtsH or other site-1 and site-2 metalloproteases. It is also possible that recognition is not specific to one protease, and degradation will still occur in strains lacking only ClpP or Lon.
To further investigate whether the major limitation to MS detection is the low abundance of the small proteins, we expressed the small protein YceO, known to be present at low levels in cells grown in LB, from an inducible promoter on a plasmid. When we compared wildtype E. coli cells to ΔyceO cells carrying a pBAD-yceO plasmid without and with induction with 0.002% arabinose, we observed two different peptides for YceO in the overexpression strain (ΔyceO + pBAD-yceO + 0.002% arabinose): LLHYLINNIR3+ and MRPFLQEYMR3+ (Fig. 7A). No peptide was identified for YceO in either the wildtype or the noninduced plasmid strain. As a comparison, we analyzed Western blots (n = 2) for SPA-tagged YceO expressed from the chromosome or inducible plasmid under the same conditions. We observed bands for all samples but could estimate that the chromosomal levels of YceO were at least 10,000 times lower than what was expressed on the plasmid induced with 0.002% arabinose (Fig. 7B). Assuming a linear response in the MS for the entire range, this difference would bring the levels of chromosomal YceO far below our limit of detection.
In summary, we demonstrated that PRM is a valuable approach for detecting and quantifying small proteins in E. coli. This acquisition strategy allows for reliable quantitation of proteins with low expression levels that would be otherwise missed and to assess the amounts of these proteins under the conditions studied. However, the low abundance of many small proteins still is a major limiting factor in their detection.

INTRODUCTION:
Our knowledge about the smallest proteins is severely limited because of the lack of gene annotation and challenges associated with the biochemical characteristics of these proteins, which are commonly denoted small proteins (defined as <50 amino acids [aa]) or microproteins in eukaryotes (defined as <100 aa). Despite long being ignored, recent studies have documented that small proteins and microproteins can be critical regulators of various biological processes and provide numerous ways to modulate cellular responses, including resistance to antibiotics, regulation of metabolism, membrane transport, and cell development. For most characterized examples, the small proteins interact with larger proteins or protein complexes to regulate their stability, assembly, activity, or subcellular localization.
While some small proteins and microproteins have been known for decades, most of them have only recently been annotated. This is explained, in part, by the adoption of thresholds of >50 to 100 aa for the annotation of ORFs in the early stages of genome sequencing to prevent spurious annotations. With the advances in computational approaches and ribosome profiling, these proteins are now being widely discovered. However, mass spectrometry (MS)–based proteomics could provide significant value for all aspects of small protein and microprotein characterization.
First, MS could be employed to identify small proteins, particularly those that are less well conserved, are encoded as alternative proteins in larger ORFs, or are recalcitrant to other techniques, such as ribosome profiling. In addition, a major category of overlooked small peptides is those derived from proteolysis of larger proteins, yet are stable and have independent functions. These include peptide hormones in eukaryotes and major histocompatibility complex peptides in humans and other vertebrates. Given that most small proteins act by binding larger partners, it also is important to be able to identify all proteins associated with a purified complex. Second, MS approaches are crucial for the quantitation of small protein expression levels, especially to elucidate how abundances change under specific growth conditions or because of degradation. Third, MS approaches are needed to determine whether the small proteins are modified; very little is known about post-translational modifications (PTMs) of the smallest proteins.
Developments in data acquisition and sample preparation for MS have improved small protein detection. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was once the most commonly applied bottom–up acquisition strategy. More recently, data-independent acquisition (DIA) has become more prominent, providing more complete datasets with greater quantitative power in full proteome studies. Targeted MS data acquisition strategies such as parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) also have been successfully used for detecting small viral peptides and microproteins in human samples. PRM involves monitoring multiple product ions associated with a single isolated precursor increasing the acquisition time for dedicated, preselected targets, leading to increased confidence in the identification as well as in the quantitation of peptides. In addition to data acquisition, multiple sample preparation workflows have been developed and adapted to enrich for small proteins or simply to prevent their depletion in standard approaches. Current approaches for MS-based proteomics focusing on small proteins and microproteins were extensively discussed in recent reviews. However, despite all efforts in advancing data acquisition and sample preparation, there is little consensus on the best strategy for the MS detection of small proteins and a comprehensive comparison of different approaches for a single model organism is missing.
We chose Escherichia coli as a robust, widely studied, and well-characterized model system, with extensive information on small protein expression and comprehensive data summarized on platforms, such as EcoCyc and UniProt. The latter lists 4402 different proteins for this organism (as of May 2024), 166 of which are classified as small proteins (Supplemental Table S1). This makes it an optimal foundation for in-depth comparison and development of MS-based proteomics methods for detecting small proteins. Importantly, even in E. coli, the important group of experimentally validated proteins below 100 aa remains under-represented in MS-based proteomics experiments because of limitations in their detection. While most E. coli proteomics studies can identify on average two-thirds of the annotated proteome, the fraction of small proteins detected is close to zero (Fig. 1A).
In this work, we systematically compared all steps of MS-based detection and quantitation of small proteins, including different methods for sample preparation, data acquisition using top–down DDA and bottom–up DDA, DIA, and PRM approaches, along with different processing software pipelines. To maximize our chances of detecting small proteins and to evaluate the quantitative power of each approach, we grew E. coli under multiple conditions. While the focus of our work was small proteins of <50 aa, we also evaluated our data for proteins of 51 to 100 aa, which in eukaryotes would be considered microproteins. Ultimately, we documented that top–down analysis is more suited for discovery of new small proteins, whereas bottom–up analysis with PRM data acquisition allowed us, for the first time, to determine the levels of 18 small proteins.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability
All data are available in the main text or the supplemental data. The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD058422 and PXD066241.
Targeted MS data were uploaded to Panorama, a public repository for quantitative datasets processed in Skyline, and are available on https://panoramaweb.org/smallptnprm.url
Supplemental Data
This article contains supplemental data.
Supplementary data