PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Fibroblast
diseases: Disease free
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification; Spectrum counting
keywords: Human fibroblast; Ecm

ABSTRACT:
During radiotherapy, X-rays can deliver significant doses of ionising radiation to both cancerous and surrounding healthy tissues, often leading to undesirable side effects that compromise patient outcomes. While the cellular effects of such therapeutic x-ray exposures are well studied, the impact on extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, which are critical to tissue integrity, remains poorly understood. This study characterises the response of breast proteins, including the major ECM components collagen I and fibronectin, to therapeutic X-rays doses of 50Gy (as employed in breast radiotherapy) and 100Gy, using a combination of gel electrophoresis, biochemical assays, and mass spectrometry-based peptide location fingerprinting (PLF) analysis. In purified protein solutions, X-ray exposure led to fragmentation of constituent α chains of collagen I, and in fibronectin localised structural modifications (as detected by LC-MS/MS peptide location fingerprinting [PLF]) which increased its binding affinity for collagen I. In complex environments, such as newly synthesised fibroblast-derived ECM (fECM) and mature ex vivo breast tissue, therapeutic x-rays induced proteolytic changes in, not just collagen I and fibronectin, but also key basement membrane proteins, including collagen IV, laminin, nidogen-1, and perlecan. Intracellular proteins associated with gene expression (RPS3, MeCP2), cytoskeleton (moesin, plectin), and the endoplasmic reticulum (calnexin) were also found to be structurally compromised. These structural changes may impair the ECM integrity and alter cell-ECM interactions, with potential implications for tissue stiffening, fibrosis, and impaired wound healing in irradiated tissues.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
X-Ray Exposure Induces Structural Changes in Human Breast Proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Immortalised human mammary fibroblast (HMFU-19) [42] were cultured at passage 20-22 and grown in RPMI-1460 media, with 1% Glutamax and 10% FBS. Cells were seeded in 6 well plates at a density of 105 per dish/well and grown until confluent (2-3 days). Media was changed every 2 days and cells were allowed to deposit matrix until 9 days post-confluence. The matrix was decellularized following previously established protocol [43], [44] by incubating with PBS- (137mM NaCl, 2.7mM KCl, 10mM Na2HPO4, 1.8mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4) (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) containing 0.5mL of 20mM NH4OH, 0.005% Triton-X 100 until no cells were visible. Additional 1mL of PBS- was added to each well and allowed to incubate overnight at 4°C to allow cells to detach fully. Plates/wells were carefully washed the next day with PBS- twice and PBS+ (PBS with 0.9 mM CaCl2 and 0.5mM MgCl2) twice to remove detergent and remaining cells. The decellularized matrix was then stored PBS+ supplemented with 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin (P/S) at 4°C (for up to 5 days) until needed.  The supernatant (PBS+ containing P/S) were collected to prevent loss of fragmented/released matrikines. 400μL of lysis buffer is added to the decellularised ECM in 6-well plates. Following which, the ECM was removed with the buffer and collected into an Eppendorf tube by using a mini cell scraper (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA). Supernatant was frozen down in -20°C freezer and lyophilized in a freeze dryer overnight. Subsequently, 100μL of lysis buffer was added to the lyophilised supernatant and combined with the ECM samples to a total volume of 500uL. The samples were then homogenised with ultrasonication using Covaris LE220+ (Covaris LLC, Woburn, MA, USA) at 500W peak power, 20% duty factor (100W average) for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was subsequently determined by Direct Detect™ (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) assay before storage at -20°C.100μg of homogenised extract (fECM or tECM protein amount determined by Direct Detect method) was diluted to either 130μL (purified proteins) or 500μL (fECM and tECM) in 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 7.5, prior to reduction with 5mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylation with 15mM Iodoacetamide (IAM). Phosphoric acid was added to a final concentration of 1.2% (v/v), followed by protein precipitation with binding buffer (100mM TEAB, 90% Methanol, pH 7.1) at a ratio of 6:1 (buffer:sample) (v/v). Proteins were then concentrated by an S-trap column (ProtiFi LLC, Fairport, NY, USA) which was washed with binding buffer before addition of 20μL trypsin at ration of 1:10 trpsin:sample in 50mM TEAB. Trypsin digestion was at 37°C for 16-24 hours. Digested peptide suspensions were sequentially eluted with 50mM TEAB, 0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid (FA) and finally 0.1% (v/v) FA in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile to a final 5% (v/v) acetonitrile concentration. Samples were desalted and washed with 0.1% formic acid using Oligo R3 beads added to 96-well Corning FiltrEX desalt filter plates. Next, peptides were eluted with 0.1% formic acid in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile and dried with Heto speed vacuum concentrator centrifuge (ThermoFisher, UK) without heating for 90 minutes. Vacuum-dried peptide samples were then stored at 4°C and re-suspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) FA prior to LC-MS/MS. Briefly, the experiment utilized an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (ThermoFisher, UK). The mobile phases consisted of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). A 2μL aliquot of re-suspended peptides (100ng/μL) was injected into a nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 analytical column (130Å, 1.7 µm, 75 µm X 250 mm, Waters Corp, Milford, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were separated with a multistage gradient as follows: 1% to 6% buffer B over 2 min, 6% to 18% buffer B over 44 min, 18% to 29% buffer B over 7 min and 29% to 65% buffer B over 1 min. MS2 data acquisition was performed in a data-dependant mode, covering a scan range of 300-1750Th

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher, UK) was used for protein identification with a pre-optimised workflow. Spectrum search were conducted using SEQUEST within Proteome Discoverer. The SwissProt database (retrieved from UniProtKB, release 2022_01) was used to search for fully tryptic peptides, with Homo sapiens specified as the taxonomy. Search parameters include a pre-cursor ion tolerance of 10ppm, and an MS/MS fragment ion tolerance of 0.2Da. Fixed modifications considered included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, while variable modifications considered were the oxidation of lysine, methionine, proline, and arginine. A maximum of two missed cleavages and peptide charge states of +1, +2, and +3 were considered. The peptide false discovery rate was controlled at 1%. Identified peptides lacking pre-cursor ion (MS1) intensity quantification were excluded.