PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Human; Hek293

ABSTRACT:
The intricate molecular environment of the native membrane profoundly influences every aspect of membrane protein (MP) biology. Despite this, the most prevalent method of studying MPs uses detergent-like molecules that disrupt and remove this vital local membrane context. This severely impedes our ability to quantitatively decipher the local molecular context and comprehend its regulatory role in the structure, function, and biogenesis of MPs. Using a library of membrane-active polymers we have developed a platform for the high-throughput analysis of the membrane proteome. The platform enables near-complete spatially resolved extraction of target MPs directly from their endogenous membranes into native nanodiscs that maintain the local membrane context. We accompany this advancement with an open-access quantitative database that provides the most efficient extraction conditions of 2065 unique mammalian MPs. Our method enables rapid and near-complete extraction and purification of target MPs directly from their endogenous organellar membranes at physiological expression levels while maintaining the nanoscale local membrane environment. Going beyond the plasma membrane proteome, our platform enables extraction from any target organellar membrane including the endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, lysosome, Golgi, and even transient organelles such as the autophagosome. To further validate this platform we took several independent MPs and demonstrated how our resource can enable rapid extraction and purification of target MPs from different organellar membranes with high efficiency and purity. Further, taking two synaptic vesicle MPs, we show how the database can be extended to capture multiprotein complexes between overexpressed MPs. We expect these publicly available resources to empower researchers across disciplines to capture membrane ‘nano-scoops’ containing a target MP efficiently and interface with structural, functional, and other bioanalytical approaches. We demonstrate an example of this by combining our extraction platform with single-molecule TIRF imaging to demonstrate how it can enable rapid determination of homo-oligomeric states of target MPs in native cell membranes.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A proteome-wide quantitative platform for nanoscale spatially resolved extraction of membrane proteins into native nanodiscs

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample preparation for LC-MS: Solubilized membrane active polymer scoops (MAPs) were MTBE extracted with minor modifications from previously described39. Briefly, 1 mL MTBE:MeOH (3:1) was added to 200uL MAP discs and vortexed for 45 minutes at 4C. Samples were sonicated for 15 minutes at 4C, and 650 uL of H2O:MeOH (3:1) with 1% KCl was added to the samples. They were vortexed, and centrifuged at 20,000xg for 5 minutes to precipitate protein. The supernatant was discarded and the protein pellet was dried under vacuum. Protein was resuspended in 10M Urea and heated for 30 minutes. 10mM DTT was added to each sample and incubated at 56C with shaking for 1 hour. 20mM IAA was added to each sample and incubated at 22C with shaking for 1 hour in the dark. The urea concentration was diluted to 1.5M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 1ug of trypsin was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 37C with shaking. Samples were desalted using SepPak18 cartridges, and a BCA assay was used to quantify peptides before drying under vacuum.  Liquid chromatography: Samples were resuspended in water + 0.1% formic acid and equally loaded at 500 ng for each run. Chromatography was conducted on a Vanquish Neo nLC with a home-packed C18 column (15cm x 75 uM ID) for separation of peptides by hydrophobicity. A 75-minute gradient was used with a buffer system of water/acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry: Mass spectrometric acquisition was performed using a DDA method on the Orbitrap Eclipse platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 scans were acquired using the Orbitrap detector at a resolution of 120000 and stored in profile mode. A mass range of 350-1400 m/z was used with an intensity threshold of 1.0e3. A cycle time of 1 second was used for ion isolation and MS2 fragmentation. Ions were isolated with a 1.4 m/z window and fragmented with CID energy at 30% activation. Product ions were detected at the ion trap set to rapid detection mode. Precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds after one instance of detection.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw proteomic data-processing: MaxQuant version 2.3.1.0 (RRID:SCR_014485) was used to ID peptides and perform label free quantitation40. Spectra were first searched against the SwissProt Human Proteome, downloaded from Uniprot (03/09/23). Modifications were set to Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), and Deamidation (N). Trypsin/P was used for digestion with a max number of missed cleavages set to 2. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. Match between runs was enabled. Label-free quantitation was enabled with the LFQ min ratio count set to 1, and FastLFQ was used. Peptide and protein FDRs were both set to 1%. The “protein groups” table was used for further analysis, and decoys and contaminants were filtered out.  Data analysis for building a solubilization database: Any proteins not detected in both biological replicates were filtered out. The protein groups sheet was then hand-curated to filter out any soluble proteins that were erroneously filtered into the membrane protein database. The protein groups sheet was then run through an in-house code that matched protein hits against organellar databases downloaded from Uniprot (03/09/23). Any protein not matching an organellar database was hand-curated to either be included in the correct organellar database or filtered out with the resulting sheet containing only membrane proteins. This sheet, containing 2065 proteins, was used to generate the solubilization database and for all downstream analyses. It was run through an in-house code to average LFQ values across biological replicates, normalize LFQ values, and normalize each protein to the highest LFQ value across all polymer conditions. This means that the polymer with the highest LFQ value for a given protein was scaled to 100% and all other conditions were scaled accordingly. These values represent the solubilization database and were fed into the WebApp for searching.