PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics; Top-down proteomics
keywords: Plasma; Native peptide; Peptidome

ABSTRACT:
We have improved our ultrahigh-yield method, which we named “differential solubilization" (J Proteome Res 9, 2010, 1694-1705), to extract and analyse low-molecular-weight plasma peptides, and initiated a large-scale sequencing of circulating native peptides at concentrations as low as the picomolar level using less than 200 μl of human plasma.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Human plasma peptidomics -  Identification and quantification of plasma free salusin-β, an endogenous parasympathomimetic peptide

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Blood samples were taken from four healthy volunteers into vacutainers containing Na2-EDTA and separated immediately in a refrigerated centrifuge at 1,000 g for 20 min. Aliquots were immediately flash-frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until processing. Informed consent was obtained from the volunteers. Thawed plasma was processed essentially according to the differential solubilization method, but with the following modifications. A 50-μl plasma sample was diluted 1:2 with 100 μl of denaturing solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 20 mM dithiothreitol), slowly dropped into 2 ml ice-cold acetone, immediately stirred at 4 °C for 1 h and centrifuged at 19,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The precipitate was resuspended in 1 ml of 80% acetonitrile containing 12 mM HCl, mixed at 4 °C for 2 h and centrifuged again at 19,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The low molecular weight peptides fraction, eluted into the supernatant, was lyophilized and stored at −80 °C until use. Enriched eluates with or without the reductive alkylation procedure were either directly analysed by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) or subjected to reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) to be pre-separated into 8 or 13 fractions by a 'cyclic sample pooling technique' prior to the LC-MS/MS experiment. RP-HPLC prefractionated and non-fractionated samples were injected onto a C18 0.075- × 20-mm trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then eluted onto a C18 0.075- × 120-mm analytical column (Nano HPLC Capillary Column; Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) configured to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The flow rate of the mobile phase was 300 nl/min; mobile phase (A) consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase (B) consisted of 0.1% formic acid/90% acetonitrile. After sample introduction, the ratio of these solvents was programmed to change in 54-, 70-, 90-, 120-, 165- and 215-min cycles. Separated peptides were subjected to Q-Exactive™ (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The 12 most intense full-scan peaks were selected with an isolation window of 1.6 Da or 2.4 Da. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2 kV; no sheath or auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250 °C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw LC-MS/MS data obtained from a total of all 189 runs were classified to four MS groups (MS data groups 1–4). Each MS group data was searched against the SwissProt_2015_02.fasta database (selected for Homo sapiens; 20,199 entries) using two different data processing pipelines and search engines, Mascot (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) and PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada). In the Mascot workflow, raw MS and MS/MS data files were processed using Mascot Distiller (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). Data processing included peak picking, de-isotoping and charge deconvolution of fragment ions. The resulting peak list files were searched using the Mascot search engine (version 2.4.1). The search parameters were as follows: enzyme, no enzyme; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C) (MS data groups 2 and 4); variable modifications, acetyl (N-term), amidated (C-term), oxidation (M); peptide ion mass tolerance, 6 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da. The identified peptides were searched against the randomized decoy database created by Mascot. In the PEAKS Studio workflow, the PEAKS Studio (version 7.0) was used to perform peak picking, de-isotoping, charge deconvolution of fragment ions and de novo peptide sequencing-based database search from MS and MS/MS spectra of peptides. The search parameters were as follows: enzyme, no enzyme; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C) (MS data groups 1 and 3); variable modifications, acetyl (N-term), amidated (C-term), oxidation (M); peptide ion mass tolerance, 6 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da. The PEAKS' PTM algorithm was applied to identify variable modifications. The FDR was set as 1%.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Study participants
A total of 28 healthy volunteers (14 men and 14 women, age 46.5 ± 13.2), 51 diabetic patients (type 1 diabetes, 11 men and 9 women, age 54.9 ± 4.0; type 2 diabetes, 15 men and 16 women, age 54.5 ± 4.5), 10 patients with panhypopituitarism with complete diabetes insipidus (4 men and 6 women, age 46.3 ± 4.6), and 7 patients with obesity without diabetes (4 men and 3 women, age 33.3 ± 2.4) provided blood samples. None of the healthy volunteers had any current medical problems. Patients with diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus were diagnosed and recruited as previously described. The protocols were approved by the Kitasato University Medical School Ethics Committee and informed consent was obtained from all participants. All study methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations of Kitasato University Medical School.
Plasma sample collection
Blood samples from the above subjects were collected into vacutainers containing Na2-EDTA (1.5 mg/mL), and plasma was separated immediately in a refrigerated centrifuge and stored in aliquots at −30 °C until processing. For LC-MS/MS analysis, plasma obtained from four healthy volunteers were combined without addition of any detergents and immediately stored at −80 °C.
Mass spectrometry analysis
Thawed plasma was processed according to the differential solubilization method with the following minor modifications. A 50-μL plasma sample diluted with 100 µL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 20 mM dithiothreitol solution was slowly dropped into 2 mL of ice-cold acetone and immediately stirred at 4 °C for 1 h and centrifuged at 19,000 × g for 15 min at 4 °C. The precipitate was then resuspended in 1 mL 80% acetonitrile and 12 mM HCl, mixed at 4 °C for 2 h, centrifuged again, and the supernatant lyophilized and stored at −80 °C. Lyophilized peptides were redissolved in 1 × Invitrosol (Life Technologies) and 100 mM ammonium hydrogen carbonate, and combined to give a total of 480 µL of original plasma to be injected onto a 2.0-i.d. × 100-mm C18 reversed phase (RP) column (Cadenza CD-C18; Imtakt) attached to a HPLC system (Nanospace SI-2; Shiseido Fine Chemicals). Extracted peptides were separated at 1 min intervals and combined into 8 fractions using cyclic sample pooling. All HPLC fractions were then lyophilized and redissolved in 32 µL of 500 ng/mL NV10 (AMR) and 8 µL (120 µL of original plasma) was injected onto a C18 0.075- × 20-mm trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then eluted onto a C18 0.075- × 120-mm analytical column (Nano HPLC Capillary Column; Nikkyo Technos) configured to an EASY-nLC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher). The mobile phases consisted of (A) 0.1% formic acid and (B) 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile, and the flow rate of the mobile phase was set at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase flow was programmed as follows: 8–28% B (0–60 min), 28–50% B (60–70 min), 50–100% B (70–72 min), and 100% B (72–90 min). Separated peptides were subjected to Q-Exactive™ (Thermo Fisher) operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between full-scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Full scan mass spectra (m/z 350–1200) were acquired in the Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher) with 70,000 resolution at m/z 200, after accumulation of ions to a 1 × 106 target value. The ten most intense peaks with charge state more than two from the full scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.4 Da, and fragmented in the higher energy collisional dissociation cell with normalized collision energy of 27%. Tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200, after accumulation of ions to a 5 × 104 target value. The ion selection threshold was 7 × 105 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 120 ms for full MS scans, and 200 ms for tandem mass spectra. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature of 250 °C; and dynamic exclusion time, 30 s.
Database searches were performed using the SwissProt_2015_02.fasta database (selected for Homo sapiens; 20,199 entries), and PEAKS Studio (version 7.0, Bioinformatics Solutions) was used to perform de novo peptide-sequence-based database searches from MS and MS/MS spectra of peptides. The search parameters were as follows: enzyme, no enzyme; variable modifications, acetyl (N-term), amidated (C-term), oxidation (M); peptide ion mass tolerance, 6 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate was set at 1%. The raw mass spectrometry data have been deposited into the ProteomeEXchange Consortium database and the information on respective identifiers has been added to Table 1.
Production and purification of salusin-β antibodies
Synthetic peptide, [Cys0]-PEG-GRAPP (Scrum), was pretreated with a protein crosslinking and fixation reagent, mixed with untreated [Cys0]-PEG-GRAPP, coupled to maleimide-activated mariculture keyhole limpet hemocyanin (Pierce), and immunized into Japanese white rabbits. This polyclonal C-terminal salusin-β antiserum was purified using a Melongel IgG purification kit (Thermo Fisher) and 200 µg of the purified rabbit IgG was labeled with peroxidase using a Peroxidase Labeling Kit (Dojindo Laboratories) and dissolved in 200 µL of storage buffer according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Polyclonal antibodies against N-terminal salusin-β were raised in chickens by immunization with a synthetic N-terminal salusin-β sequence, AIFIFI-[Cys0]2, and were extracted from egg yolk using a Thermo Scientific Pierce Chicken IgY Purification Kit (Thermo Fisher).
Salusin-β-depleted human plasma
Plasma samples obtained from healthy subjects were circulated within a 60-cm polypropylene tube (outer diameter 4 mm, inner diameter 2 mm) using a peristaltic pump for 2 h at room temperature (RT). This allows free salusin-β to be removed by adherence to the inner surface of the tube. The plasma was then centrifuged at 1500 × g for 10 min and the supernatant stored at −30 °C until required for ELISA. Depletion of endogenous salusin-β was confirmed by the following two criteria: 1) failure to detect the native full-length salusin-β sequence using mass spectrometry and a non-tryptic native peptide identification approach; and 2) failure to detect salusin-β-like immunoreactivity using the specific antibodies described above.
Sandwich ELISA to directly measure plasma free salusin-β
Flat-bottomed 96-well black microtiter plates (Porvair Sciences) were coated with 100 µL of 0.1 µg/mL anti-N-terminal salusin-β IgY as a capture antibody and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were washed three times with PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 (PBS-T, pH 7.4) and then blocked with 5% (w/v) skim milk in Tris-buffered saline for 2 h at RT. Salusin-β (Peptide Institute) was reconstituted in PBS containing 0.025% NP-40 to avoid its adherence to experimental plastic tubes and tips, and serially diluted to between 1 and 10 nM. Ten-microliter plasma samples were diluted with 40 µL of 0.025% NP-40/PBS, while 10 µL of salusin-β-depleted plasma samples were added to 40 µL of standard salusin-β solution serially diluted with 0.025% NP-40/PBS. This was added to 50 µL of peroxidase conjugated anti-C-terminal salusin-β IgG prediluted to 1:500 with 0.025% NP-40/PBS and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Microtiter plates precoated with anti-N-terminal salusin-β IgY were then washed with PBS-T three times, 100 µL of immune complex mixtures were applied to the wells, and the plates further incubated for 1 h at RT. The plates were then washed with PBS-T four times, 120 µL of 0.5% 3-(4-hydroxyphenyl) propionic acid containing 0.005% H2O2 added, and the plates incubated again for 1 h at RT. The reaction was then stopped by adding 0.1 M glycine-NaOH solution (pH 10.3) and the fluorescence measured at an excitation wavelength of 320 nm and an emission wavelength 405 nm on a SpectraMax M2 microplate reader (Molecular Devices).
Clinical protocols
Stored plasma samples obtained using clinical protocols performed previously were used for measuring the free salusin-β levels. These include: 1, postural changes (4 men and 2 women); 2, circadian variation (18 men and 9 women); 3, oral water loading (3 men and 3 women); 4, intravenous hypertonic saline loading (3 men and 2 women); and 5, Valsalva maneuvers (9 men, 2 women). Seven healthy subjects (3 men, 4 women) performed the Valsalva maneuver on a different day exactly as described, except that blood samples were collected at 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 s. Oral glucose tolerance tests were performed in 10 subjects (4 men, 6 women) whose laboratory data revealed that they were non-diabetic. After a 10-h overnight fast, all of the subjects ingested a solution containing 75 g of glucose and venous blood was drawn at 0, 30, 60, 90, 120, and 180 min.
Diabetic patients received routine systemic evaluation, including serum biochemical analysis. Patients were also evaluated for their glycemic excursion profiles using continuous glucose monitoring (CGM; CGMS® System Gold or Minimed iPro2® CGM, Medtronic Minimed). All 576 glucose values obtained at 5-min intervals during 48-h CGM recordings were used to calculate the mean glucose or the glycemic SD, and this was compared against the plasma free salusin-β level for each patient.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as the mean ± SE. Differences within groups or over time courses were examined for statistical significance using a one way ANOVA and post hoc comparisons were analyzed using a Mann-Whitney U test or a Wilcoxon signed-rank test. These analysis were performed using GraphPad Prism 5 (GraphPad Software). Multivariate analyses were performed using JMP ver. 5.0.1a (SAS, Cary, NC, USA) employing age, gender, diabetes, panhypopituitarism and body mass index as an explanatory variable and plasma free salusin-β level as an objective variable. Test results with P < 0.05 were considered as statistically significant.
 Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

RESULTS:
Results
Identification of circulating salusin-β and its fragments
Pooled plasma was depleted of high-abundance proteins and further enriched for the low molecular weight (MW) native peptides fraction by removing residual plasma high MW proteins. Enriched eluates containing low MW native peptides that were previously unbound or bound to carrier proteins were subjected to pre-separation using RP-HPLC followed by LC-MS/MS. The data obtained were subjected to a PEAKS Studio database search based on de novo sequences. This resulted in the identification of the full-length 20 amino acid residue, salusin-β (Fig. 1a) and 7 additional cleavage products (Fig. 1b–h). The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (Table 1).  
Free salusin-β ELISA
A specific sandwich ELISA was established and validated for the direct measurement of plasma free salusin-β. However, we found that addition of NP-40, a non-ionic detergent normally used to prevent salusin-β loss, at concentrations ≥0.05% actually reduced salusin-β binding to its antibody. To overcome this issue, we used 0.025% NP-40 to dissolve high-purity salusin-β and for subsequent experimental uses of salusin-β solution. A standard absorbance curve was generated using synthetic human salusin-β peptide diluted to 2.3–46.8 ng/mL (1.0–20 nmol/L). To evaluate parallelism, serial dilutions of extracted human plasma were assayed, yielding a highly linear relationship with an R2 value of 0.99 (P < 0.0001; Fig. 2a). The intra-assay CV was 4.8% (n = 7) and the inter-assay CV 17.1% (n = 10). The minimum detection limit was 1.12 ng/well (0.48 nmol/well) and the ED50 was 18.5 ng/well (43.3 nmol/well). We synthesized the seven salusin-β fragment sequences we identified in human plasma and found that none had greater than 0.03% cross-reactivity when subjected to our salusin-β ELISA (Table 2).  
Pathophysiological implications of plasma free salusin-β
Free salusin-β measured during daytime did not show any appreciable circadian variations. However, overnight blood sampling revealed markedly reduced levels at 6 am (Fig. 2b). This early morning nadir was profound and coincided with night-time parasympathetic augmentation as demonstrated by elevated high frequency components (HF) and the root mean square of successive differences of normal-to-normal intervals (RMSSD) values (Fig. 2b). The magnitude of this decrease in free salusin-β was far more pronounced than that observed previously for total salusin-β.
To examine the direct effect of parasympathetic nervous stimulation, we measured free salusin-β levels before and after the Valsalva maneuver using the same plasma samples that we previously used to determine total salusin-β. Unlike total salusin-β levels, which gradually decreased following the Valsalva maneuver, free salusin-β levels did not show any significant changes at 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30 min following the maneuver. We repeated the experiment to investigate whether the Valsalva maneuver exerted more rapid changes. Plasma free salusin-β levels were reduced within 30 s, and these levels returned to the baseline level after 45 s (Fig. 2c).
We investigated whether plasma free salusin-β is under the influence of physiological stimuli that modulate hemodynamic and body fluid status. Compared with the values obtained after sitting for 15 min (74.2 ± 10.0 ng/mL), plasma salusin-β levels were unaffected after 30 min in the supine position (73.9 ± 8.4 ng/mL) and after 60-min in the standing position (72.4 ± 6.9 ng/mL). Drinking 20 mL/kg body weight of water did not significantly suppress plasma salusin-β after 60 min (67.4 ± 16.8 vs. 61.8 ± 14.4 ng/mL, ns). Hypertonic saline infusion, a powerful stimulus of vasopressin release, also did not significantly affect plasma salusin-β levels after 60 min (42.8 ± 14.9 vs. 45.1 ± 17.2 ng/mL, ns). Combined, these results show that stimulation of vasopressin release is unaccompanied by changes in free salusin-β levels.
To further explore the conditions affecting plasma free salusin-β levels, we measured levels in patients with diabetes and panhypopituitarism, and in non-diabetic obese subjects. Patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes, but not nondiabetic obese subjects, had significantly reduced plasma free salusin-β levels compared with healthy controls (P < 0.005, Fig. 3a). Patients with panhypopituitarism combined with complete central diabetes insipidus also had reduced plasma free salusin-β levels (P < 0.005) compared with healthy controls. This finding supports the hypothesis that peripheral salusin-β might partly originate in the pituitary. Multivariate analyses confirmed that type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes and panhypopituitarism were independently associated with reduced free salusin-β values (β = −0.551, F = 13.742, P < 0.0005; β = −0.629, F = 17.186, P < 0.0001, β = −0.474, F = 14.876, P < 0.0005, respectively), whereas age, gender and body mass index were not selected as independent variables influencing these levels. We analyzed whether the exact glycemic profiles of our diabetic patients were related to their plasma free salusin-β values. Neither mean glucose values nor glycemic SD data obtained during the 48-h CGM recordings was significantly correlated with plasma free salusin-β values. HbA1c, glycated albumin, serum LDL cholesterol, and serum HDL cholesterol levels also did not correlate with plasma free salusin-β. In our non-diabetic population, oral intake of 75 g glucose suppressed the free salusin-β levels and the effect lasted for at least 180 min (Fig. 3b). 

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Salusin-β is a potent bioactive peptide that we originally predicted using in silico analysis of a human cDNA library. Salusin-β-like immunoreactivity was later demonstrated in human plasma and urine. Salusin-β exerts combined systemic and local biological actions, including hypotensive and bradycardic effects, that are mediated via systemic parasympathetic stimulation and negative cardiotropic inotropism. Central salusin-β regulates hemodynamic homeostasis by inducing antidipsogenesis, blood pressure elevation and stimulation of vasopressin and oxytocin secretion. Peripheral activities of salusin-β include its potent proatherosclerotic effects and suppression of cardiac remodeling. In addition to such overwhelming biological activities, it has also been proposed as a biomarker for certain human diseases.
Despite its potent and unique activities, measurement of human plasma salusin-β concentrations using commercially available kits described in the literature is largely inconsistent. Highly purified synthetic salusin-β, immediately after reconstitution with distilled water, tightly adheres to various plastic and glass consumables in medical and laboratory use. Such unusual physicochemical properties of salusin-β can be circumvented by the addition of a low concentration of non-ionic detergent. The processing of salusin-β and its precursors remains largely unknown. Although full-length salusin-β appears to bind to plasma proteins, its binding capacities and affinities are as yet unknown and such binding is likely to confound the published serum salusin-β measurements.
We are in the process of successfully identifying plasma native peptides using LC-MS/MS, and unveiling a variety of fragments and precursors of many classical bioactive/biomarker peptides in the human peripheral circulation. Among the many circulating proteins we have already identified, a significant number have amino acid substitutions, amino acid modifications, or both. These changes may account for the altered antibody binding capacities. Measurements of plasma or serum peptide hormone levels almost always utilize antibodies recognizing partial sequences with high antigenicity. However, if cleaved peptides or precursor proteins are also present in human plasma, conventional assays employing such antibodies may not determine the exact peptide concentrations. Some commercially available ELISA kits exert unexpected reactivity to known or unknown antigens and it is recommended that results be interpreted with extreme caution.
Characterizing the exact amino acid sequences of plasma bioactive and biomarker peptides, together with their endogenous fragments or precursors, remains an important unmet challenge in the fields of analytical biochemistry and health sciences. This is because of unresolved technical difficulties that prevent circumvention of known and unknown confounding factors, such as the myriads of cocirculating high abundance proteins. Here, we use LC-MS/MS analysis of non-tryptic human plasma to identify the exact amino acid sequence of salusin-β and examine whether its precursors and derivatives circulate in human peripheral blood. Our results prompted us to measure exact plasma concentrations of full-length salusin-β peptide separately from related native sequences that cocirculate in human plasma.