PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Bruker Daltonics timsTOF series; Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: acetylated residue; carbamoylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Chemoproteomics; Cunip; Methionine

ABSTRACT:
Methionine plays a critical role in various biological and cell regulatory processes, making its chemoproteomic profiling indispensable for exploring its functions and potential in protein therapeutics. However, the advancement of methionine chemoproteomics is currently hindered by the scarcity of efficient labeling strategies. Methionine exhibits high kinetic reactivity and undergoes rapid oxidation due to the lower energy gap between Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) and Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO). Building on this unique high reactivity of methionine (Met), we introduce Copper(I)-Nitrene Platform (CuNiP) for robust, and selective labeling of Met to generate highly stable sulfonyl sulfimide conjugates under physiological conditions. We demonstrated the versatile proficiency of CuNiP to label methionine in a wide range of bioactive peptides, intact proteins (6.5-79.5 kDa) independent of molecular weight and 3D structures and proteins in complex cell lysate mixtures with varying payloads. Leveraging nitrene reactivity-based probes, we have discovered an array of new, previously undiscovered, ligandable proteins and sites harboring hyperreactive methionine within the landscape of the human proteome. Crucially, we employed CuNiP for live cell chemoproteomic profiling of methionine in breast (T47D) and prostate cancer (LnCap) cell lines, observing minimal cytotoxic effects and achieving dose-dependent labeling. Confocal imaging further revealed the spatial distribution of modified proteins within cell membrane, cytoplasm, and nucleus, underscoring the platform's potential in profiling the cellular interactome. This breakthrough, with its insights into live cell methionine labeling will deepen our understanding of protein biochemistry and also pioneers a transformative pathway in drug discovery.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Copper(I)-Nitrene Platform for Chemoproteomics Profiling of Methionine

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The proteins were acetone precipitated, followed by digestion using SMART Digest™ Trypsin Kit by Thermo Scientific. Digested samples were resuspended in Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and the peptide amount was determined by Pierce™ Quantitative Peptide Assays & Standards (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer instructions. Samples were injected into a nanoElute UPLC autosampler (Bruker Daltonics) or Evosep One (Evosep) coupled to a timsTOF Pro2 mass-spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were loaded either on a 15 cm Aurora Elite or 25 cm Aurora ultimate CSI C18 column (IonOpticks) and chromatographic separation was achieved using a linear gradient starting with a flow rate of 250 nl/min from 2% Buffer B (0.1% FA in MeCN) and increasing to 13% in 42 min, followed by an increase to 23% B in 65 min, 30% B in 70 min, then the flow rate was increased to 300 nl/min and 80% B in 85 min, this was kept for 5 min.For the samples analyzed on the Evosep, the 20 SPD method was employed. The mass-spectrometer operated in positive polarity for data collection using a data-dependent acquisition (ddaPASEF) mode. The cycle time was 1.17 s and consisted of one full scan followed by 10 PASEF/MSMS scans. Precursors with intensity of over 2500 (arbitrary units) were picked for fragmentation and precursors over the target value of 20,000 were dynamically excluded for 1 min. Precursors below 700 Da were isolated with a 2 Th window and ones above with 3 Th. All spectra were acquired within an m/z range of 100 to 1700 and fragmentation energy was set to 20 eV at 0.6 1/K0 and 59 eV at 1.60 1/K0.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw files were searched FragPipe GUI version 20 with MSFragger (version 3.8) as the search algorithm. Protein identification was performed with the human Swisspot database (20′456 entries) with acetylation (N-terminus), and oxidation on methionine was set variable modification. To account for the mass shift introduced by the chemical handles a variable mass shift of 209.0147 Da on Methionine with a maximal occurrence of 3 was set. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was considered a fixed modification. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. The peptide length was set to 7–50, and the peptide mass range of 500–5000 Da. For MS2-based experiments, the precursor tolerance was set to 20 ppm and fragment tolerance to 20 ppm. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate using Percolator as part of the Philosopher toolkit (v5). For label-free quantification, match-between-runs were enabled. All downstream analysis was performed in R (version 2023.03.0). Individual samples were normalized to the mean of all quantified peptides.