PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Colon
diseases: Colitis
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Legumain; Mouse; Colon; Colitis; Hunter

ABSTRACT:
The mammalian lysosomal protease legumain is often dysregulated in pathophysiological conditions including inflammation, neurodegeneration, and cancer, yet its proteolytic targets are poorly defined. To profile protease substrates degradomics techniques typically employ enrichment strategies to select for sub-stoichiometric and low abundant peptides generated from proteolytic cleavage. However, recent advancements in degradomics techniques have revealed N-termini enrichment can be circumvented if peptide-based fractionation is employed, enabling simultaneous proteome and N-terminome analysis. Herein, we compare the previously published enrichment free N-terminomics approach using high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) to offline basic reverse-phase (bRP) fractionation to assess the complementarity of these fractionation methods for simultaneous proteomic and degradomic analysis. While at the protein levels FAIMS and bRP provide access to overlapping proteomic coverage, at the N-terminal level each fractionation technique reveals unique cleavage information. Combining fractionation approaches we identify 6,499 novel N-terminal peptides with N-terminal TMTpro labelling allowing the identification of cleavage events modulated in the context of Dextran Sulfate Sodium (DSS) induced colitis within wild type and legumain-deficient colons. Among these N-termini, we identify 35 putative legumain substrates in naïve and 41 in the DSS colons supporting legumain’s role in both pro-inflammatory and physiological conditions. Use of an additional negative selection method, High-efficiency Undecanal-based N-Termini EnRichment (HUNTER), further validated and supplemented this list of identified legumain substrates. Combined, this study identifies multiple putative substrates of legumain in healthy and inflamed murine colons as well as the utility of using complementary fractionation approaches for degradomics studies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Murine colon HUNTER N-terminomics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Tissue lysis and N-terminal labelling occurred as previously outlined (Ziegler, Anderson, et al., 2024). Briefly, vehicle and DSS colons from wild-type (WT) and legumain-deficient (Lgmn-/-) mice were homogenized in 4% SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES, pH 7.5 (Sigma)) containing Roche cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Sigma) using a probe sonicator. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (21,000 x g, 5 minutes, 4°C) before normalization using BCA analysis where samples were aliquoted to contain 20 µg protein in 100 µL lysis buffer for subsequent labelling. Proteins were reduced using 20 mM DTT (10 minutes, 80°C, 500 rpm) followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide (30 minutes, 37°C, 500 rpm) and quenching with a further 50 mM DTT (20 minutes, 37°C, 500 rpm). Proteins were precipitated using excess conditioned SP3 paramagnetic beads (Sera-Mag SpeedBeads 45152105050250 and 65152105050250, 1:40 protein:bead ratio) with the addition of 100% ethanol (80% final) for 20 minutes with gentle agitation (25°C, 1,000 rpm) (Hughes et al., 2019). The peptide-conjugated beads were washed three times with 80% ethanol facilitated by a magnetic stand prior to primary amine labelling using TMTpro 16-plex (Thermo, #A44520). Peptides underwent two stages of labelling with 80 µg TMTpro reagent resuspended in 10 µL 100% acetonitrile for 60 minutes each time (25°C, 1,000 rpm) (Zecha et al., 2019). Labelling was quenched with the addition of 3% hydroxylamine (2 µL, Merck, #438227) under the same conditions. Peptides were again precipitated using conditioned SP3 beads (1:20 protein:bead ratio) and 100% ethanol (80% final) for 20 minutes (25°C, 1,000 rpm), and then washed in 80% ethanol three time using a magnetic stand. Peptide-conjugated beads were resuspended in 100 µL 200 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) containing Solu-trypsin (1 µg, Sigma, 1:20 trypsin:protein ratio) for an overnight digestion at 37°C (1,000 rpm). Following, the peptides were collected, pooled and acidified using Buffer A* (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% ACN) for de-salting using a 50 mg Sep-Pak Cartridge C18 Column (Waters, WAT054960) (Demir, Niedermaier, Kizhakkedathu, & Huesgen, 2017). Samples were dried using a speedvac. HUNTER was undertaken according to the protocol of Weng and colleagues (Weng et al., 2019). Briefly, labelled peptides were resuspended in TEAB pH 8.0 and undecanal solution (Sigma, #80139) stock prepared by diluting to 40% v/v in 100% acetonitrile. Undecanal solution was added to samples at a 50:1 undecanal:peptide ratio along with 30 mM sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma, #156159), with the pH confirmed to be between 7.0-8.0. Labelling was allowed to proceed for 90 minutes at 50°C (1,000 rpm) and then samples adjusted to 40% ethanol and 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Negative selection was performed using a 50mg Sep-Pak Cartridge C18 Columns (Waters, WAT054960). Columns were conditioned using 100% methanol, followed by 40% ACN + 0.1% TFA before samples were loaded. The resulting flow-through was collected and the columns washed using 40% ethanol + 0.1% TFA for further N-termini collection. HUNTER samples were dried on a speedvac and stored at -20°C prior to analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry raw data files were matched to a murine proteome database containing isoforms and contaminants (UniProt Accession: UP000000589, accessed January 2024, contains 51,316 entries including 25,658 decoys = 50.0%) using FragPipe v.21.1 (MSFragger v.4.0) (Kong, Leprevost, Avtonomov, Mellacheruvu, & Nesvizhskii, 2017). For fractionation-based experiments, all fractions of a biological sample were defined as a single replicate and experiments searched together for a global false discovery rate of 1% (Schaab, Geiger, Stoehr, Cox, & Mann, 2012). Variable modifications were set to include methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da), N-terminal cyclisation on glutamine (-17.026549 Da) and glutamic acid (-18.010565 Da), N-terminal and lysine TMTpro-labelling (+304.20715 Da), and N-terminal lysine labelling (+608.4143 Da). A fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215 Da) was also included. Cleavage specificity was set to “SEMI-N_TERM” and “TrypsinR” (Arg-C) with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 20 ppm. An isotopic error was set to 3 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Philosopher (v.5.1.0) and set at both the protein and peptides levels. Isobaric quantification of TMTpro-labelled peptides was performed using IonQuant (v.1.10.12) (Yu, Haynes, & Nesvizhskii, 2021), with a quantification level of 2, mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a virtual reference selected as no pooled sample was included. Further filtering and statistical analyses of the normalised protein and peptide intensity values were processed in Perseus (v.1.6.0.7) (Tyanova et al., 2016). Values were log2-transformed and filtered to contain a minimum three of four valid values in at least of the four groups. The remaining missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution (-width = 0.3 and -downshift = 1.8) before a two-sample t-test was applied to calculate fold-change and p-value. Data visualisation was performed using R (v.4.3.1). Gene ontology (GO) and pathway analyses were performed using SRplot (Tang et al., 2023). TopFINDer was used to extract upstream peptide sequences (Fortelny, Yang, Pavlidis, Lange, & Overall, 2015) for the generation of sequence logos using pLogo (O’Shea et al., 2013).

METHODS:
METHODS
Mice
Studies involving animals were approved by and carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the Animal Ethics Committee at Monash University or the New York University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Wild‐type C57Bl/6 J mice were purchased from the Monash University in‐house colony or purchased from JAX (#000664). Legumain‐deficient mice (Matthews et al., ) were kindly provided by Thomas Reinheckel and bred in the New York University animal facility. All mice were maintained with free access to food and water under temperature and light controlled conditions.
Dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)‐induced colitis
Acute colitis was induced in 8–10‐week‐old male mice by administering 3% DSS (MP Biomedicals 36,000–50,000 Da) in the drinking water for 6 days. Control (naïve) mice received normal drinking water. Body weights and symptoms were monitored daily. Body weight loss was scored (0–none; 1–1%–5%; 2–5%–10%). Fecal pellets were scored using scales for consistency (0–dry; 1–moist but firm; 2–soft but still formed; 3–unformed but bulky; 4–liquid) and blood (0–no blood; 1–subtle blood or darkening of the stool; 2–red streaks in stool; 4–obvious rectal bleeding). Disease activity index (DAI) was calculated by adding scores for weight consistency and blood on each day. For the legumain inhibitor trial, LI‐1 (Edgington‐Mitchell et al., ; Lee & Bogyo, ) (25 mg/kg in 100 µL PBS containing 20% DMSO) or vehicle control was administered daily by intraperitoneal injection. Unless otherwise indicated, colons were harvested on Day 6. Colons were flushed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Luminal fluid was collected, centrifuged to clear solids, and frozen. Colon tissue was divided and frozen for gel analysis and MPO assay or fixed for microscopy or histology. Where indicated, mucosa and muscle tissue were separated before freezing.
TNBS‐induced colitis
Male mice (8–10 weeks old male mice) were sedated using isofluorane. Using a PE10 catheter inserted 4 cm into the rectum, mice were first infused with a saline enema, followed by 100 µL of 2,4,6‐trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS; 2 mg/mouse, 50% ethanol/saline, 100 µL) or vehicle (50% ethanol/saline, 100 µL). On Day 3, colons were harvested and processed as above.
Mechanical allodynia
Mice were acclimatized to the room, apparatus, and investigator for 2 h per day for 2 days before the study. To assess colonic nociception, the abdominal area was divided into 9 equal quadrants; von Frey filaments of increasing force (0.07–2 g) were applied to the central quadrant, which corresponds to the area of the colon (Latorre, Hegron, et al., ). Responses to von Frey filament were arching of the back, jumping, and raising the rear legs. Responses were measured on Day 0, before the beginning of the DSS colitis treatment, and at end point on Day 6. Results are expressed as a mechanical threshold in grams.
Spontaneous nonevoked pain behavior
To measure nonevoked pain behavior, we used a behavioral spectrometer (Behavior Sequencer by Behavioral Instruments, NJ, and BiObserve by DE) (Latorre, Ramírez‐Garcia, et al., ). This instrument quantifies the locomotor, exploratory, and grooming behavior of mice, eliminating operator bias. The mice were placed individually in the center of the behavioral spectrometer and their behavior was recorded, tracked, evaluated, and analyzed for 20 min using a computerized video tracking system (Viewer3 by BiObserve, DE). We recorded and analyzed the total distance traveled in the open field, average velocity of locomotion, wall distance, ambulation, and grooming.
Ex vivo imaging of legumain activity
At endpoint, naïve, DSS‐ or TNBS‐treated mice were injected with the legumain activity‐based probe LE28 intravenously by tail vein (20 nmol in 100 µL 20% DMSO/PBS) (Edgington et al., ). After 6 h, colons were harvested, flushed with PBS, and imaged for Cy5 fluorescence using an IVIS Lumina XR III in vivo imaging system (Perkin Elmer). Proximal colons were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4℃ followed by 30% sucrose. Tissues were then embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) Compound (TissueTek) and frozen on dry ice. Ten‐micrometer sections were cut and air‐dried. Slides were submerged in cold acetone for 10 min and dried at room temperature for 10 min. OCT was dissolved with PBS and sections were blocked for 30 min in blocking buffer (PBS at pH 7.4, 3% normal horse serum, and 0.05% Triton X‐100). Sections were incubated with the indicated primary antibody in blocking buffer at 4℃ overnight followed by three washes with PBS: sheep anti‐mouse legumain (1:100, R&D Systems AF2058); rat anti‐mouse CD68 (1:500, clone FA‐11, BioLegend). Secondary antibodies (donkey anti‐sheep/rat‐AlexaFluor488, 1:500; Jackson ImmunoResearch) were added for 1 h at room temperature followed by DAPI staining (1 µg/mL) and three PBS washes. Sections were mounted with ProLong Gold (Life Technologies, Scoresby, Australia). Staining was visualized using a Leica SP8 inverted confocal microscope.
Analysis of activity‐based probe labeling by SDS‐PAGE
Mouse proximal colon tissues were lysed by sonication in PBS (for in vivo‐labeled samples) or citrate buffer (for in vitro‐labeled samples; 50 mM citrate, pH 5.5, 0.5% CHAPS, 0.1% Triton X‐100, 4 mM DTT). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 5 min at 4℃. Cleared luminal fluids were concentrated using a 3‐kDa cutoff column (Amicon). Fecal pellets were homogenized in PBS and centrifuged to clear solids. Total protein concentration was measured in colon lysate, luminal fluid and fecal supernatant using a BCA assay and diluted into PBS or citrate buffer (50 µg total protein in 20 µL). For in vivo‐labeled samples, 5× sample buffer was immediately added (50% glycerol, 250 mM Tris‐Cl, pH 6.8, 10% SDS, 0.04% bromophenol blue, 6.25% beta‐mercaptoethanol; 1× final). For in vitro‐labeled samples, LE28 (1 µM) was added from a 100× DMSO stock concentration and incubated at 37℃ for 30 min. The labeling reaction was quenched by addition of 5× sample buffer. Samples were boiled for 5 min and resolved on a 15% SDS‐PAGE gel. Gels were scanned for Cy5 fluorescence using a Typhoon 5 flatbed laser scanner (GE Healthcare). After transferring to nitrocellulose membranes, membranes were immunoblotted overnight with sheep anti‐legumain (1:1000; R&D; AF2058) or goat anti‐cathepsin L (1:1000, R&D, AF1515) followed by detection with donkey anti‐goat‐IR800 (1:10,000; LI‐COR; 9263‐2214). Membranes were scanned using a Typhoon 5.
Immunoprecipitation
LE28‐labeled samples were divided into input and pulldown, each containing 50 µg total protein. Pulldown samples were diluted in 500 µL immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer (PBS, pH 7.4, 0.5% Nonidet P 40 Substitute (Sigma), 1 mM EDTA) followed by 10 µL of sheep anti‐mouse legumain (R&D Systems AF2058). Protein A/G agarose beads (40 µL slurry; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were washed in IP buffer, added to the sample, and rotated overnight at 4℃. Beads were washed four times in IP buffer and once in NaCl (0.9%) and resuspended in 20 µL 2× sample buffer. Input and pulldown were boiled for 5 min and resolved by fluorescent SDS‐PAGE as above.
Histology and immunohistochemistry
Colon tissues were fixed overnight at 4℃ in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS before transferring to 70% ethanol for paraffin embedding. Tissues were sectioned, dewaxed and stained with hematoxylin and eosin according to standard protocols. Slides were scanned on a Mirax Digital Slide Scanner (Zeiss) by Australian Phenomics Network at The University of Melbourne. Slides were deidentified and four random regions from each colon were scored for crypt organization (0–5), immune cell infiltration (0–5) and goblet cell expression/cavitation (0–5) based on modified histomorphological evaluation criteria (Erben et al., ; McQuade et al., ). All images were analyzed blindly. For immunostaining, antigen retrieval was performed in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6.0 in the microwave for 15 min total without boiling. All slides were washed in PBS, followed by incubation in blocking buffer (3% normal horse serum in PBS‐Tween; PBST) for 30 min at room temperature. Tissues were incubated in anti‐mouse legumain antibody (R&D Systems AF2058) in a humidified chamber overnight at 4℃. Endogenous peroxidases were blocked using 1% hydrogen peroxide in PBS for 10 min. Following three washes in PBST, secondary antibody anti‐goat HRP (Invitrogen A15999; 1:500) was added at room temperature for 1 h. Tissues were washed twice with PBST and twice with PBS and stained with 3,3′‐Diaminobenzidine (DAB) (eBioscience DAB Advanced Chromogenic Kit) according to manufacturer's protocol. After 30 min, slides were placed in water to stop the reaction. Tissues were stained briefly with haematoxylin and then dehydrated by immersing three times in 100% ethanol and four times in xylene. Coverslips were mounted using Entellan (Merck) and slides were kept covered overnight to set. Slides were scanned as above.
MPO activity assay
Tissues from the middle region of the colon or spleen were assayed for MPO activity. Tissues were sonicated in buffer containing 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 6.0, 0.5% hexadecyl trimethylammonium bromide (50 mg tissue per mL) and supernatants were cleared by centrifugation. In a 96 well plate, 7 µL sample was diluted in 193 µL substrate solution containing 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 6.0, O‐dianisidine HCl (0.167 mg/mL) and 0.0005% H2O2. Absorbance at 460 nm was measured every 40 s for 25 min on a CLARIOstar Plus (BMG Labtech) and slopes were recorded.
Field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS)‐facilitated N‐terminomics
Quantitative proteomics and N‐terminomics analysis of colon tissue from wild‐type male C57BL/6 and Lgmn −/− mice (n = 4/group) were completed using a modification of our previously described method (Ziegler, Dufour, Scott, & Edgington‐Mitchell, ). Tissue lysis was facilitated by sonication in 4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5, Sigma) containing Roche cOmplete, EDTA‐free protease inhibitor (Sigma) and subsequent boiling for 10 min. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (21,000 × g, 5 min, 4℃) and total protein (100 µg) was diluted in 100 µL buffer according to BCA analysis.
Proteins were reduced with 20 mM DTT (80℃, 10 min, 500 rpm) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (37℃, 30 min, 500 rpm) in the dark followed by quenching with 50 mM DTT (37℃, 20 min, 500 rpm). Conditioned paramagnetic SP3 beads (Sera‐Mag SpeedBeads 45152105050250 and 65152105050250, GE Healthcare) (Hughes et al., ) were added to samples (2 mg of SP3 beads, final protein: SP3 bead ratio of 1:20) with ethanol (80% final concentration) to facilitate protein aggregation and incubated for 20 min (25℃, 1000 rpm). Following three rounds of washing with 500 µL of 80% ethanol, peptides were resuspended in 90 µL 200 mM HEPES, pH 7.5. Primary amines were labeled at the protein level using TMTpro 16‐plex reagents (Thermo, #A44520) by adding 80 µg of each reagent diluted in 10 µL 100% ACN and incubating for 60 min (25℃, 1000 rpm, 4:5 TMTpro:protein) (Zecha et al., ). This was repeated once more before incubating with 3% hydroxylamine (2 µL) for a further 60 min (1000 rpm) to quench labeling. Excess reagents were removed from samples using SP3 clean up (1 mg SP3 beads; final protein: SP3 bead ratio of 1:30) and proteins were precipitated with ethanol (80% final concentration). Samples were gently shaken (25℃, 1000 rpm) for 20 min and then washed three times with 500 µL of 80% ethanol using a magnetic rack. SP3 beads were then resuspended in 100 μL of 200 mM HEPES (pH 7.5) and digested overnight at 37℃ with Solu‐trypsin (3 µg solu‐trypsin, Sigma, trypsin:protein ratio 1:33). The resulting peptide mixtures were collected using a magnetic rack, and pooled. The pooled sample was acidified with Buffer A* (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile) before desalting using a 50 mg Sep‐Pak Cartridge C18 Column (Waters, WAT054960) as previously described (Demir et al., ). Samples were dried using a speedvac and stored at −20℃ until analysis.
Online fractionation by high‐FAIMS and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis
Proteome samples were re‐suspended in Buffer A* and separated using a two‐column chromatography setup composed of a PepMap100 C18 20‐mm by 75‐μm trap and a PepMap C18 500‐mm by 75‐μm analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were concentrated onto the trap column at 5 μL/min for 5 min with Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% DMSO) and then infused into an OrbiTrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface at 300 nL/minute. For each sample/FAIMS fraction ~2 µg of peptide mixtures was separated using 125‐min analytical runs undertaken by altering the buffer composition from 3% Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 77.9% acetonitrile, 2% DMSO) to 23% B over 95 min, then from 23% B to 40% B over 10 min, then from 40% B to 80% B over 5 min. The composition was held at 80% B for 5 min, and then dropped to 3% B over 0.1 min before being held at 3% B for another 9.9 min. For each sample, six individual LC‐MS runs were collected with the OrbiTrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer operated using different FAIMS compensational voltages (CV) of either −20, −30, −40, −50, −60 or −70. For each FAIMS fraction, data‐dependent acquisition was undertaken with a single Orbitrap MS scan (300–2000 m/z, a resolution of 60k with the automated gain control (AGC) set to a maximum of 400%) collected every 3 s followed by Orbitrap MS/MS HCD scans of precursors (Quad isolation window width of 1.6 m/z, stepped normalized collision energy of 35;38;45%, maximal injection time of 118 ms, a resolution of 60k and a AGC of 500%, lower mass cut off set at 120 m/z). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the Proteomexchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez‐Riverol et al., ) partner repository with the data set identifier PXD051470.
Bioinformatic analyses
Raw data files were processed and searched using MSFragger (Fragpipe v.21.0) (Kong et al.,) against the unreviewed murine proteome (Mus musculus, UniProt Accession: UP000000589, downloaded January 2024, 25,658 protein entries), supplemented with common contaminants, and a reverse decoy database (25,658 decoys: 50%). All six FAIMS fractions for a given sample were defined as a single biological replicate with individual FAIMS CVs defined as fractions and experiments searched all together to ensure a global false discovery rate of 1% (Schaab et al.,). Parameters were set to default unless otherwise described below. Identification and isobaric quantification were undertaken allowing for cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification (+57.0215 Da) as well as variable modifications of methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), N‐terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da), N‐terminal cyclisation (−17.0265/−18.0106 Da), N‐terminal and lysine TMT‐labeling (+304.20715 Da), and N‐terminal lysine TMT‐labeling (+608.4143 Da). Cleavage specificity was set to “SEMI‐N_TERM” and “TrypsinR” (Arg‐C), allowing a maximum of two missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 20 ppm and isotopic error of 3 Da were also included. Protein and peptide‐level false discovery rates (FDR) were determined using Philosopher (v.5.1.0) with default settings (FDR threshold set at 1%). Isobaric TMT‐16 quantification parameters were left as default and performed with IonQuant (v.1.10.12) (Yu et al.,). Quantification level was set to two with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a virtual reference. The resulting outputs (MaxLFQ values) were further processed in Perseus (v.1.6.0.7) (Tyanova et al.,), where a log2 transformation was applied. Protein/peptides identified in a minimum of three of four biological replicates in at least one of the groups were selected and missing values imputed based on a downshifted normal distribution (σ‐width = 0.3, σ‐downshift = −1.8) for statistical analyses at the protein and N‐termini level. Due to legumain cleavage events being absent in Lgmn −/− samples, imputation was used to allow statistical analysis to guide the identification of cleavage events overrepresented within WT samples. Student's two‐sample t‐test was applied for statistical comparison between groups with a significance threshold set to log2(fold change) ±1 and −log10(p) = 1.3 (p = 0.05). Volcano plots and Venn diagrams were created using R (v.4.2.0).
Data were processed in WebPICS (Schilling & Overall, ) and TopFINDer (Fortelny et al., ) for generation of sequence logos using plogo (O'Shea et al., ). STRING‐db (v.12.0) was used for protein interaction and pathway analyses (https://stringdb.org) with medium confidence (0.400) and FDR stringency (5%).
Statistical analyses
All experiments were performed with at least 3 biological replicates. Data are reported as means ± SEM. Statistical significance was determined by the indicated test, and p values of less than 0.05 were considered significant.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Legumain activity is increased in the colon during acute experimental colitis
To study the activation of legumain in the setting of acute experimental colitis, we used the activity‐based probe LE28 (Edgington et al., ). LE28 is a fluorescently quenched probe that selectively and covalently binds to the active site cysteine of legumain in an activity‐dependent manner. Upon binding, a quenching group is released, leading to an increase in fluorescence of the Cy5 fluorophore. The fluorescence can be then detected as a surrogate readout of legumain activity, either by optical imaging of cells or tissues or by in‐gel analysis of probe‐labeled lysates.
Acute colitis was induced through administration of 3% DSS in drinking water. On day 6, LE28 was intravenously administered, and after 6 h, colons were removed, flushed, and imaged ex vivo for LE28 fluorescence. Fluorescence was increased in the proximal colons of DSS‐treated mice compared to naïve colons (Figure 1a). In‐gel fluorescence of full thickness colon lysates revealed increased legumain labeling by LE28 in DSS‐treated tissues compared to naïve (Figure 1b). When mucosal and muscle tissues were analyzed separately, it was evident that most of the legumain was confined to the mucosal layer (Figure 1b). In inflamed tissues, LE28‐labeled species were slightly larger than in naïve tissue, as we previously observed in the context of acute pancreatitis (Edgington‐Mitchell et al., ). This corresponded to an increase in total legumain levels detected by immunoblot and the appearance of a higher molecular weight form of legumain (Figure 1c). We also observed this phenomenon when legumain was labeled with LE28 ex vivo in colon lysates (Figure 1d). To verify the identity of the probe‐labeled species in both naïve and DSS‐treated colons, we immunoprecipitated LE28‐labeled lysates with a legumain‐specific antibody (Figure 1e). Indeed, the immunoprecipitated species mirrored the input samples, confirming specificity of LE28 for legumain in these samples.
We also analyzed luminal fluid and fecal samples collected from the mice after LE28 administration. In samples from naïve mice, labeling of 36 kDa legumain was virtually absent; however, it was clearly detected in DSS‐treated samples (Figure 1f). These results suggest that luminal secretion of legumain may increase during acute colitis. Additional proteins were labeled with LE28 (indicated by asterisks) in these samples, although the identity of these species is still unknown.
In addition to DSS, we also examined legumain in TNBS‐induced colitis. Increased legumain activity was observed in acute colitis induced by TNBS, although it was most active in the distal region as opposed to the proximal region, which is in line with locations affected by these models (Figure 1g–h). Together, these results suggest that legumain is activated in multiple models of acute experimental colitis.
Legumain is activated in macrophages and colonocytes
To determine the cellular source of legumain in the colon, we analyzed LE28‐labeled tissues by confocal microscopy. In both naïve and DSS‐treated colons, the majority of LE28 fluorescence was contained within CD68+ cells, suggesting that legumain in both mucosal and muscle layers is largely macrophage‐derived (Figure 2a). We also observed LE28 fluorescence in colonocytes. Immunohistochemistry of paraffin‐embedded colon tissues also revealed anti‐legumain reactivity in these cells as well as macrophage‐like cells throughout the mucosa (Figure 2b). Staining of tissues harvested from legumain‐deficient mice confirms the specificity of the anti‐legumain antibody used (Figure S1). Together, these results suggest that the major sources of legumain in the murine colon are macrophages and epithelial cells. This mirrors what was previously observed in normal human colon tissue adjacent to CRC (Haugen et al., ).
Colonocyte‐derived legumain may not regulate epithelial permeability
In light of our observation that legumain is present in colonocytes, we hypothesized that its activity may contribute to barrier function, either through activation of PAR2 or potentially through cleavage of other substrates that mediate epithelial adhesion. We first verified that legumain is present and active in the immortalized human colonocyte line Caco‐2 (Figure S2A,B). Legumain is also highly secreted from these cells, although under standard cell culture conditions, it remains in the inactive zymogen form (56 kDa). We demonstrated that that a legumain inhibitor SD‐134 (Jafari et al., ; Lee & Bogyo, ) could block its intracellular activity in wild‐type cells (Figure S2C). Using the CRISPR/Cas9 system (Figure S2D), we generated two legumain‐deficient Caco‐2 single‐cell clones (Figure S2E). In a permeability assay, we observed no differences in the flux of FITC‐dextran (3–5 kDa) between wild‐type and legumain‐deficient clones (Figure S2F–G). Likewise, treatment with SD‐134 had no clear effects on monolayer permeability. Thus, legumain may not regulate epithelial permeability, at least under these conditions in vitro.
Legumain inhibition does not attenuate acute colitis induced by DSS
Having demonstrated that legumain activity is upregulated in models of acute colitis, we next queried whether pharmacological blockade of its activity would alter the course of disease progression. Mice were treated daily with the covalent legumain inhibitor LI‐1, which is an analogue of SD‐134 that is acetylated instead of Cbz‐capped (Lee & Bogyo, ) or DMSO vehicle during colitis induction with DSS. To verify the efficacy of the inhibitor, proximal colons were harvested and labeled ex vivo with the LE28 ABP. Legumain activity was almost completely abolished after LI‐1 treatment and was substantially reduced compared to DMSO‐treated mice (Figure 3a). In line with previous studies (Anderson et al., ; Edgington‐Mitchell et al., ), LI‐1 treatment led to increased total legumain levels (Figure 3b). We also observed accumulation of single‐chain cathepsin L (Figure 3c). As processing of single‐chain cathepsin to its two‐chain form is dependent on legumain activity (Anderson et al., ; Edgington‐Mitchell et al., ; Maehr et al., ), this provides further confirmation of LI‐1 target engagement.
Over the course of the 5‐day DSS treatment, we observed no significant differences in weight loss, DAI, or colon shortening at endpoint between DMSO‐ and LI‐1‐treated mice (Figure 3d–f). Histological evaluation of colon damage revealed no differences in immune infiltration, crypt disorganization, or goblet cell cavitation, and total damage scores were also indistinguishable (Figure 3g–j, S3).
Since we observed increased legumain expression in response to LI‐1 treatment, there may have been residual legumain activity over the course of colitis induction. We therefore independently examined legumain‐deficient mice in the DSS model. We confirmed loss of legumain activity in these mice using LE28 and immunoblot (Figure 4a,b). Processing of cathepsin L to its two‐chain form was lost in Lgmn −/− colons, providing secondary confirmation that legumain activity was lost in these tissues (Figure S4). Wild‐type and Lgmn −/− mice were indistinguishable in almost all parameters examined, including weight loss, DAI, colon shortening, colon MPO activity, and histological evaluation (Figure 4c–j, S5).
The weights of spleens from both naïve and DSS‐treated Lgmn −/− mice trended towards an increase compared to WT, but this was not significant (Figure 4k ). We previously reported that MPO activity was significantly elevated in naïve Lgmn  ‐/‐  spleen (30.6‐fold compared to WT, p < 0.0001) (Ziegler et al., ). For both genotypes, splenic MPO activity was increased upon DSS treatment, and again Lgmn −/− exhibited significantly higher levels (3.5‐fold compared to WT, p < 0.0001; Figure 4l). Legumain‐deficient mice have been previously reported to exhibit splenomegaly with increased neutrophil numbers in both peripheral blood and spleen (Chan et al., ), and this was in line with increased abundance of neutrophil‐associated proteins measured by quantitative proteomics (Ziegler et al., ). From our colon MPO data (and the below proteomics analysis), there appears to be tissue‐specific differences in neutrophil load upon loss of legumain.
Given the role of PAR2 in promoting visceral hypersensitivity, we also examined whether legumain deficiency would alter nocifensive behaviors in this model. We observed no differences in mechanical allodynia of the abdominal region in the absence of legumain, as measured by von Frey assay (Figure 4m). Mice were also analyzed using a behavioral spectrometer to measure spontaneous behaviors in an unbiased manner (Figure S6). Overall, the naïve legumain‐deficient mice exhibited less overall activity at baseline, but this was not dependent on colitis induction, suggesting that legumain does not significantly contribute to behaviors associated with colitis.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that legumain is dispensable for the initiation of symptoms associated with DSS‐induced acute colitis and does not significantly contribute to visceral hypersensitivity.
Legumain‐dependent proteolysis in the naïve and inflamed gut
Although we did not observe overt phenotypic differences in legumain‐deficient mice during acute colitis, we queried whether we could obtain information about its potential roles in healthy and inflamed gut and examine broad changes in proteolysis that are associated with colitis. We therefore adapted our recently developed FAIMS‐facilitated N‐terminomics pipeline to identify protease cleavage events that occur in WT and Lgmn  ‐/‐  colon tissue, either naïve or inflamed (Ziegler et al., ). We applied 16‐plex TMTpro labeling to facilitate simultaneous quantification of N‐termini and total protein abundance across 16 samples (four mice per group; Figure 5a).
In this data set, we identified 19,264 unique peptides corresponding to 3688 proteins (Tables S1–S4), including 3,334 that were TMTpro labeled at the N terminus (native and protease‐generated N‐termini; Table S5–S8; Figure S7). In naïve colons, we identified six proteins that were increased in WT compared to Lgmn −/− tissue, and eight proteins that were reduced in abundance (Figure 5b). In DSS‐treated samples, nine proteins were increased in WT compared to Lgmn −/− and four were reduced (Figure 5c). Among these, five proteins were identified in both naïve and DSS‐treated samples: Prodh, Med6, TMEM214 (increased in WT); Chil3, Gtf2a1 (increased in Lgmn −/−).
We detected 24 TMTpro‐labeled N‐terminal peptides that were enriched in WT naïve colons, which indicate cleavage events directly or indirectly mediated by legumain (Figure 5d; Table S5). Among these peptides, 13 (54%) corresponded to cleavage after asparagine residues, indicating that they may be direct substrates of legumain (Figure 5e). In DSS‐treated tissues, 27 TMTpro‐labeled peptides were enriched in WT compared to Lgmn −/−, including 16 (62%) arising from cleavage after asparagine (Figure 5f–g; Table S6). Only one asparaginyl cleavage (4%) was detected in legumain‐deficient samples, affirming that the asparaginyl endopeptidase signature was lost in the absence of legumain (Figure 5e,g). This is also reflected in density plots, where cleavages with P1 asparagine were significantly skewed towards WT samples (Figure S8A,B). P1 arginine, however, was not enriched in either genotype.
The majority (11) of asparaginyl cleavages were detected in both naïve and DSS samples, as well as five of the nonasparagine cleavages (Figure 5h,i). Three cleavages exhibiting P1 aspartic acid were detected (Plec, Ctsz, and Pdxdc1), which may reflect the ability of legumain to cleave after this residue at acidic pH (Edgington et al., ).
We used pLogo (O'Shea et al., ) to analyze the consensus sequences for both asparagine and non‐asparagine cleavages (Figure S9A,B). Among the asparagine cleavages, the consensus sequence looked similar between naïve and DSS‐treated proteins, with methionine and serine enriched in the P2 position, glycine and alanine at P3, and aspartic acid and isoleucine at P1'. Among the non‐asparagine cleavages, which may be cleavages indirectly mediated by legumain, the motifs differed between naïve and DSS samples, suggesting unique legumain‐influenced proteases may be responsible for these differential events.
Fibrinogen alpha (Fga) was among the asparaginyl cleavages detected in DSS tissue of WT mice. In a previous analysis of proteolytic events in human wound fluids (Sabino et al., ), several cleavages after asparagine residues were detected in fibrinogen subunits. We therefore aimed to validate whether legumain could directly cleave fibrinogen. Indeed, when co‐incubated in acidic buffer, recombinant legumain cleaved Fg alpha, beta, and gamma in a time‐dependent manner (Figure S10). We did not observe limited proteolysis but rather loss of fibrinogen over time, suggesting that legumain may function to promote fibrinogen degradation.
We also observed a number of cleavage events that were enriched in Lgmn −/− tissue, including 14 in naïve and 11 in DSS, with Nnt detected in both groups (Figure 5d,f). This suggests alterations in proteolysis in the absence of legumain, potentially as a compensatory response to loss of legumain.
Global alterations in gut proteolysis during colitis
Within our proteomics data set, we also examined changes in total protein abundance and proteolysis that occur after the onset of colitis (Tables S3,S4, S7,S8). In WT tissues, 23 proteins were increased in abundance in DSS samples compared to naïve, and 5 were decreased (Figure 6a). In Lgmn −/− samples, 30 proteins were increased in DSS tissues and 2 were decreased (Figure 6b). Among these, 15 proteins were identified as altered between naïve and DSS in both genotypes.
Among cleavage sites detected in WT tissue, 33 were enriched in DSS samples and 12 were enriched in naïve (Figure 6c). In Lgmn −/− tissue, 41 cleavage sites were enriched in DSS and 10 in naïve (Figure 6d). STRING‐db (v.12.0) analysis of the DSS‐enriched N‐termini (WT or Lgmn −/−) further revealed increased cleavage of proteins related to coagulation cascades, complement activation, and platelet degranulation, irrespective of genotype (Figure S11A,B). Many of the identified cleavage sites were also identified as increased at the total protein level after DSS treatment (Figure 6e, red).
Eighteen cleavage sites were identified as enriched in both genotypes, but we also identified 11 that were unique to WT colons, and a further 19 unique to Lgmn −/− tissue (Figure 6e). Of the cleavages sites that were more prevalent after DSS treatment, there was no evidence of an asparaginyl endopeptidase signature, with the majority of cleavages occurring after P1 lysine or arginine residues (Figure S8C,D, S9C,D). This suggests that despite increased legumain activity during colitis, there may not be substantial change in the breadth of direct substrates. It may instead function to regulate the activity of other proteases, which could account for differences in cleavage sites identified upon DSS treatment in WT and Lgmn −/− tissue.

INTRODUCTION:
INTRODUCTION
Protease‐activated receptor 2 (PAR2) is a G protein‐coupled receptor that is uniquely activated by proteolytic cleavage (Peach et al., ). A critical regulator of gastrointestinal function, its signaling influences epithelial permeability and proliferation, inflammation, and neuronal sensitivity in the gut (Cenac et al., ; Gecse et al., ; Hyun et al., ; Jimenez‐Vargas et al., ; Latorre, Hegron, et al., ; Lohman et al., ; Roka et al., ). Mice lacking PAR2 were protected from symptoms of experimental colitis induced by 2,4,6‐trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS), with reduced weight loss, myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity, colon thickening, and microscopic damage compared to wild‐type mice (Hyun et al., ). A small molecule PAR2 antagonist, GB88, abrogated colon shortening, ulceration, edema, and bowel obstruction in this model, suggesting therapeutic value of targeting the PAR2 signaling pathway (Lohman et al., ). Various lines of evidence also suggest that PAR2 is implicated in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer (Lv et al., ).
Legumain is a cysteine protease that has recently been identified as a novel PAR2‐activating protease (Tu et al., ). It cleaves the N terminus of PAR2 at N30 to provoke neuronal excitation and nocifensive behaviors in multiple mouse models. Legumain‐deficient mice were protected from oral cancer‐induced pain, and a legumain inhibitor exhibited analgesic effects. Legumain activity is associated with numerous inflammatory diseases, including pancreatitis, atherosclerosis, neuroinflammation, and cancer (Edgington‐Mitchell et al., ; Lei et al., ; Lunde et al., ; Z. H. Wang et al., ; Z. H. Wang et al., ; Wu et al., ; Xia et al., ). Given its ability to activate PAR2, and that PAR2 activation clearly underlies colitis pathophysiology, we hypothesized that legumain may also play key roles in this setting. Outside the context of gastric and colorectal cancers, where its high expression correlates with worse prognoses (Cui et al., ; Cui et al., ; Guo et al., ; Haugen et al., ; Haugen et al., ; Kovalyova et al., ; N. Li et al., ; Murthy et al., ; H. Wang et al., ; Xu, Liu, et al., ), studies of gastrointestinal legumain activity have not been previously reported.
Herein, we applied activity‐based probes to demonstrate that legumain is active in mouse colon tissue, where its predominant sources are macrophages and colonocytes. Legumain is significantly upregulated in models of acute experimental colitis. Loss of legumain activity, either through pharmacological inhibition or genetic deletion, was not protective against symptoms of colitis, suggesting it is dispensable for initiation of pathogenesis. To gain insight into potential functions of legumain in the colon, we used a systematic and unbiased proteomics approach to examine its influence on total protein abundance and on proteolysis. We further extended this analysis to broadly profile protease cleavage events that are altered in the landscape of acute colitis. Collectively, our results inform future mechanistic studies on legumain in the gut, especially its implications in cancer development, and allow comparison of mouse models of acute colitis with human mucosal biopsies.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information