PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Ascend; Orbitrap Astral; Orbitrap Exploris 480; Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; phosphorylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Screen; Proteomics; Ahr; Mass spectrometry; Parp; Crispr; Adp-ribosylation; Aryl hydrocarbon receptor

ABSTRACT:
PARP7 is an enzyme that uses donor substrate NAD+ to attach a single ADP-ribose moiety onto proteins related to immunity, transcription, and cell growth and motility. Despite the importance of PARP7 in these processes, PARP7 signalling networks remain under-researched. Here, we used genome-wide CRISPR screens and multiplex quantitative proteomics in distinct lung cancer cell lines treated with a PARP7 inhibitor to better understand PARP7 molecular functions. We discover that manipulating the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) transcriptional activity mediates PARP7 inhibitor sensitivity and triggers robust changes to the AHR-controlled proteome (AHR-ome). One of the striking features of such AHR-ome remodelling was the downregulation of Filamins A and B concurrent with the induction of the corresponding E3 ubiquitin ligase ASB2. We also show that suppressor of cytokine signalling 3 (SOCS3) reciprocally crosstalks to AHR. Inhibition of PARP7 in SOCS3 knockout cells leads to reduced viability compared to wild type cells treated with a PARP7 inhibitor. Our results reveal new signalling interplay among PARP7, AHR and SOCS3, and establish a useful resource to study the role of PARP7 in the regulation of AHR signalling and innate immunity through its ADP-ribosyl transferase activity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Genome-wide CRISPR screens and quantitative proteomics reveal remodelling of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-controlled proteome through PARP7 activity

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes (Corning). Once 80-90% confluent, cells were treated with RBN2397, Tapinarof or CH223191 (1 μM final concentration) for 24 h Cells were washed with PBS twice and scraped in a lysis buffer containing 8 M urea, 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors on ice. Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (room temperature, 15 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 20 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion (1). Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 14 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37 °CThis was followed by Tandem mass tag labeling, Spin column-based phosphopeptide enrichment, Off-line basic pH reversed-phase (BPRP) fractionation (whole proteome), and Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry.

DATA PROCESSING:
Spectra were converted to mzXML via MSconvert. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt reference Database (downloaded: April 2023). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences for that database in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling and the product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini +304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. In addition, deamidation (+0.984 Da) at glutamine and asparagine residues and phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were also set as variable modifications for phosphopeptide enrichment. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. For phosphosite identification, the AScore false-discovery metric was used and only phosphosites that were “high-confidence”, with p ≤ 0.05, were retained. Proteins and phosphorylation sites were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent. Each protein abundance measurement was scaled, such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equals 100.