PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Gel-based experiment; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Trap-peptides; Phosphatases; Pfa; Psy2; Pp2a; Cdc55; Tom complex; Protein import; Pp4; Tom6

ABSTRACT:
The identification of phosphatases that dephosphorylate specific sites in proteins remains a major challenge, particularly for the major class of serine/threonine-specific phosphatases, which function as holoenzymes. Here, we report the development of synthetic trap-peptides to identify phosphatases that bind to Tom6, a subunit of the mitochondrial translocase of the outer membrane (TOM complex). The TOM complex is regulated by reversible phosphorylation, and while responsible kinases have been identified, the corresponding phosphatases so far remain unknown. Here, the trap-peptides enriched PP2A and PP4 as full holoenzymes from yeast cytosolic-fractions. We observed that their interaction with Tom6 was mediated through their regulatory subunits Psy2reg and Cdc55reg, and that PP2A was able to dephosphorylate Ser16 of Tom6 in vitro. In summary, synthetic trap-peptides facilitate the identification of complete holoenzymes that bind to the target sequence and reveal PP2A as the first TOM phosphatase.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Identification of phosphatases that dephosphorylate Tom6 using synthetic trap-peptides

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample preparation: In‐gel trypsin digestion was performed according to standard procedures (Shevchenko et al., 2006). Briefly, the SulfoLink pull-downs as well as  the purified PP4 and PP2A holoenzymes were prepared for SDS-gel analysis as described above, and then run on a Nu-PAGE™ 4%–12% Bis‐Tris protein gel (ThermoFisher Scientific) for only about 1 cm. Subsequently, the still not size‐separated single protein band per sample was cut out, reduced (50mM dithiothreitol), alkylated (55mm chloroacetamide) and digested overnight with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade, Promega). The peptides obtained were dried to completeness and resuspended in 25 μL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water. Finally, 5 μL of sample were injected per mass spectrometric (MS) measurement. Mass spectrometric measurements: LC-MS/MS data acquisition of the SulfoLink pull-downs was carried out on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen). Injected peptides were delivered to a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min in 0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water. After 10 minutes of loading, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 450 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO in HPLC grade water) at 300 nL/min flow rate. The Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) and positive ionization mode. MS1 spectra (360–1300 m/z) were recorded at a resolution of 60k using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 45 msec. Up to 18 peptide precursors were selected for fragmentation. Only precursors with charge state 2 to 6 were selected and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was enabled. Peptide fragmentation was performed using higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) and a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26%. The precursor isolation window width was set to 1.3 m/z. MS2 Resolution was 15.000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e5 and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 25 msec. LC-MS/MS data acquisition of the purified PP4 and PP2A holoenzymes was carried out on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion LUMOS mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen). LC and MS parameters on this instrument resembled the once described above, except: MS1 normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 100%, maximum injection time (maxIT) of 50 msec, fixed cycle time of 2 sec, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30%, MS2 normalized automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 150% and maximum injection time (maxIT) of 22 msec.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometric data analysis: Peptide identification and quantification was performed using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with its built‐in search engine Andromeda. MS2 spectra were searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein database (UP000000589, 6049 protein entries, downloaded November 2020), supplemented with common contaminants (built‐in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation at the protein N‐terminus was specified as variable modifications. Results were adjusted to 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level and protein level employing a target‐decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) intensities were used for protein quantification with at least 2 peptides per protein identified. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids and the “match-between-runs” functionality was disabled. The MaxQuant output data was analyzed with Perseus (version 1.6.15.0). The LFQ values were filtered to remove proteins only identified by site, reverse and potential contaminants. The remaining values were log2 transformed. Rows were filtered by valid values (3 values in at least one group). The missing values were imputed from a normal distribution (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). The results were visualized in volcano plots with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 5 %. Volcano plots were generated with ggplot2 and tidyverse in R (version4.3.3). For the MS data of the phosphatases purified through Psy2reg and Cdc55reg, the LFQ values were filtered as before. The next analysis steps were not performed as they are individual samples without biological triplicates.