PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: TMT
keywords: Human; Protein stability; Methionine oxidation; Lumos; Quantitative proteomics; Protein folding

ABSTRACT:
Most natural proteins fold into a native conformation stabilized by non-covalent interactions. The energy difference between native and denatured states (Gfolding) is highly variable between proteins and can range from less than -10 kcal per mole for highly stable proteins to positive values for intrinsically disordered proteins. Folding stability is a dynamic property of proteins and can be modulated by molecular chaperones and binding interactions. The stability of a protein influences its tendency to aggregate, degrade or become covalently modified in cells. Despite its significance to understanding protein folding and function, quantitative analyses of thermodynamic stability have been mostly limited to small soluble proteins in purified systems. Here, we have used a highly multiplexed bottom-up proteomics approach, based on analyses of rates of methionine oxidation, to quantify the thermodynamic stabilities of the human proteome in crude extracts obtained from dermal fibroblasts. Our data provide structural and stability information for more than 10,000 unique regions and domains within more than 3,200 proteins. The data identifies lysosomal and extracellular proteins as the most stable ontological subsets of the proteome. We show that the stability of proteins can impact their tendency to become oxidized and are globally altered by the osmolyte trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO). We also show that most proteins designated as IDPs retain their unfolded structure in the complex milieu of the cell and most cannot be refolded by TMAO. Together, the data provide a census of the stability of the human proteome and validate a methodology for global analysis of protein thermodynamic stabilities.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Global analysis of methionine oxidation provides a census of folding stabilities for the human proteome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Human dermal fibroblasts were grown to 100% confluency and maintained for at least 4 days before harvesting to ensure they reached a quiescent state. On the day of analysis, cell pellets were resuspended in native lysis buffer at 50 µL per 106 cells. Lysis was accomplished by repeated passage through a 16-gauge sterile syringe, resting on ice, after which the samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13000xg while at 4oC, and the supernatants collected. Protein concentration was subsequently measured using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Fisher) and samples were diluted to a final concentration of 2 mg/mL. Protein extracts were aliquoted out in 25 µL portions into 30 wells of a 96-deepwell polypropylene microplate (Fisher Scientific). 3 wells were kept as a control (no H2O2, no GdmCl) for background levels of methionine oxidation, and the remaining wells were split into 3 complementary sets of denaturant-containing buffers such that their final concentrations ranged between 0-3 M GdmCl (see Figure 3A), allowed to equilibrate for 1 hr at RT, and oxidized with  3% H2O2 for 1 min. Oxidation was quenched using a four-fold molar excess of TCEP, and protein was purified using 30-kDa centrifugal filters (Millipore Sigma). During this process, proteins were fully denatured using 8 M urea, disulfide bonds were reduced with 5 mM TCEP in urea buffer for 1 hr at RT, and proteins were alkylated by incubating with 50 mM IAA for 20 min at RT in darkness. After washing out the denaturant, proteins were digested with trypsin protease (Pierce) at a 1:100 ratio (g protein/g trypsin), incubating overnight at 37oC in a wet bath. Trypsin was quenched by adding formic acid (Fisher Scientific) to a final concentration of 1%, after which samples were dried down and 10 µg of digest was resuspended in 25 µL of 0.1 M TEAB for labeling using tandem mass tag (TMT) 10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific). TMT labeling was accomplished by adding 20 µL of 10 mg/ml TMT reagents in acetonitrile (Thermo Scientific) and incubating for 1 hr at RT. TMT labeling was quenched using a final concentration of 5% hydroxylamine (Fisher Scientific), incubating for 15 min at RT. For each of the TMT sets, 5 µg portions of labeled digest were combined and dried down. To increase coverage, samples were fractionated using lab-made C18 spin columns. Columns were first conditioned using acetonitrile and 100 mM ammonium formate (AF) buffer (pH 10). Samples were resuspended in 50 µL of AF buffer and added to the columns. After washing the columns with 5% acetonitrile in AF buffer, samples were eluted with 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 22.5%, 25%, and then 50% acetonitrile (in AF buffer). Eluent fractions were then dried down and resuspended in MS-grade 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in water (Thermo Scientific) at a concentration of 0.25 mg/ml for LC-MS/MS analysis.  For analyses conducted in the presence of TMAO, protein extracts were prepared at a concentration of ~5 mg/ml, using the method described above.  On the day of analysis, a concentrated TMAO stock solution was prepared from high purity ((98%) trimethylamine N-oxide dihydrate (Sigma) dissolved in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH = 7.4). Immediately prior to incubation in GdmCl, samples were mixed with the TMAO stock solution such that the final concentration of TMAO was 1 M. Samples were then denatured and processed as above. For MS analysis, peptides were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 um beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, while solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile.  Ions were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex source operating at 2 kV. The gradient began at 3% B and held for 2 minutes, increased to 10% B over 7 minutes, increased to 38% B over 94 minutes, then ramped up to 90% B in 5 minutes and was held for 3 minutes, before returning to starting conditions in 2 minutes and re-equilibrating for 7 minutes, for a total run time of 120 minutes.  The Fusion Lumos was operated in data-dependent mode, with both MS1 and MS2 scans acquired in the Orbitrap.  The cycle time was set to 3 seconds. Monoisotopic Precursor Selection (MIPS) was set to Peptide. The full scan was done over a range of 400-1500 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  Peptides with a charge state between 2-5 were picked for fragmentation. Precursor ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a collision energy of 36% and an isolation width of 0.7 m/z. MS2 scans were collected with a resolution of 50,000, a maximum injection time of 105 ms, and an AGC setting of 1e5. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds.

DATA PROCESSING:
All MS2 data were searched against the H. sapiens UniProt database (20975 entries, downloaded 6/18/2017) using the integrated Andromeda search engine with MaxQuant software. The searches included the TMT10plex labels as fixed modifications and methionine oxidation as variable modifications,  and allowed for up to two missed cleavages with maximum FDR thresholds of 1%. Subsequent analyses of MaxQuant search results and quantitations were conducted with scripts written in Mathematica (Wolfram). MaxQuant searches produced reporter ion intensities for 15 different TMT 10-plex experiments for -TMAO analyses and 6 for +TMAO experiments, with each tag corresponding to a different GdmCl concentration within a methionine oxidation denaturation curve. Reporter ion intensities within each 10-plex experiment were normalized with respect to one another using the median intensities of non-methionine-containing peptides. For each 10-plex experiment, the data for methionine-sulfoxide-containing (met-ox) peptides were converted to fraction oxidized by using the intensities of no-H2O2/0M GdmCl and highest concentration GdmCl datapoints as initial and final baselines, respectively. For methionine-containing (met) peptides, the inverse fractions were obtained by reversing the baselines. For sequences containing more than one methionine, the fully oxidized and fully unoxidized peptides were analyzed as met-ox and met variants. The data for each peptide were then combined and fit to a sigmoid curve using non-linear least-squares analysis.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
For more information on HR-SPROX protocol, details of bioinformatic analyses, reagents, and chemicals, please consult SI Appendix. SI Appendix also includes a detailed description of the protein folding thermodynamic model used in our analyses and its assumptions. SI Appendix also includes datasets that tabulate the proteomic search parameters, raw and processed proteomic data, and bioinformatic analyses.

RESULTS:
Results
HR-SPROX Workflow.
Fig. 1 outlines the premise and workflow of HR-SPROX analyses, and detailed methods are provided in SI Appendix. Methionine is a readily oxidizable amino acid and can be converted to methionine sulfoxide by the oxidizing agent hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). The oxidation rate of a methionine residue within a protein is contingent on its local structural environment. Exposed methionines in unfolded regions oxidize faster than protected methionines in folded regions. Thus, the energy difference between the folded and unfolded conformations (ΔGfolding) can modulate the folding equilibrium and rate of methionine oxidation. The progressive addition of a chemical denaturant results in the unfolding of the protein (as ΔGfolding increases) and escalates the rate of oxidation. Monitoring the extent of oxidation (at a constant oxidation time) in the presence of increasing concentrations of a chemical denaturant produces a denaturation curve.
The SPROX denaturation curve can potentially provide four types of information: baseline oxidation, [denaturant]1/2, ΔGfolding, and m value (Fig. 1A). The level of baseline oxidation (the extent of oxidation induced by H2O2 in the absence of denaturant) provides a measure of the susceptibility of the methionine to oxidation in the context of the native protein. As we show below, this parameter is largely influenced by the level of solvent exposure of the methionine sidechain. The midpoint of denaturation ([denaturant]1/2) is a model-independent parameter that provides the denaturant concentration required to unfold one-half of the protein population. For proteins that conform to a two-state folding model, where only the fully folded and fully unfolded conformations are significantly populated at all denaturant concentrations, the resulting sigmoidal denaturation curve can be interpreted in terms of the energy difference between the two conformations using the following equation (see SI Appendix for formal derivation and assumptions):where ΔGfolding is the folding stability in the absence of denaturant, and the m value is the slope of the linear relationship between ΔGfolding and [denaturant] in accordance to the linear extrapolation model of two-state folding (LEM). It has been shown that the m value is correlated with the size and accessible surface area of the folding unit. Thus, for proteins or domains that unfold in a two-state fashion, least-squares fitting the SPROX curve with the above equation can provide ΔGfolding measurements for the folding unit that encompasses the methionine.
Accurate determination of ΔGfolding values from HR-SPROX curves using LEM is contingent on the availability of a significant number of data points in the transition regions of the sigmoidal curves. To obtain sufficient resolution required for analysis of a large number of polypeptides with diverse stabilities, we obtained data points at numerous denaturation concentrations (see below for exact statistics) and multiplexed the samples using TMTs (Fig. 1B). Each methionine can potentially produce two HR-SPROX curves based on the disappearance of methionine or appearance of methionine sulfoxide as a function of denaturant concentration. For a given methionine, these two curves are expected to be mirror images of one another, providing two independent datasets for analysis of its localized stability.
It should be noted that methionine residues have a tendency to become oxidized in the cell or during mass-spectrometric analysis, even in the absence of H2O2. However, the level of such spurious oxidation is minimal relative to the forced oxidation induced by H2O2. Furthermore, this background oxidation is expected to be constant at all denaturant concentrations and does not influence the measurements of normalized fractional oxidation.
Analysis of Purified Lysozyme Validates the Accuracy of ΔGfolding Measurements by HR-SPROX.
We first validated the HR-SPROX approach by analyzing purified lysozyme, a well-studied two-state protein folding model. Lysozyme has three buried tryptophan residues whose fluorescence emission spectra change upon denaturation (Fig. 2A). A protected methionine resides in the same region of the protein, enabling parallel analysis of stability by HR-SPROX. We obtained fluorescence and HR-SPROX denaturation curves using guanidine hydrochloride (GdmCl) as a denaturant. The experiments were carried out at room temperature at pH 7.4. Fig. 2B compares the denaturation curves obtained by fluorescence and HR-SPROX for a methionine-containing tryptic peptide that also encompasses two of the buried tryptophan residues. Analysis of the two denaturation curves with the two-state folding model provides similar measurements for [GdmCl]1/2, m value, and ΔGfolding. These values are also consistent with previous stability measurements obtained for lysozyme under similar conditions.
HR-SPROX Enables Proteome-Wide Analysis of Folding Thermodynamics in Human Fibroblast Extracts.
We next extended our analysis to the proteome-wide investigation of complex extracts. Human diploid fibroblasts expressing the catalytic component of human telomerase (HCA2-hTert) were grown to a contact-inhibited quiescent state in culture and extracts were obtained under nondenaturing conditions. A series of HR-SPROX analyses were carried out with GdmCl concentrations ranging from 0 to 3 M (SI Appendix, Fig. S1). The experiments included five technical replicates obtained from two biological replicates, with each technical replicate being exposed to 30 denaturant concentrations and tagged with three different sets of 10-plex TMTs before LC-MS/MS analysis. Together, the data provided quantitative information for 10,412 unique methionine-containing peptides (in unoxidized and/or oxidized forms) mapped to 3,158 protein groups (Table 1 and Datasets S1–S3). All raw and processed data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD011456.
The H2O2 concentrations and oxidation times used in our experiments were sufficient to oxidize exposed methionines to methionine sulfoxides (Met-O) but did not lead to the formation of significant levels of methionine sulfones (Met-O2) (SI Appendix, Fig. S2). The only other oxidized residue that was detectable at appreciable levels was sulfonic acid (Cys-O3). However, levels of sulfonic acid-containing peptides were significantly lower than methionine sulfoxide-containing peptides and their formation did not result in any calculation bias in measurements of methionine oxidation (SI Appendix, Fig. S2).
We initially analyzed methionine oxidation levels in individual experiments and showed that there was a significant correlation between replicate experiments (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). Additionally, there was a significant correlation between denaturation curves of individual peptides independently obtained from disappearance of methionines and appearance of methionine sulfoxides (SI Appendix, Fig. S3). Given that replicate experiments were in general agreement with each other, we combined all available data (all replicates, encompassing measurements of oxidized and/or unoxidized peptides based on availability) to obtain high-resolution denaturation curves for individual peptides. After merging datasets, the number of denaturant concentration points analyzed for individual methionine-containing peptides ranged from 10 to 300, with a median of 50 (SI Appendix, Fig. S4).
As an example, Fig. 3 illustrates a HR-SPROX denaturation curve for a protected methionine residue in ADP ribosylhydrolase. We noticed that, although individual TMT data points for a given peptide generally overlapped and had consistent trends, outliers were typically present and heavily biased subsequent least-squares regression analyses of the denaturation curves. We therefore obtained moving averages of the denaturation data and used the resulting smoothed plots to conduct least-squares regression analyses (Fig. 3). The baseline oxidation, [GdmCl]1/2, m value, and ΔGfolding measurements for individual methionine-containing peptides are tabulated in Dataset S4.
Baseline Methionine Oxidation Levels Correlate with Secondary Structure and Solvent Accessibilities.
We first focused on analysis of baseline oxidation levels in the absence of denaturant. The data indicated that the distribution of baseline oxidation levels within the proteome is remarkably bimodal, with approximately one-half of the methionines forming a relatively well-protected population and one-half forming a poorly protected population (Fig. 4A). Based on these measurements, we set out to identify sequence and structural parameters that correlate with methionines’ susceptibility to oxidation.
We did not find strong correlations between methionine oxidation and identities of neighboring residues in the primary sequence, beyond slightly decreased oxidation levels near hydrophobic residues (Fig. 4B and SI Appendix, Fig. S5). As discussed below, we can rationalize this trend by considering that hydrophobic residues are more likely to be in the protein core where methionines would lack exposure to solvent and thus be less susceptible to oxidation. Alternatively, as has been noted previously, the direct interaction of the methionine side chain with aromatic residues may decrease the reactivity of the sulfur atom with oxygen.
We next cross-referenced baseline oxidation levels to the secondary structure context of the methionine residues using the Define Secondary Structure of Proteins (DSSP) analysis of corresponding Protein Data Bank (PDB) structures. Structural data mapped to 1,016 proteins in our dataset indicated that highly oxidizable methionines tend to be contained in turns, bends, and unstructured coils, whereas more protected methionines tended to be in rigid secondary-structure elements such as β-strands and α-helices (Fig. 4C and Dataset S5). We subsequently used PDB structures to measure the solvent-accessible surface area (SASA) of methionines using the VMD molecular visualization program. We observed a very strong positive correlation between the SASA of a methionine residue and its susceptibility to oxidation (Fig. 4D and Dataset S5). Together, the data provide proteome-wide evidence that secondary-structure context and solvent accessibilities of methionine residues are the primary determinants of their susceptibility to oxidation. This trend had been previously noted for a limited number of individual proteins.
Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Are Highly Prone to Oxidation in Cell Extracts.
A large number of protein regions and domains have been classified as “intrinsically disordered,” primarily based on lack of evidence for structure in crystallography or NMR studies, or low complexity patterns of amino acid usage in their primary sequence. However, it is unclear what fraction of these sites retain their disorder in the complex intracellular environment of the cell where they could potentially be interacting with binding partners and other stabilizing factors. Given the strong correlation between localized structure and methionine oxidation established above, we assessed the baseline oxidation levels of methionines within regions classified as “disordered” in MobiDB, a curated database of intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). Our analysis indicated that methionines within regions classified as disordered are significantly more prone to oxidation than those classified as “structured” (Fig. 4E and Dataset S5). This suggests that as a group, proteins that have been classified as intrinsically disordered mostly retain this property in crude extracts where they could potentially be interacting with stabilizing factors and binding partners. Thus, methionine oxidation rates can potentially help resolve ambiguities where conflicting evidence exists regarding the structured/disordered designation of a protein region.
Susceptibility to Oxidation Is Enriched in Specific Gene Ontologies.
We conducted gene ontology (GO) enrichment analyses to identify GO categories that were statistically enriched in protected or exposed methionines (Fig. 4F, SI Appendix, Fig. S6, and Dataset S6). GO categories most enriched in protected methionines included mitochondrial proteins, as well as proteins involved in oxidation–reduction reactions and ATP synthesis. It is notable that these categories contain proteins that are particularly exposed to reactive oxygen species (ROS) within the cell. It is possible that the prevalence of protected methionines in these proteins is an adaptive response to safeguard against ROS-induced oxidative damage. Among the GO categories most enriched in exposed methionines were cytoskeletal proteins. It has been shown that enzyme-mediated methionine oxidation is a regulatory mechanism for cytoskeletal dynamics. MICAL proteins are F-actin disassembling factors that modify the actin cytoskeleton by oxidizing two conserved methionine residues in actin. Our data indicate that not only are MICAL-targeted methionines highly prone to oxidation (Fig. 5A) but that, as a group, cytoskeletal proteins contain an atypically large number of exposed methionines that could potentially be targetable by other oxygenases.
HR-SPROX Uncovers Proteome-Wide Distributions of [GdmCl]1/2, ΔGfolding, and m Values.
We next focused on analyzing thermodynamic folding parameters based on peptide HR-SPROX denaturation curves. We limited our subsequent analyses to peptides that contained protected methionines (conservatively defined as having a baseline oxidation levels less than 0.5) and were well fit by a two-state folding model (r2 > 0.9). This “two-state” subset consisted of 1,798 peptides mapped to 991 proteins (mean peptide to protein ratio of 1.7) (Fig. 5A). Peptides that contained protected methionines but were poorly fit by a two-state folding model (r2 < 0.9) were designated as “non–two-state.” These peptides fell into two categories. The first were peptides that showed poor fit to the two-state model due to low signal to noise (e.g., low intensity peptides). The second were peptides that displayed multiphasic unfolding patterns, perhaps due to the presence of partially folded intermediates populated during the course of denaturation. However, the resolution and signal-to-noise level of our data were not sufficient to accurately quantify the thermodynamic properties of folding intermediates in the latter category of peptides.
For “two-state” peptides, the distributions of ΔGfolding, m values, and [GdmCl]1/2 measurements are plotted in Fig. 5B. The median values for these three parameters were −2.6 kcal/mol, 2.8 kcal⋅mol−1⋅M−1, and 0.91 M, respectively. As a whole, our measured stabilities and m values appear lower than the majority of protein folding models studied to date and theoretical proteome-wide predictions for global protein stabilities. It is therefore likely that, for most proteins, HR-SPROX measurements do not reflect the global stability of the protein, but rather subglobal stabilities of localized cooperative unfolding units encompassing the methionines. In this way, the exposure of methionines to oxidation through subglobal unfolding may be similar in nature to native HDX experiments.
Protein Stability Is Elevated in Specific GOs.
We conducted GO analyses to identify protein categories that are statistically enriched in highly stable or highly unstable regions as determined by [GdmCl]1/2 and ΔGfolding measurements of their methionine residues (Fig. 5 C and D, SI Appendix, Figs. S7 and S8, and Dataset S6). Among the most stable subsets of the proteome were proteins localized to the lysosomal lumen and extracellular space. Unfolding of target proteins in the denaturing environment of the lysosome is known to be required for their hydrolysis. It is therefore likely that resident proteins of the lysosome have evolved to be resistant to denaturation. Similarly, proteins localized to the oxidizing environment of the extracellular space are enriched in stabilizing disulfide bonds.
Among the least stable subsets of the proteome were ATP-binding proteins and ribosomal proteins. At ATP concentrations present in cell extracts, many ATP-binding proteins may exist in ATP-unbound forms that are predicted to be less stable than the ATP-bound forms. At higher ATP concentrations, the binding equilibrium may shift to the bound form, resulting in ligand-induced stabilization. Similarly, ribosomal proteins are stabilized by stoichiometric association to form the intact small and large subunits of the ribosome. During the course of chemical denaturation, as the higher-order structure of the ribosome is disrupted, orphaned ribosomal proteins appear to be relatively thermodynamically unstable.
Protein Stability Impacts the Rate of Oxidation for a Subset of the Proteome.
We next analyzed the relationship between folding stability and baseline methionine oxidation (Fig. 5E). The data indicated that ΔGfolding is not a strong predictor of baseline susceptibility to oxidation for two-state proteins that are relatively stable (ΔGfolding less than −1.5 kcal/mol). However, once protein stability declines beyond a minimum threshold, baseline methionine oxidation rates begin to rise. Thus, in unstable protein regions, oxidation from the unfolded state is the dominant pathway for oxidation, and the rate of oxidation is contingent on the folding equilibrium. Conversely, in stable protein regions, where the folding equilibrium is heavily shifted toward the native state, oxidation occurs primarily from the folded structure. In this regime, the rate of oxidation is independent of the folding equilibrium and instead appears to be limited by the solvent accessibility of the methionine in the native state.
HR-SPROX Enables Analysis of Interdomain and Intradomain Variability in Stability.
An important feature of the HR-SPROX analysis is that it can potentially provide localized stability information within proteins. In theory, different methionines within the same protein provide independent and localized stability probes. In some multidomain proteins, each domain may act as an independent cooperative unfolding unit. For these proteins, different methionines within the same domain are expected to report similar stabilities. To assess this feature of our data, we examined intradomain variability in our stability measurements. In general, we found that different methionines within the same domain have similar stabilities (Fig. 6).
An example of this trend is shown for the cytoskeletal protein talin (Fig. 6A). Talin is a large, amphipathic multidomain protein that forms a mechanical linkage between integrins and the cellular cytoskeleton. The interaction between talin domains and vinculin in focal adhesions is force dependent and is thought to occur through mechanical unfolding of specific talin domains that expose cryptic vinculin binding sites. To identify potential binding sites, mechanical stabilities of individual talin domains have been previously investigated by single-molecule atomic force microscopy (smAFM). Here, we were able to track the stability and solvent exposure of 16 of the 18 domains in talin. Our data are largely consistent with the smAFM findings. We found that domains shown to have low mechanical stability by smAFM, including the linker region, R3 and R4, are solely composed of highly exposed methionines. Conversely, domains that have been shown to be highly stable, such as R5 and R9, contained protected and stable methionines. Additionally, our analysis provided thermodynamic data on domains that have not been previously studied by smAFM. For example, we identified R13 as another highly stable talin domain. These results highlight the ability of HR-SPROX to analyze localized thermodynamic stability data for large multidomain proteins that are difficult to study by traditional protein denaturation experiments.
Within individual talin domains where multiple methionine-containing peptides could be identified, the stability trends were in good agreement with each other (see overlap between protected methionine curves in Fig. 6A). To examine the generality of this trend, we used the Pfam database of protein domains to globally define domain boundaries within our dataset and analyzed intradomain variability in our measurements. The analysis indicated that variabilities in [GdmCl]1/2, ΔGfolding, and m values were significantly lower within domains in comparison with variabilities of the parameters within the overall proteome (Fig. 6 B–E). The results are consistent with the idea that many domains behave as independent cooperative unfolding units.
The Chemical Chaperone Trimethylamine N-Oxide Has Variable Stabilizing Effects on the Proteome.
To determine whether HR-SPROX is capable of monitoring changes in protein stability induced by environmental alterations, we repeated our analyses in the presence of the chemical chaperone trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO). TMAO is an amine-oxide osmolyte. It is found in the tissues of a variety of marine organisms where it is thought to counteract the destabilizing effects of urea and pressure on proteins. It has been postulated that TMAO stabilizes proteins by increasing the free energy of the unfolded state through solvent exclusion effects, thus shifting the folding equilibrium toward the native state. Although the stabilizing effects of TMAO had previously been observed for a number of proteins, the selectivity of its stabilizing effects have not been investigated on a proteome-wide scale. We conducted a limited HR-SPROX analysis in the presence of 1 M TMAO (SI Appendix, Fig. S9) and compared the baseline oxidation levels, [GdmCl]1/2, ΔGfolding, and m values of methionine-containing peptides to untreated controls (Fig. 7 and SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Overall, we observed that TMAO decreased baseline oxidation levels and increased the stability of the proteome, although the magnitudes of these effects were variable between proteins (Fig. 7A).
Our data indicated that TMAO decreased baseline oxidation levels of protected methionines within unstable proteins (ΔGfolding greater than −1.0 kcal/mol) but that this effect was diminished for more stable proteins (Fig. 7 B and C). This trend is consistent with the idea that, unlike stable protein regions, methionine oxidation in unstable protein regions occurs primarily from the unfolded state. Hence, modulation of the folding equilibrium by a chemical chaperone can effectively decrease oxidation rates in unstable protein regions (see above and Fig. 5E). However, TMAO did not significantly decrease the oxidation rates of most highly exposed methionines, indicating that most unstructured regions within proteins (including regions with nonrigid secondary structures, high solvent accessibility, and those characterized as “intrinsically disordered”) do not transform to stably folded structures in the presence of 1 M TMAO (Fig. 7C and SI Appendix, Fig. S9). Although our experiments did not investigate the efficacy of TMAO at higher concentrations, the results indicate that, at levels where it has a significant impact on the stability of structured proteins (Fig. 7 D–F), TMAO is not able to impose structure on the majority of disordered regions within the proteome.

INTRODUCTION:
Within a cell, most proteins exist in a dynamic equilibrium between folded and unfolded conformations. The free-energy difference between these two states (ΔGfolding or “thermodynamic folding stability”) establishes the fraction of its population that is in a folded conformation at equilibrium. Folding stabilities can impact the tendency of proteins to aggregate, oxidize, or undergo degradation, and alterations in protein stabilities play a role in diverse biological processes and physiological disorders (e.g., aging and neurodegenerative proteinopathies). Despite their fundamental importance to protein function, the magnitude and span of folding stabilities within the proteome remain unclear. For example, estimations of the fraction of the proteome that harbors “intrinsically disordered” domains are largely based on theoretical predictions and, with a few exceptions, have yet to be verified by proteome-wide experimental data.
Historically, quantitative measurements of protein folding stabilities have been conducted for proteins in purified systems using in vitro denaturation experiments that employ global folding probes such as circular dichroism or isothermal calorimetry. Although these studies have made significant contributions to our understanding of folding thermodynamics, they have inherent limitations that mitigate their in vivo relevance. First, these studies have been biased toward well-folded stable protein model systems that can be easily expressed and purified. Hence, the thermodynamic folding parameters measured for well-studied folding models may not be representative of the proteome as a whole. Second, experiments conducted in purified systems typically do not account for the effects of interacting partners and other cellular factors that may influence protein stabilities in vivo. Third, these methodologies are inherently low throughput and cannot be easily used to investigate protein stabilities on proteome-wide scales.
To address these shortcomings, a number of recently developed techniques have investigated protein folding patterns using probes that can be analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange (HDX), hydroxyl radical footprinting, and limited proteolysis have been coupled with liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to provide proteome-wide measures of protein structure. These global studies have successfully investigated thermostabilities (melting temperatures), ligand binding interactions, and conformational changes induced by environmental alterations. However, due in part to technical limitations inherent in each of these approaches, it has proven difficult to obtain measurements of thermodynamic folding stabilities (ΔGfolding) on proteome-wide scales.
In this study, we globally measured protein folding stabilities by using methionine oxidation as a probe. This approach, referred to as stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX), was initially described by West et al. and is conceptually similar to previously described probing methodologies based on thiol labeling. SPROX offers a number of advantages that are particularly conducive to proteomic workflows. Methionine oxidation is a small, nonlabile modification that can be readily coupled with chemical denaturation and is retained during the course of LC-MS/MS analyses. Selective oxidation of methionines allows for straightforward database searches, identification of modification sites, and interpretation of oxidation kinetics. Furthermore, the use of chemical denaturants prevents the irreversible aggregation of proteins during the course of denaturation—a phenomenon that typically confounds thermal unfolding experiments. To date, SPROX has been used to analyze the stability of individual intact proteins and to examine proteome-wide alterations in denaturation patterns induced by ligand binding. Here, we have coupled SPROX with highly multiplexed tandem mass tagging (TMT) to obtain high-resolution denaturation curves—an approach we have termed high-resolution SPROX (HR-SPROX). By analyzing HR-SPROX data in the context of thermodynamic protein folding models, we were able to measure localized ΔGfolding values on a proteome-wide scale.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited with the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (dataset identifier PXD011456).
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1819851116/-/DCSupplemental.