PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Urine
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Schistosoma haematobium; school-aged children; urinary proteomics; machine learning; diagnostic biomarkers.

ABSTRACT:
Background: Schistosomiasis is a major public health challenge and one of the neglected tropical diseases globally. Schistosoma haematobium, the causative agent of urogenital schistosomiasis, is primarily endemic in African countries, with school-aged children (7 to 15 years) considered the most vulnerable population. The current diagnostic method relies on identifying parasite eggs in urine through microscopy, which is labor-intensive, requires specialized skills, and is often limited in sensitivity, especially in mild infections.  Disease-related biomarkers offer a promising avenue for advancing disease diagnosis and detection. Method: A total of 135 school-aged children (aged 7—15 years) from Zanzibar were recruited for this study. To identify potential host protein biomarkers, data independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics combined with machine learning was used to screen for differentially expressed proteins in the urine samples from individuals infected with schistosome haematobium. Machine learning was used to pinpoint the most discriminative proteins, which were subsequently validated using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Results: Proteomic analysis identified 823 common host proteins in urine samples from the infection group, with 269 proteins showing  significant differential expression. Of these, 149 were up-regulated and 120 were down-regulated in the infected group. Machine learning further highlighted SYNPO2, CD276, α2M, LCAT, and hnRNPM as the most discriminating biomarkers for Schistosomiasis haematobium infection. ELISA validation confirmed the differential expression trends of these proteins, underscoring their diagnostic potential. Conclusions: This study identified key urinary protein biomarkers associated with Schistosoma haematobium

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteome profiling identifies urinary biomarkers for Schistosomiasis Haematobium among school-aged children

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
This study utilized data and samples collected as part of China-Assisted Zanzibar Schistosomiasis Control Project. Samples were collected by Chinese experts during the implementation of the project, as detailed below: the proteomic cohort and validation cohort A comprised samples collected from the children aged 7-15 years in Mtangani and Ukutini, Zanzibar, during 2018-2019.This study utilized data and samples collected as part of China-Assisted Zanzibar Schistosomiasis Control Project. Samples were collected by Chinese experts during the implementation of the project, as detailed below: the proteomic cohort and validation cohort A comprised samples collected from the children aged 7-15 years in Mtangani and Ukutini, Zanzibar, during 2018-2019.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw DIA data were processed by Spectronaut 15.0 (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with default settings. Database searches were conducted against the uniprot-homo sapiens (version201907, 20,428 entries), assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation as a variable modification. Retention time prediction was set to dynamic iRT, with extensive mass calibration and ideal extraction windows determined dynamically by Spectronaut. A Q value (FDR) cut-off of 1% was applied at both the precursor and protein levels. Decoy generation was set to mutated, involving random amino acid position swamps (min = 2, max = length/2). The normalization strategy was set to local normalization. The average top three filtered peptides that passed the 1% Q value cut-off were used to calculate the major group quantities. The proteins with ≥ 50% of expression values in any group were retrained, while proteins with ≤ 50% missing values were filled with the mean of samples in the same group. Data were transformed into log2 scale and median-normalized. Different expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified using a t-test (p value was < 0.05) and an absolute fold change > 1.5. Visualization of the statistical analysis results were generated accordingly. To explore the biological functions associated with DEPs, we conducted GO pathway enrichment analysis using their co-expression genes. The analysis criteria required the number of differentially expressed hetero-proteins in each pathway to range between 3 and 40. The results were prioritized based on statistical significance, with the top 10 pathways selected in ascending order of P-value.