PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Hipsc cell
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: phosphorylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Cellular signaling/ chromosomal mosaicism/ genome stability/ embryonic development/ pluripotent stem cells/ dna replication stress/ linage specifications

ABSTRACT:
Human development relies on the correct replication, maintenance and segregation of our genetic blueprints. How these processes are monitored across embryonic lineages, and why genomic mosaicism varies during development remain unknown. Using pluripotent stem cells, we identify that several patterning signals –including WNT, BMP and FGF– converge into the modulation of DNA replication stress and damage during S-phase, which in turn controls chromosome segregation fidelity in mitosis. We show that the WNT and BMP signals protect from excessive origin firing, DNA damage and chromosome missegregation derived from stalled forks in pluripotency. Cell signalling control of chromosome segregation declines during lineage specification into the three germ layers, but re-emerges in neural progenitors. In particular, we find that the neurogenic factor FGF2 induces DNA replication stress-mediated chromosome missegregation during the onset of neurogenesis, which could provide a rationale for the elevated chromosomal mosaicism of the developing brain. Our results highlight roles for morphogens and cellular identity in genome maintenance that contribute to somatic mosaicism during mammalian development.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Developmental signals control chromosome segregation fidelity during pluripotency and neurogenesis by modulating replicative stress

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
This experiment had the objective to detect differential enrichment of phospho-peptides caused by modulation of different signaling cascades (WNT, FGF, BMP) using short term morphogen treatments (3 hours). Given our initial findings of morphogens controlling chromosome segregation fidelity and replicative dynamics, we were intrigued on whether these cascades directly impact by phosphorylation critical regulators (proteins) of the DNA replication, DNA damage, and DNA repair cascades. hiPSCs were seeded in 10 cm dishes in Essential 8 media and treated with control (untreated), DKK1 conditional medium (1:3), Noggin (200ng/ml) or FGF2 (40ng/mL) (See Supplementary Data 1 on the article) for 3 hours before harvesting. Tgfb1 (5ng/ml) and GSK3 inhibition (CHIR99021 3uM) treatment conditions were not taken in account in this study. Four independent experiments (n= 4 biological replicates/condition) were processed for phospho-proteome analysis was performed similarly as described previously (Potel C.M., et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2018). In brief, proteins were extracted by full lysis of cells, digested in-solution with Lyc-C and Trypsin in an 8 M Urea buffer and subsequently desalted using Sep-Pak cartridges. Digested samples have further been applied to immobilized metal affinity chromatography (Fe-IMAC) to enrich phospho-peptides. The desalted IMAC eluate containing the phospho-peptides, have further been analysed by LC-MS/MS measurement. Resulting peptides have been loaded on a cartridge trap column, packed with Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5µm, 300Å wide pore (Thermo Scientific) and separated via a gradient from 3% to 40% ACN on a nanoEase MZ Peptide analytical column (300Å, 1.7µm, 75µm x 200 mm, Waters) using a 150 min MS-method. Eluting peptides have been analyzed by an online coupled Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant (version 1.6.14.0). In total 113165 peptides and 8104 proteins could have been identified by MS/MS based on an FDR cutoff of 0.01 on peptide level and 0.01 on protein level. Identified in all samples were 40292 peptides and 6620 proteins. Match between runs option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across Raw files based on accurate retention time and m/z. Quantification was done using a label free quantification approach based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox, J. et al., Mol Cell Proteomics 2014). A minimum number of quantified peptides was required for protein quantification. In total 7394 proteins could have been quantified, 4140 were quantified in all samples.  For the downstream analysis, only peptides with fold changes > 2 and p-values < 0.1 for the 4 experiments were considered differentially regulated and are shown in Supplementary Fig. 5 in the publication. Each of the factors were manually analysed in STRING, PhosphoSitePlus, and other databases for i) their role in DNA replication or/and damage, ii) known kinases modulating the identified phospho-sites.