PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood platelet
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; formylated residue; dihydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Human; Lc-msms; Releasate; Blood; Ltq orbitrap velos; Isotope labeling; Platelets; Alpha granules

ABSTRACT:
The platelet releasate defined by quantitative reversed protein profiling.  Dimethyl labeled proteins of platelets in resting (light label) and activated state (collagen and thrombin activation, intermediate label) from three healthy volunteers fractionated by SCX, analyzed on a LTQ Obitrap Velos using a data dependent decision tree method (HCD/ETD).Peak lists were generated from the raw data files using the Proteome Discoverer software package version 1.3.339. Peptide identification was performed by searching the individual peak lists (HCD, ETD-IT and ETD-FT) against a concatenated target-decoy database containing the human sequences in the Uniprot database (release 2012_06) supplemented with a common contaminants database using the Mascot search engine version 2.3 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) via the Proteome Discoverer interface (version 1.3). The search parameters included the use of semitrypsin as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and the dimethyl light and intermediate labels on N-termini and lysine residues were set as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was initially set at 50 ppm, while fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.6 Da for ETD-IT fragmentation and 0.05 Da for HCD and ETD-FT fragmentation. Subsequently, the peptide identifications were filtered for true mass accuracy <4 ppm and an ion score of 40 until an FDR <1% at peptide level was achieved.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
High precision platelet releasate definition by quantitative reversed protein profiling

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Not available

DATA PROCESSING:
Not available

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Objective</h4>Platelet activation and subsequent protein release play an important role in healthy hemostasis and inflammatory responses, yet the identity and quantity of proteins in the platelet releasate are still debated. Here, we present a reversed releasate proteomics approach to determine unambiguously and quantitatively proteins released from activated platelets.<h4>Approach and results</h4>Isolated platelets were mock and fully stimulated after which the released proteins in the supernatant were removed. Using high-end proteomics technology (2D chromatography, stable isotope labeling, electron transfer dissociation, and high collision dissociation fragmentation) allowed us to quantitatively discriminate the released proteins from uncontrolled lysis products. Monitoring the copy numbers of ≈ 4500 platelet proteins, we observed that after stimulation via thrombin and collagen, only 124 (<3%) proteins were significantly released (P<0.05). The released proteins span a concentration range of ≥ 5 orders, as confirmed by ELISA. The released proteins were highly enriched in secretion tags and contained all known factors at high concentrations (>100 ng/mL, eg, thrombospondin, von Willebrand factor, and platelet factor 4). Interestingly, in the lower concentration range of the releasate many novel factors were identified.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Our reversed releasate dataset forms the first unambiguous, in depth repository for molecular factors released by platelets.