PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Phosphorylation; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Skin exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays from sunlight results in the formation of mutagenic DNA photolesions that are repaired by the nucleotide excision repair (NER) machinery. The inefficient repair of photolesions can lead to stalled DNA replication and mispairing, thereby causing strand breaks and mutations. B-cell translocation gene 3 (BTG3) is expressed in the epidermis of the skin and is an antiproliferative gene that is upregulated in human keratinocytes after radiation injury. In this study, we found that BTG3 is required to promote the timely extraction of the lesion-binding protein XPC by the segregase VCP/p97, an essential step preceding the excision of photolesions. Mechanistically, we showed that BTG3-dependent CHK1 activation and phosphorylation of VCP/p97 at S775 are necessary for the nuclear translocation of VCP/p97 after UV irradiation. Thus, loss of BTG3 or inhibition of CHK1 results in cytoplasmic retention of VCP/p97 and accumulation of ubiquitinated XPC, leading to delayed removal of photolesions and inefficient NER, which was recapitulated in vivo in the skin of the Btg3 knockout mice showing increased photolesions and H2AX and elevated mutations after UV. Our findings revealed that by influencing the cellular localization of VCP/p97, BTG3 is critical for the proper execution of NER to protect cells from UV-induced damage and skin carcinogenesis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
BTG3-dependent VCP/p97 nuclear translocation is required for efficient repair of UV-induced DNA lesions

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HEK-293T cells were transfected with Flag-VCP together with HA-CHK1-WT or HA-CHK1-KD plasmids. Two days after transfection, cells were lysed in TEGN buffer, diluted with an equal volume of TEG buffer, and rocked with anti-Flag M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma-Aldrich, A2220) for 1.5 h at 4 °C to perform the immunoprecipitation assay. The pulled-down proteins were boiled in protein sample buffer and the samples were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation, which included alkylation with iodoacetamide and protein digestion with trypsin. Subsequently, the samples were subjected to titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data obtained were analyzed using Matrix Science MASCOT software (https://www.matrixscience.com/) to identify the CHK1-dependent phosphorylation sites in VCP/p97.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell culture and treatment
HaCaT cells were maintained in Dubecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Hyclone), 2 mM of l-glutamine (Gibco), and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Gibco, 15140-122). HEK-293T cells were maintained in the same medium without l-glutamine. Where indicated, the cells were pretreated with 5 μM of the CHK1 inhibitor CCT245737 (MedChem Express, HY-18958) or 1 μM ATR inhibitor VE-821 (MedChem Express, HY-14731) for 2 h before UV irradiation.
Mice and treatments
C57BL/6 Btg3−/− mice have been described previously and were housed under 12 h light–dark cycle and pathogen-free conditions. For UV-DNA repair in the mouse back skin, dorsal hair was shaved two days before UVB irradiation. The mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, and the back skin was irradiated once with a UVB dose of 400 mJ/cm2 using a crosslinker (Bio-Link, BLX-312). The mice were allowed to recover and then sacrificed at the indicated time points to harvest the back skin. The collected back skin was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (w/v) in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) overnight was replaced with 50% ethanol the following day for sectioning. The procedure was evaluated and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Academia Sinica (Protocol ID: 21-12-1755).
Preparation of genomic DNA from mice back skin for whole exome sequencing
The back skin of the mice was shaved 2 days prior to the first UVB irradiation. The back skin of the mice was UVB-irradiated three times using a dose of 300 mJ/cm2 with a 2-day rest in between. Six hours after the last irradiation, the mice were sacrificed and the back skin were collected and washed once with PBS and then 70% ethanol, followed by digestion with 8 mg/ml Dispase II (Gibco, 17105-041) in DPBS (Gibco, 14190-144) for 1 h at 25°C. The epidermis of the digested skin was separated from the dermis with forceps, minced into smaller pieces, transferred to a tube containing extraction buffer [10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 0.1 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), pH 8.0, 20 μg/ml RNase A, 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)], and incubated for 1 h at 37°C. The epidermis was further digested with the addition of proteinase K (100 μg/ml) and incubated for 3 h at 50°C. Genomic DNA was extracted by adding an equal volume of phenol and rotating for 10 min. After centrifugation at 13 000 × g for 5 min at room temperature, the upper layer was collected, transferred to a new tube, and re-extracted. The upper layer was dialyzed at 4°C in dialysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) for 1.5 h with two changes of buffer until OD270 of the dialysate was <0.05. For each group (WT and Btg3−/−, no UV and UV-irradiated), genomic DNA purified from two mice was combined and submitted to BioTools (https://www.toolsbiotech.com/index.php) for whole exome sequencing. Sequences were aligned to mm10 in NCBI Genome using SnpEff.
DNA constructs
The full-length (FL) sequence coding for human XPC was amplified from IMR90 cells and cloned into pcDNA3-HA using EcoRV and NotI cloning sites. The product pcDNA3-HA-XPC was then used to generate HA-XPC ΔN (amino acids 334–940), ΔC (amino acids 1–814), ΔNC (amino acids 342–814), internal deletion constructs ΔI (amino acids 332–494 deleted), and ΔHR23B (amino acids 495–732 deleted) using polymerase chain reaction and the corresponding primers. To generate GFP-tagged XPC, XPC was amplified from pcDNA3-HA-FL XPC and cloned into pEGFP-N1 (Clontech) between the XmaI and SalI sites. To clone human VCP/p97, the coding sequence was amplified from IMR90 and cloned into pCMV-Tag 2 B (Stratagene) using the BamHI and ApaI cloning sites. The construct was used as a template to generate S775D and S775A mutants by site-directed mutagenesis. For recombinant protein expression, VCP/p97 was amplified from the pCMV vector and re-cloned into pRSET A (Invitrogen) using BamHI and HindIII cloning sites. FL and truncated BTG3 expression constructs have been described previously. All the constructs were confirmed by sequencing.
Purification of recombinant proteins
The Escherichia coli strain BL21 (DE3) Lys (Novagen) was transformed with WT and S775A pRSET A VCP/p97 and grown to an OD600 0.6–0.8. The bacterial culture was then cooled and induced with 0.5 mM IPTG for 2  h at 25°C. After induction, the bacterial culture was collected, and the pellet was stored at −80 °C. Sonication buffer [50  mM NaH2PO4, pH 8.0, 300  mM NaCl, 20% glycerol, 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and 0.5  mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)] was used to resuspend the pellets for sonication. Purification of His-tagged WT and S775A VCP/p97 recombinant proteins was performed as previously described using Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen).
Global and local UV irradiation of cultured cells
For global UV irradiation, the cell culture medium was removed and the cells were washed once with PBS prior to UVC irradiation (20 J/m2) using a UV crosslinker (Spectroline). To generate localized UV damage, polycarbonate isopore membrane filters with 5 μm pore size (Millipore, TMTP02500) were placed on top of the cells after washing with PBS and UVC-irradiated at 100 J/m2. PBS was added to facilitate the removal of the isopore membrane filter and then replaced with culture medium for cell recovery.
Antibodies
The BTG3 antibody has been described previously . Other antibodies used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table S1.
Cell lysis, co-immunoprecipitation, and western blotting
The cell lysates were prepared using TEGN buffer (10 mM Tris at pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 420 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 0.5% Nonidet P-40) containing 10 mM NaF, 10 mM glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The cell lysates were sonicated and cleared by centrifugation for 15 min at 4°C.
For co-immunoprecipitation, the lysates were diluted with an equal volume of TEG buffer (10 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, and 20% glycerol) and rotated with 15 ml of 50% protein G beads (Thermo, 53126) and antibody for 1 h at 4°C. The beads were washed twice with the same buffer, then once in PBS, boiled in protein sample buffer (2 M β-mercaptoethanol, 12% SDS, 0.5 M Tris–HCl, pH 6.8, 0.5 mg/ml bromophenol blue, and 30% glycerol), and resolved by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). Proteins on the gel were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes for immunoblotting. The signals on the blots were detected using chemiluminescent reagents (Perkin Elmer) and captured using GeneGenome (Syngene).
CHK1 immunoprecipitation and in vitro kinase assay
Wild-type (WT) and kinase-dead (KD) HA-CHK1 were immunoprecipitated from transfected 293T cells with an anti-HA antibody. Recombinant His-VCP-WT and His-VCP-S775A were expressed and purified from E. coli and treated with enterokinase (NEB, P8070S) to remove the His tag at room temperature overnight. Kinase reaction was performed with immunoprecipitated HA-CHK1 and His-VCP in kinase buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM MnCl2, and 1 mM dithiothreitol) supplemented with 0.5 mM PMSF, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM NaF, 3 μCi [γ-32P]-ATP, and 18.75 μM cold ATP at 30°C for 20 min. After boiling in protein sample buffer, the reaction was resolved by SDS–PAGE, followed by autoradiography to determine the extent of phosphorylation and immunoblotting for protein loading.
Cell fractionation
HaCaT cells were cultured in 35-mm dishes and UV-irradiated at the indicated time points. To separate chromatin-bound proteins from unbound proteins, the cells were processed as described previously. Briefly, cells were collected and resuspended in CSK buffer (10 mM PIPES, pH 7.0, 100 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 300 mM sucrose) containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (v/v) and incubated on ice for 15–20 min. The insoluble fractions were collected by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C and the supernatant (chromatin unbound) was collected. The chromatin-bound pellet was washed once and directly resuspended in protein sample buffer. Both chromatin-bound and unbound fractions were boiled in protein sample buffer and resolved by SDS–PAGE followed by western blotting.
For preparation of cytosolic and nuclear proteins, WT and BTG3 knockout (KO) HaCaT cells plated in 35-mm dishes were collected and resuspended in 200 μl hypotonic buffer (25 mM Tris, pH 8.0, and 2 mM MgCl2) containing 10 mM NaF, 10 mM glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and incubated on ice for 5 min. One microliter of 10% NP-40 was then added, and cells were properly mixed and incubated on ice for 2 min. Following centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C, the supernatants (cytosolic fractions) were removed, and the nuclear pellets were washed once with the hypotonic buffer and boiled in protein sample buffer.
Cell cycle synchronization and flow cytometry
HaCaT cells synchronization was performed basically as previously described. Cells growing at 40% confluence were arrested at the G1/S boundary using double-thymidine block with 2 mM thymidine (Sigma–Aldrich, T1895). Cells were released into fresh medium and collected at indicated time (4, 6, and 12 h for S, G2/M, and G1, respectively). Cell populations were determined by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) after staining with PBS containing 60 μg/ml propidium iodide (Sigma–Aldrich, P4170) and 50 μg/ml of RNase A (Amresco, #0675). The samples were sorted through an Attune NxT flow cytometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed using the FlowJo™ Software (BD).
 In vivo ubiquitination and SUMOylation
For in vivo ubiquitination and SUMOylation experiments, parental and BTG3 KO HEK-293T cells were transfected with His-ubiquitin or my-His-SUMO3 using Lipofectamine™ 2000 (Invitrogen). Two days later, cells were collected as non- and UV-irradiated at indicated time points and resuspended in buffer A (6 M guanidine–HCl, 0.1 M Na2HPO4/NaH2PO4, and 10 mM imidazole at pH 8.0) and the lysates were sonicated and cleared with centrifugation for 15 min at 4°C. The lysates were rotated with 15 ml of Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid agarose (Qiagen) for 1 h at 4°C, washed once with buffer A, once with buffer A mixed with buffer Ti (20 mM imidazole, 0.2% Triton X-100, and 25 mM Tris·HCl at pH 6.8) (1:3), and then three times with buffer Ti. After the second wash, 0.5 mM PMSF and 5 mM N-ethylmaleimide were added to the wash buffer. The bound proteins were boiled and analyzed by SDS–PAGE, followed by immunoblotting.
GST pull down assay
GST or GST-fusion proteins (GST-BTG3-FL, N, C, d1, d2, d3, and d5) were prepared as described previously. The interaction between HEK293T-expressed HA-XPC and recombinant GST-BTG3 in vitro was performed at 4°C for 1 h in Co-IP buffer (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP-40, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol, and protease inhibitor cocktail) containing 2 mg/ml bovine serum albumin. After three washes with Co-IP buffer, the beads were boiled in protein sample buffer and analyzed by SDS–PAGE, followed by immunoblotting using the indicated antibodies.
Mass spectrometry for determining CHK1 phosphorylation site in VCP/p97
HEK-293T cells were transfected with Flag-VCP together with HA-CHK1-WT or HA-CHK1-KD plasmids. Two days after transfection, cells were lysed in TEGN buffer, diluted with an equal volume of TEG buffer, and rocked with anti-Flag M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma–Aldrich, A2220) for 1.5 h at 4°C to perform the immunoprecipitation assay. The pulled-down proteins were boiled in protein sample buffer and the samples were subjected to filter-aided sample preparation, which included alkylation with iodoacetamide and protein digestion with trypsin. Subsequently, the samples were subjected to titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment followed by LC–MS/MS analysis. The data obtained were analyzed using Matrix Science MASCOT software (https://www.matrixscience.com/) to identify the CHK1-dependent phosphorylation sites in VCP/p97.
Immunofluorescence experiments
For immunocytochemistry experiments, cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 10 min at room temperature, washed twice with PBS, and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS for 5 min on ice. After permeabilization, cells were washed twice with PBS and blocked with 10% FBS at room temperature with gentle rocking for 30 min. The cells were probed with anti-6-4PP (Cosmo Bio, 1:200) and anti-XPC (Santa Cruz, 1:200) overnight at 4°C. The following day, the cells were washed twice with PBS and probed with fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies and DAPI (1:500) for 1 h at room temperature in the dark, washed, and mounted with DABCO. All images were acquired using Zeiss LSM 700.
For fluorescence immunohistochemistry, non- and UVB-irradiated mouse back skin frozen sections were subjected to 30 min heat-mediated antigen retrieval at 95°C using DAKO target retrieval mediated solution (S1669). The tissue section slides were rinsed once with PBS, followed by blocking with 10% FBS in 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. The skin sections were then probed with anti-CPD (Cosmo Bio) and anti-γH2AX (Cell Signaling) overnight at 4°C. After three washes with PBS, the sections were incubated with fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies and DAPI for 1 h in the dark at room temperature. The sections were washed three times with PBS and mounted with DABCO. Images were obtained using Zeiss LSM 700.
Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
WT and BTG3 KO HEK-293T cells were seeded in glass-bottomed dishes and transiently transfected with GFP-XPC. On the day of the analysis, the cells were washed once with PBS, UV-irradiated globally using a UVC lamp (20 J/m2), and allowed to recover for 1 h. For the FRAP (fluorescence recovery after photobleaching) analysis, a region of interest (ROI) spanning the nucleus (5 × 2 μm) at zoom was bleached for 200 ms using 10% of a 488-nm laser. The fluorescence recovery from the ROI was monitored every 3 s until a steady state was reached. All FRAP data were obtained using a Zeiss LSM 780 laser-scanning confocal microscope equipped with 63× oil immersion objective lens. Three independent experiments were performed, with at least 12 cells analyzed in each experiment. To determine the immobile fraction from the FRAP measurements, the average fluorescence between 84 and 114 s was measured, and the data were normalized using the initial fluorescence intensity after photobleaching.
Unscheduled DNA synthesis
To assess repair synthesis, the protocol described by Nakazawa et al. was followed with slight modification. Cells were seeded in 35-mm dishes with coverslips and allowed to grow for 2 days, followed by starvation in DMEM supplemented with 0.5% FBS and 2 mM l-glutamine for another 2 days. Cells were washed twice with PBS, UV-irradiated (20 J/m2), and recovered in fresh prewarmed serum free medium containing 2.5 μM/ml of 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) (Invitrogen, A10044) until time of collection. Cells were washed twice with PBS and fixed with 3.7% PFA in PBS on ice for 10 min. The fixed cells were washed twice with PBS prior to 5 min permeabilization with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS on ice. All collected cells were maintained at 4°C. Following blocking with 10% FBS in PBS for 30 min at room temperature with gentle rocking, the incorporated EdU was detected using ClickIT chemistry by incubation with 5 μM Alexa Fluor 488-azide (Invitrogen, A10266) diluted in 50 mM TBS (pH 7.3) supplemented with 4 mM CuSO4 (Sigma, C1297-100G), 10 mM C6H7NaO6 (Sigma, A4034-100G), and DAPI (1:500) for 1 h at room temperature in dark. After three washes with PBST (PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20), cells were fixed with 3.7% PFA in PBS for 20 min and mounted with DABCO. EdU fluorescence images were acquired using a Zeiss LSM700 and the intensity was quantified using ImageJ software.
Recovery of RNA synthesis
The protocol by Nakazawa et al. was followed. Cells were seeded as for unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS). Two days later, cells were washed twice with PBS, UV-irradiated at lower dose (5 J/m2), and recovered in DMEM with 1% FBS. At each time point, cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated with serum-free DMEM containing 100 μM/ml of 5-ethynyl uridine (EU) (Invitrogen, E10345) for 4 h. The cells were processed as described for UDS.
Proximity ligation assay
Cells were seeded in 35-mm dishes with coverslips 2 days prior to UV irradiation. A proximity ligation assay (PLA) to detect endogenous interactions between XPC and BTG3 was performed using a Duo-link PLA kit (Sigma, # DUO92101) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After incubation with PLA blocking solution, HaCaT cells were incubated with anti-XPC (Santa Cruz, 1:200 dilution) and anti-BTG3 (Lab raised, 1:100 dilution) antibodies overnight at 4°C with gentle rocking. After three washes, the cells were incubated with PLA probes (anti-rabbit PLUS, anti-mouse MINUS), washed, ligated, and amplified by rolling circle amplification as described in the protocol. Images were obtained using Zeiss LSM 700. PLA foci and fluorescence intensity were analyzed using ImageJ software.
Statistical analysis
Quantitative data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) of at least three independent experiments. Unless specified otherwise, plotting and significance tests were conducted using Prism 9 (GraphPad) and unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test with 95% confidence intervals. Differences were considered statistically significant at P< .05.

RESULTS:
Results
BTG3 is required for efficient repair of UV-induced photolesions
To explore the possible role of BTG3 in the repair of UV-induced DNA lesions in the skin, BTG3 KO HaCaT cells were generated using the CRISPR–Cas9 approach. These cells were UV-irradiated, collected at different time points together with the parental HaCaT cells, and probed with a UV photolesion-specific antibody against 6-4PPs. Loss of BTG3 led to delayed repair of photolesions compared to that in the parental cells (Fig. 1A–C). The levels of photolesions were about the same immediately after UV treatment in KO and parental cells, but were significantly higher in KO at 3 h post-UV treatment (Fig. 1C), suggesting that BTG3 is required for the efficient clearance of UV photolesions. Similar delay was observed in BTG3 KO HEK293T cells (Supplementary Fig. S1A–C). In addition to 6-4PP, the removal of CPD photolesions was also delayed in HaCaT BTG3 KO cells (Supplementary Fig. S1D and E).
UV-induced photolesions generate DNA breaks in the process of repair with NER. The presence of unrepaired photolesions and single-strand breaks, upon collision with replication forks, can trigger replication stress, leading to the phosphorylation of histone variant H2AX at ser139 (γH2AX). γH2AX levels in BTG3 KO cells were significantly higher at 6 h post-UV irradiation than in the parental cells (Fig. 1D and E). Furthermore, delayed removal of photolesions also led to reduced DNA repair synthesis in KO cells compared to parental cells, as indicated by reduced EdU incorporation after UV irradiation in KO cells (Fig. 1F and G). To assess the recovery of RNA synthesis (RRS), which is a measure of TC-NER, we also conducted EU labeling after UV irradiation. The results showed that BTG3 KO cells, although with lower basal RNA synthesis, recovered at the same pace as BTG3 proficient cells (Supplementary Fig. S2A–C). Taken together, these data suggested that BTG3 mainly participates in GG-NER and is not essential for TC-NER.
Because accumulated DNA damage, signified by elevated γH2AX, may negatively impact cell survival, colony assays were performed after UV irradiation. Indeed, the loss of BTG3 led to reduced cell survival after UV irradiation, as revealed by a marked decrease in surviving colonies (Fig. 1H and I). Collectively, these results support the notion that BTG3 is required for efficient repair of UV-induced photolesions to promote cell survival after UV irradiation.
Loss of BTG3 leads to reduced XPC mobility at photolesion damage sites
The XPC–Rad23B complex is the initial photolesion recognition factor required for the assembly of core NER proteins. To further investigate how BTG3 influences photolesion removal, we sought to determine whether there is a functional interplay between BTG3 and XPC. Therefore, we performed a PLA. The results showed that the interaction between BTG3 and XPC increased after UV irradiation, as demonstrated by the elevated fluorescence intensities and the number of PLA foci in the nucleus (Fig. 2A–C and Supplementary Fig. S3). This implies a functional interplay between BTG3 and XPC, which was further validated by co-immunoprecipitation (Fig. 2D), in which interaction was seen to be first increased and then decreased 30 min after UV. Loss of BTG3 did not affect the loading of XPC at localized UV photolesions (Fig. 2E and F); however, persistent occupancy of XPC was observed in BTG3 KO cells at localized photolesions (Fig. 2E and F), especially at 45 min post-UV.
The persistent levels of XPC at damage sites can represent two possible scenarios: it could indicate increased recruitment of XPC at damage sites or, alternatively, it may suggest reduced XPC mobility. To investigate this possibility, FRAP was conducted using XPC-EGFP expression in parental or BTG3 KO HEK293T cells. The cells were globally irradiated with UV light and the XPC mobility was measured every 3 s until a steady-state level was reached. UV irradiation reduced the mobility of XPC in parental cells (Fig. 2G). In the non-irradiated state, XPC mobility was significantly lower in BTG3 KO cells than in the UV-irradiated parental cells, and was further reduced after UV irradiation (Fig. 2G and H, and Supplementary Fig. S4A). Taken together, these data led us to conclude that XPC recruitment at damage sites does not require BTG3. Prolonged retention of XPC at damage sites in KO cells is most likely a result of reduced mobility due to the loss of BTG3.
The N-terminus of BTG3 is required for regulation of XPC mobility
Since there is a functional interplay between BTG3 and XPC, we next determined whether and how these two proteins interact with each other. In the co-immunoprecipitation assay, we found that HA-XPC can be pulled down by myc-BTG3 FL and the N-terminus (amino acids 1–107) but not by the C-terminus (amino acids 108–252) (Fig. 3A). Further dissection of the BTG3 N-terminus in GST pull-down assay revealed that the interaction may involve both Box A and Box B, as well as the N-terminal sequences (Fig. 3B). Reciprocally, we explored which domain of XPC is required for its interaction with BTG3. Three truncated and two internally deleted HA-tagged XPC constructs were generated: ΔN, ΔC, ΔNC, ΔI, and ΔHR23B (Supplementary Fig. S5 and Fig. 3C). The results of co-immunoprecipitation showed that loss of the XPA, HR23B, or TFIIH interaction domain of HA-XPC did not affect its interaction with myc-BTG3 (Supplementary Fig. S5). However, deletion of the domain between residues 332 and 494 in ΔI greatly diminished the interaction with BTG3 (Fig. 3C), indicating that BTG3 interacts with XPC through a specific domain between the XPA- and HR23B-interacting regions.
Given that the loss of BTG3 led to reduced XPC mobility in BTG3 KO HEK293T cells under both non-irradiated and UV-irradiated conditions in our FRAP experiment (Fig. 2G and H), we sought to verify whether the re-expression of BTG3 in KO cells would restore XPC mobility. As expected, re-expression of FL BTG3, but not the BTG3 C-terminal domain, increased XPC mobility in both non-irradiated and UV-irradiated BTG3 KO cells (Fig. 3D and E, and Supplementary Fig. S4B). These results further confirm the role of BTG3 in regulating the mobility of XPC in cells, especially after UV irradiation.
Nuclear shuttling of VCP/p97 after UV damage is impaired in BTG3 KO cells
XPC is extracted from the damage site by the ATP-dependent segregase VCP/p97 following the recruitment of XPA and TFIIH, which requires XPC modification, particularly by ubiquitin (Ub). The prolonged retention of XPC in the damaged foci (Fig. 2E) suggests that XPC may not be properly modified in BTG3 KO cells. However, upon examination of chromatin-bound XPC, increased rather than decreased modifications were observed after UV irradiation of BTG3 KO cells (Fig. 4A). XPC undergoes two types of ubiquitylation upon damage recognition: K63- and K48-linked ubiquitylation. To identify which XPC ubiquitylation was elevated in BTG3 KO cells, we carried out in vivo ubiquitylation in HEK293T cells using K48 only or K63 only His-Ub to co-express with HA-XPC. These results indicated that XPC underwent extensive K63-linked ubiquitylation after UV irradiation, which was markedly increased in BTG3 KO cells (Fig. 4B) and diminished by BTG3 overexpression (Supplementary Fig. S6A). Upon damage recognition, XPC undergoes SUMO modification, which is required for subsequent K63-linked ubiquitylation and release of XPC. To determine whether XPC SUMOylation was affected in BTG3 KO cells, leading to elevated K63 ubiquitination, we employed the same in vivo experiment by expressing His-tagged SUMO3 in HEK293T cells. We found that XPC SUMOylation was comparable in parental and BTG3 KO cells after UV exposure (Supplementary Fig. S6B). This result suggests that SUMO modification of XPC may not be involved in the increased K63-linked ubiquitylation in BTG3 KO cells.
As ubiquitylated XPC is removed from the sites of DNA lesions by VCP/p97, we next investigated whether BTG3 KO affects VCP/p97 expression or localization, as its impairment often results in the accumulation of ubiquitylated clients. After confirming that the levels of VCP/p97 were not affected by BTG3 KO (Fig. 4C), we compared the distribution of the segregase in parental and BTG3 KO HaCaT cells. In parental cells, cytoplasmic VCP/p97 transiently moved into the nucleus as early as 45 min after UV irradiation, whereas in BTG3 KO cells (A3 and N7), nuclear localization of VCP/p97 was only detected 2 h post-UV irradiation (Fig. 4D and E). Importantly, the delay could be rescued by re-expression of BTG3 in the KO HaCaT cells (Supplementary Fig. S7A–C). By cellular fractionation, we confirmed that VCP/p97 was still mostly cytosolic in BTG3 KO cells at 60 min after UV (Supplementary Fig. S7D). These results indicated that the nuclear localization of VCP/p97 was significantly delayed upon the loss of BTG3, which may explain the prolonged retention of XPC at DNA damage sites.
VCP/p97 nuclear shuttling after UV requires phosphorylation by CHK1 at Ser775
Since we have previously shown that BTG3 regulates CHK1 activation in UV-induced DNA damage response (DDR), we wondered whether CHK1 plays a role in the nuclear shuttling of VCP/p97 after UV irradiation. Interestingly, pretreatment of cells with the CHK1 inhibitor CCT245737 not only increased XPC ubiquitylation (Fig. 4F) but also markedly delayed VCP/p97 nuclear localization after UV irradiation (Fig. 4G and H), outcomes similar to those observed in BTG3 KO. Treatment of cells with ATR inhibitor VE-821, which dampened CHK1 activity, also blocked nuclear translocation of VCP/p97 after UV (Supplementary Fig. S8A–C), and elevated XPC ubiquitylation before but not after UV (Supplementary Fig. S8D), consistent with a role of ATR in the recruitment of XPC at the DNA damage sites. These results suggest that BTG3 promotes VCP/p97 nuclear translocation via CHK1 following UV damage. Loss of BTG3 or functional inhibition of CHK1 impairs the timely extraction of XPC from damage sites, leading to defects in NER.
Given that inhibition of CHK1 led to the retention of ubiquitylated XPC (Fig. 4F) and delayed VCP/p97 nuclear translocation (Fig. 4G and H), we investigated whether CHK1 and VCP/p97 interacted at the molecular level. Through co-immunoprecipitation, we observed that WT and kinase-defective (KD) CHK1 could pull down Flag-VCP/p97 (Fig. 5A), suggesting that CHK1 interacts with VCP/p97 in an activity-independent manner.
CHK1 is a kinase known to participate in DDR and our data with VCP/p97 suggested that CHK1 may promote VCP/p97 phosphorylation. To determine the CHK1-phosphorylated residues in VCP/p97, we co-expressed Flag-VCP/p97 with WT or KD CHK1 in HEK293T cells with or without UV irradiation and subjected the immunoprecipitated Flag-VCP/p97 to mass spectrometry analysis. Several amino acid residues were found to be phosphorylated in VCP/p97 when co-expressed with WT CHK1, but not when co-expressed with KD CHK1 (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. S9). Among them, only the S775 site conforms to the consensus CHK1 target (R at −3). Therefore, we generated phosphodeficient (S775A) and phosphomimetic (S775D) VCP/p97. To validate the mass spectrometry data, we co-expressed HA-CHK1 with WT or S775A VCP/p97 in HEK293T cells. Overall, serine phosphorylation (pSer) of WT, but not S775A Flag-VCP/p97, was elevated when co-expressed with WT CHK1 (Fig. 5B). This increase was not seen with KD CHK1 and was diminished by the CHK1 inhibitor CCT245737 (Fig. 5C). An antibody that recognizes phosphorylated S/T in the consensus CHK1 site (RXXS/T) could detect endogenous VCP/p97 as early as 15 min after UV (Supplementary Fig. S8E). Moreover, purified recombinant WT, but not S775A, was phosphorylated by immunoprecipitated WT, but not KD CHK1 in vitro (Fig. 5D and E), suggesting that VCP/p97 could be a direct CHK1 substrate. These results confirm our mass spectrometry data showing that VCP/p97 S775 is a target of CHK1 phosphorylation in cells.
Phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain of VCP/p97 has been shown to be involved in regulating its nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. Given that S775 is located at the C terminus of VCP/p97, we determined its role in nuclear translocation in HaCaT cells by expressing WT, phospho-mimicking S775D, or phospho-deficient S775A Flag-VCP/p97. WT Flag-VCP/p97 showed increased nuclear localization after UV irradiation, whereas the S775A mutant remained largely in the cytoplasm and was unable to move into the nucleus even after UV irradiation (Fig. 5F–H). Interestingly, the S775D mutant preferentially resided in the nucleus irrespective of UV irradiation (Fig. 5F–H). Moreover, overexpression of the S775D mutant reduced the accumulation of ubiquitinated XPC and γ-H2AX in BTG3 KO cells more effectively than overexpression of the S775A mutant (Fig. 5I and J, and Supplementary Fig. S7E). In comparison, mutation of the other C-terminal site, T791, to alanine had no effect on the distribution of VCP/p97 (Supplementary Fig. S10). Taken together, we conclude that CHK1 interacts with VCP/p97, promoting its phosphorylation at S775 and nuclear translocation after UV irradiation, which enables timely XPC extraction to allow the repair of UV-induced photolesions.
Given that CHK1 is involved in cell cycle regulation, we also investigated whether the re-localization of VCP/p97 is cell cycle-dependent. HaCaT cells were enriched in G1, S, or G2/M phase by double thymidine block and release, then irradiated with 20 J/m2 UV. Our data showed that S and G1 phase cells responded as the asynchronous cells, showing nuclear translocation of VCP/p97 after UV, whereas in the G2/M cells, VCP/p97 remained mostly cytoplasmic (Supplementary Fig. S11A–C). Concordantly, we observed lower CHK1 activation by UV (Supplementary Fig. S11D) in G2/M, similar to what has been reported by Warmerdam et al., accompanied by increased levels of modified XPC (Supplementary Fig. S11E).
BTG3 promotes efficient repair of UV-induced photolesion in mouse back skin to guard against epidermal mutation
The impact of BTG3 deletion on the sensitivity of the skin to UV irradiation was examined in Btg3−/− mice. Mouse dorsal hair was shaved 2 days prior to UVB irradiation, and the skin was collected at the indicated time points following UV irradiation (Fig. 6A). Consistent with what we observed in vitro, loss of Btg3 in vivo led to inefficient clearance of UVB-induced photolesions (CPD) and elevated γH2AX in the mouse back skin (Fig. 6B–D). Excessive UV-induced DNA damage is a known risk factor for skin cancer due to accumulative mutation. To explore the consequences of Btg3 loss in UV-irradiated mouse back skin, mice were UVB-irradiated three times. The back skin of non-irradiated and UVB-irradiated mice was collected and epidermal genomic DNA was prepared for whole-exome sequencing. A total of 2.7 × 109 bases were sequenced and the percent increase of transversions and transitions after UV irradiation in WT and Btg3−/− mice was calculated. In Btg3 knockout mice, both transversions and transitions increased much more than in WT mice (Fig. 6E), indicating accumulation of mutations, likely as a result of delayed repair and increased DNA breaks (Fig. 6C and D). Thus, our data implicate a role for BTG3 in the repair of UV-induced photolesions in the skin and in preventing UV-induced mutations and related skin diseases such as cancer.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The skin is the soft outer tissue of the body that is frequently exposed to UV rays from the sun. UV light is the most common environmental carcinogen that causes acute radiation injury or, in the worst-case scenario, skin cancer. Skin exposure to UV rays results in the formation of two bulky DNA lesions: cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and pyrimidine (6-4) pyrimidone photoproducts (6-4PPs). These lesions are formed by covalent linkages between adjacent thymine (T) and cytosine (C) bases in the DNA. If not properly removed and repaired, these lesions can interfere with DNA replication and transcription, resulting in mutations or cell death. To ensure genomic integrity, these lesions are repaired in cells mainly via the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway, which is a versatile and flexible DNA repair pathway. In addition to the crosslinked pyrimidine dimers, the NER pathway can repair a broad range of DNA double helix-distorting lesions, such as bulky chemical adducts, interstrand crosslinks, and reactive oxygen species (ROS)-generated cyclopurines. NER removes damage by cutting both ends of the DNA strand harboring the lesion, followed by repair synthesis to fill the gap using the complementary strand as a template, and completion by DNA ligation.
There are two different modes of NER: global genome NER (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER). GG-NER repairs the DNA damage at any position in the genome to prevent mutagenesis. In contrast, the TC-NER removes transcription-blocking lesions to promote undisturbed gene transcription. Each subpathway enlists specific proteins for damage detection. Pyrimidine dimers are detected by xeroderma pigmentosum C (XPC) in the GG-NER pathway and by Cockayne syndrome B protein recruited through the stalled RNA Pol II in the TC-NER. Once damage is detected, transcription factor IIH (TFIIH), replication protein A (RPA), and xeroderma pigmentosum A (XPA) are recruited to the DNA lesion site to open the DNA strand. This is followed by extraction of XPC by ATP-dependent segregase VCP/p97 (in GG-NER) to allow loading of the structure-specific endonucleases xeroderma pigmentosum G (XPG) and xeroderma pigmentosum F (XPF)–excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) complex. The XPG cuts the damaged strand at the 3′ end, whereas the XPF–ERCC1 creates an incision at the 5′ end, thus generating a 22–30-nucleotide single-strand gap referred to as the canonical NER gap. The trimeric proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) ring is directly loaded to the 5′ end of the incised part by XPF-ERRC1 to promote the recruitment of DNA polymerases (κ, ϵ, δ) for gap filling. Finally, NER is completed by DNA ligase I by catalyzing the formation of phosphodiester bonds and joining the DNA ends together.
B-cell translocation gene 3 (BTG3) is a member of the anti-proliferative BTG/Transducer of ErbB2 (Tob) family that regulates the cell cycle in a variety of cells. Members of the BTG family share two conserved regions, Box A and Box B, in their N-terminal domains, which have been shown to regulate transcription or messenger RNA turnover through protein–protein interaction. The C-terminal domains are diverged and may be involved in functions unique to each member. BTG3 is one of the upregulated anti-proliferative genes in human skin after radiation injury. Downregulation of BTG3 has been observed in some cancer types (breast, renal, and prostate cancer). Our group previously reported that BTG3 plays an important role in tumor suppression. A previous study conducted by our group identified BTG3 as a direct downstream target of p53. Once activated by p53, it binds and inhibits E2F1 activity to prevent G1/S phase transition. In normal human fibroblasts, the loss of BTG3 causes deregulation of ERK signaling and induction of JMJD3, leading to derepression of the Ink4a locus and acute cellular senescence. Moreover, our group has also reported that overexpression of BTG3 blocked the neoplastic progression of mouse tumors by disrupting the AKT-GSK3β-β-catenin signaling axis, providing a mechanistic insight supporting its tumor-suppressive ability. However, despite being highly expressed in the skin and one of the genes upregulated after radiation injury, the role of BTG3 in DNA repair in the skin remains largely uncharacterized.
The valosin-containing protein VCP/p97 is an AAA+ ATPase that functions as a hexamer. Together with ubiquitin-binding cofactors and energy from ATP hydrolysis, VCP/p97 extracts or unfolds ubiquitylated substrates for proteasome degradation or recycling. Its substrates span the cytoplasm and the nucleus, and its deficiency has been linked to malfunction in DNA repair and multisystem degenerative disorder. In the present study, we investigated the role of BTG3 in the signaling and repair of UV-induced photolesions. Our results indicate that BTG3 is required for the timely removal of XPC from UV-damage sites and efficient NER. Significantly, we showed that this is due to the regulation by BTG3 of a previously unreported CHK1-VCP/p97 signaling that contributes to VCP/p97 nuclear shuttling.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Supplementary data
 Supplementary data is available at NAR online.
Data availability
Materials used in this study are available upon request. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD056446.