PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Bioid; Sars-cov-2 nsp7; Turboid; Proximity labeling; Gr; Sars-cov-2 n

ABSTRACT:
Protein-protein interactions play an important biological role in every aspect of cellular homeostasis and functioning. Proximity labeling mass spectrometry-based proteomics overcomes challenges typically associated with other methods, and has quickly become the current state-of-the-art in the field. Nevertheless, tight control of proximity labeling enzymatic activity and expression levels is crucial to accurately identify protein interactors. Here, we leverage a T2A self-cleaving peptide and a non-cleaving mutant to allow the use of the protein-of-interest in the experimental and control TurboID setup. To allow easy and streamlined plasmid assembly, we build a Golden Gate modular cloning system to generate plasmids for transient expression and stable integration. To highlight our T2A Split-link design, we applied it to identify protein interactions of the glucocorticoid receptor and SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid and NSP7 proteins by TurboID proximity labeling. Our results demonstrate that our T2A split/link provides an opportune control to match expression levels for proximity labeling proteomics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Leveraging a self-cleaving peptide for tailored control in proximity labeling proteomics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For each proximity labeling experiment, three 150 cm2 plates were seeded with 2.7 x 106 cells per replicate. Next day, optimized doxycycline concentrations as previously described were added to the corresponding setup. After 24 h, 50 uM biotin was added for 1 h. Cells were washed once on the plate with 10 mL ice-cold PBS, after wish cells were collected per replicate by scraping in 750 uL ice-cold PBS. Cells were pelleted by spinning for 5 min at 4°C at 500 x g. Pellets were washed once with 6 mL ice-cold PBS. Pellets were frozen at -20°C until further processing. Subsequently, cell pellets were resuspended in 5 mL ice-cold RIPA (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 2 mM EDTA, and 0.1% SDS in ddH2O), supplemented with 1X cOmplete Protease Inhibitor cocktail and 0.5% sodium deoxycholate. Next, 50 U mL-1 benzonase was added and samples were incubated for 1 h at 4°C with end-to-end rotation. Lysates were then sonicated on ice with a probe sonicated at 30% amplitude for 5 rounds of 6 s burst with 2 s in between rounds. Lysates were pelleted at 16100 x g for 15 min at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford assay, and a maximal shared protein amount across all samples in the same experiment was used as an input for the affinity precipitation. Per replicate 30 uL Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads were washed three times with 600 uL unsupplemented ice-cold RIPA and eventually resuspended in 600 uL ice-cold supplemented RIPA buffer. Samples volumes were adjust to a minimum volume of 4.5 mL, and equilibrated beads were added to each sample. Affinity purification was performed by incubation at 4°C for 3 h with end-to-end rotation. Next, beads were pelleted by centrifugation for 1 min at 500 x g. Beads were washed with 1 mL unsupplemented RIPA buffer. This process was repeated for a total of three washes, after which beads were washed twice with freshly prepared ABC buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 pH 8.0 in ddH2O). Next, beads were washed three times with trypsin digest buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0 and 2 mM CaCl2 in ddH2O). Ultimately, beads were resuspended in 20 uL Tris-HCl pH 8.0, and 1 ug trypsin was added. Samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Next morning, beads were pelleted and supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Another 0.5 ug trypsin was added and samples were incubated for an additional 3 h at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were acidified with 20% FA to a final concentration of 2% FA. Mixtures were centrifuged at 20000 x g for 10 min at room temperature, and the supernatant was transferred to a MS vial. Samples were frozen at -20°C until LC-MS/MS analysis. For each sample, 2.5 uL peptide mixture was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in line connected to a Q-Exactive-HF Biopharma mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trapping was performed 2O uL min-1 for 2 min in loading solvent A (98% ACN, 0.1% TFA) on a 5 mM trapping column (Thermi Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was performed on a 250 mm Aurora Ultimate (IonOpticks) at a constant temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% solvent B (80 ACN, 0.1% FA) reaching 33% solvent B in 60 min, 55% in 75 min, 70% in 90 min, followed by a wash at 70% solvent B for 10 min and re-equilibration with solvent A. The mass spectromter was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS1 spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375 – 1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3000000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold of 15000 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30%. The C-trap was filled at a target value of 100000 for maximum 80 ms and the MS2 spectra (200 – 2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15000 in the Orbitrap analyzer with a fixed mass of 145 m/z. Only peptides with charge states ranging from +2 to +6 were included for fragmentation and the dynamic exclusion was set to 12 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
RAW files were searched using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings (1% FDR at peptide and protein level) as implemented in MaxQuant (v2.3.4.0). Spectra were searched against the human SwissProt proteome database (version of January 2023). Sequences of V5-TurboID and SARS-CoV-2 NCAP were added to the search database. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also when followed by a proline, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. No fixed modifications were set. Matching between runs was disabled. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained for identification. Proteins were quantified using the MaxLFQ algorithm with iBAQ turned on. Proteins that are known contaminants, identified as reverse hits, or only identified by site, were removed from the analysis. iBAQ values were log2-transformed and each replicate was median-normalized. Based on PCA sample clustering, outlying replicates were removed from the analysis. Proteins only identified in N-1 replicates in either the T2A or MUTT2A condition were retained for downstream statistical analysis, missing values were imputed by quantile regression with the imputeLCMD R package. In limma, a linear model was fitted onto the data and differential analysis was performed by empirical Bayes moderated t-tests with a Benjamini Hochberg correction for multiple testing. Proteins with an adjusted p-value of less than or equal to 5% were considered statistically significant.