PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Spleen
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Mice; B cells; Spleen

ABSTRACT:
Germinal center (GC) response requires increased protein synthesis. We identify the methyltransferase METTL1 as a translational checkpoint during GC responses. Therefore, we immunized mettl1-cko mice and control mice with NP-OVA, and sorted spleen B cells on day 14.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Mettl1-mediated B cell responses

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The sorted B cells were centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 min. After that, 50 µl lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell sediment, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at RT in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water) and loaded to Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Orbitrap MS) for MS analysis after drying. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using ProteinDiscovery search engine (v2.5).

DATA PROCESSING:
The sorted B cells were centrifuged at 500 x g for 5 min. After that, 50 µl lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the cell sediment, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000 x g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at RT in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water) and loaded to Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Orbitrap MS) for MS analysis after drying. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using ProteinDiscovery search engine (v2.5).