PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos; Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Top3a; Mitochondria; Mitochondrial processing peptidase (mmp); Proteolytic cleavage product

ABSTRACT:
The TOP3A gene encodes two isoforms, one targeted to the nucleus and one to mitochondria. Nuclear TOP3A functions as part of the BTRR complex to resolve double Holliday junctions during homologous recombination, while the mitochondrial isoform separates hemicatenated daughter mitochondrial DNA molecules following DNA replication. Here, we show that the mitochondrial isoform of TOP3A undergoes proteolytic cleavage by the mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP), removing ~90 amino acids from the C-terminus. This cleavage enhances the enzyme’s biochemical properties, increasing single-stranded DNA binding and decatenation activity. Notably, all BTRR complex subunits except TOP3A are absent from mitochondria, suggesting that proteolytic processing enables TOP3A to function autonomously in mtDNA maintenance. We propose that this cleavage represents a post-import maturation step that tailors TOP3A to its mitochondrial context by uncoupling it from nuclear protein interactions and enhancing its catalytic efficiency.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteolytic Cleavage Activates the Mitochondrial Isoform of TOP3A

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Determination of TOP3A cleavage by Tandem Mass Tag labelling Flp-In T-REx 293 cells were induced to express TOP3A carrying C-terminal Strep-tag II and 3 FLAG tags for 2 days, then cells were harvested and crude mitochondria isolated as described above. Affinity pulldown was performed as previously described (34) and Strep-tag II fusion proteins were eluted with D-desthiobiotin.  Cleaved TOP3A C-terminally tagged proteins (4 µg) were buffer exchanged and concentrated on 3 kDa filters (final volume of 100 µl in 50 mM TEAB). The sample was incubated with an excess of Tandem Mass Tag reagent (TMT, 10-plex, Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by evaporation of acetonitrile. TMT reacts with free amines at N-terminal peptides and Lysine side chains. The labelled samples were reduced using 5 mM TECP at 37°C for 2 h, then alkylated with 10 mM MMTS at RT for 20 min, and digested with 1µg of trypsin (Promega) in solution at 37°C for 3 h in 0.5% SDC in 50 mM TEAB buffer. The SDC was removed by acidification.  In vitro cleavage of synthesized peptides using MPP Peptide sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 2. Each peptide (5 µg) was incubated in triplicate with recombinant MPP (3.48 µg or 10.44 µg) in 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 50 mM tris-HCl pH 7.5, and either 0.1, 0.3 or 0.5 mM MnCl2 (as indicated) at 30C for 1 h as described in (35). Control reactions omitted the MPP protein. For absolute quantification of peptide cleavage, each peptide (6 µg) was incubated with recombinant MPP (or water as a control) as above, then the internal standard peptide was added (1:2 ratio of iSTD:peptide) and the reaction adjusted to pH 8 by the addition of TEAB to 50 mM. Cysteine residues in the peptide samples were reduced using 5 mM DTT at 60ºC for 10 min, and alkylated by the addition of iodoacetamine to 10 mM.  Mass spectrometry analysis for TOP3A cleavage Peptide samples from all experiments were purified using HiPPR Detergent Removal Resin and Pierce peptide desalting spin columns (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were dried and dissolved in 3% ACN in 0.2% FA prior to MS analysis. The fractions were analyzed on a QExactive HF (for TMT labelling and PRM experiments) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (for monitoring of wild-type and KGRQ peptide cleavage) mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm  2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 30 cm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 5% to 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid over 60 min at a flow of 300 nl/min. For the parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method a 30 min gradient was used. The MS-instruments operated in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at 60 000 (QEHF) or 120 000 (Lumos) resolution with m/z range 400-1600 and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 or 45 seconds. The 10 most intense precursor ions, charge states 2 to 7, were isolated with a 1.2 (QEHF) or 3 (Lumos) m/z isolation window for fragmentation with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 28 NCE and detection in the Orbitrap at 30 000 resolution. PRM analyses were performed on a QEHF instrument set up as described above but in the PRM mode. The inclusion list contained the alkylated cleaved peptide (m/z 739.0841 Da) and the heavy isotope-labelled iSTD version (m/z 741.5861 Da) with charge state 4. The MS data were acquired with an isolation width of 2 m/z and fragments acquired with a resolution of 30 000.

DATA PROCESSING:
Database matching for TOP3A cleavage Raw files were processed and analysed with Proteome Discoverer (Ver 2.2 or 3.0, Thermo Scientific). The data were matched against a custom database including the TOP3A or peptide sequences and background proteins using Mascot or Sequest as search engines with a precursor tolerance of 5 ppm (10 ppm for PRM experiments) and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da. Semitryptic peptides were accepted with 1 missed cleavage. Methionine oxidation was set as dynamic and cysteine alkylation as fixed. For the C-terminally tagged sample, TMT on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as a variable modification. In experiments using synthetic peptides, no enzyme was specified and without TMT modifications. All fragment spectra were manually reviewed. In the PRM experiments raw files were imported into Skyline (v22.2) for peak integration and quantification. The doubly charged fragment ions for quantification were b13 to b17. Fragment ion chromatograms were manually reviewed. Quantification was performed using the sum of 5 fragments, normalized to heavy internal standards.