PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Kidney epithelial cell
diseases: Disease free
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Mitophagy; Mitochondrial biogenesis; Size exclusion chromatography; Phosphatase

ABSTRACT:
Mitochondrial homeostasis relies on a tight balance between mitochondrial  biogenesis and degradation. Although mitophagy is one of the main pathways involved in the  clearance of damaged or old mitochondria, its coordination with mitochondrial biogenesis  is poorly characterized.Here,by unbiased approaches including  last-generation liquid chromatography coupled to mass-spectrometry and transcriptomics, we identify  the protein phosphatase  PP2A-B55a/PPP2R2A  as  a  Parkin-dependent regulator  of   mitochondrial number. Upon mitochondrial damage, PP2A-B55a determines the amplitude of  mitophagy induction and execution, by regulating both early and late mitophagy events.  Few minutes after the insult, ULK1 is released from the inhibitory regulation of  PP2A-B55a, whereas 2- 4 hours after mitochondrial damage PP2A-B55a promotes the nuclear  translocation of TFEB, the master regulator of autophagy and lysosome genes, to support  mitophagy execution. Moreover, PP2A-B55a controls a transcriptional program of  mitochondrial biogenesis by regulating the stability of the Parkin substrate and PGC1-a  inhibitor PARIS. Importantly, PP2A-B55a targeting rescues neurodegenerative phenotypes in a  fly model of Parkinson’s disease, thus representing a potential therapeutic target in  this disease.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The PP2A-B55-alpha phosphatase is a master regulator of mitochondrial degradation and biogenesis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample Preparation  Each fraction from Size Exclusion Chromatography (SEC) was separately reduced with 10mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich-43815) and alkylated using 55mM Iodoacetamide(Sigma-Aldrich-I1149), both reactions were carried out for one hour at room temperature. Alkylated proteins were then submitted to a digestion using trypsin (Promega-V5113) overnight at 35°C. Digested peptides were desalted using StageTip . prior injection into the mass spectrometer.  Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry Analysis.  Desalted peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography performed on an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Elution was carried out using a binary gradient with buffer A: water (Millipore-1.5333.1000) and B: 80% acetonitrile (VWR chemical-83640.320), both containing 0.1% of formic acid (Merck-1.00264.0100). Peptide mixtures were separated at 300 nl/min flow, using a binary gradient into a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH-r119 b9 0003), for a total run-time duration of 135 minutes. Packed emitter was kept at 35°C by means of a column oven integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Sonation). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD) was used to decrease ambient contaminant signal level. General mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2.1 kV, ion transfer tube temperature, 200°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode and used in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). A full scan (FT-MS) was acquired at a target value of 1000000 ions with resolution R = 240000 over mass range of 300-1700 amu. The top fifteen most intense ions were selected for fragmentation in the dual linear ion trap using a maximum activation time of 10 ms or a target value of 30000 ions. Multiply charged ions from two to four charges having intensity greater than 500 counts were selected through a 2 amu window and fragmented using normalized collision energy of 35. Former target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds.

DATA PROCESSING:
The MS Raw files were processed with MaxQuant software version 2.3.0.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine Homo sapiens (09/07/2016; 63668 entries). The database was searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications, and Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. The peptide, protein and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %.  MaxQuant output “proteinGroups.txt” was further processed and analysed using Perseus software version 1.6.15.0. The common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. For data visualisation, a Hierarchical clustering analysis on protein intensity columns was performed using “Pearson Correlation” and Linkage “Complete” to build the rows tree. To maintain the order of the SEC elution the columns were constrained using the “Preserve order” option.