PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Lc-msms; Yeast

ABSTRACT:
Sustainable production of plant secondary metabolites remains a significant challenge. Engineered yeast platforms offer a promising alternative, yet reconstituting plant cytochrome P450s (CYPs), key enzymes in these pathways, remains a major burden. Plant Membrane-Steroid-Binding Proteins (MSBPs) have been suggested to enhance CYP functionality, possibly by facilitating CYP-CYP reductase (CPR) interactions. In this study, Arabidopsis thaliana MSBP1 (AtMSBP1) was engineered with diverse plant CYPs to assess its broad CYP activity-enhancing effects. Surprisingly, CYP-CPR interactions are not essential for AtMSBP1’s function. Instead, AtMSBP1 orchestrates inter-organelle communication, involving not only the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), but mitochondria and vacuoles. Co-expression of AtMSBP1 with CYPs triggered significant subcellular reorganization, including tubular ER expansion, increased mitochondrial volume, and vacuole fission. This study highlights the critical role of organelle coordination in supporting CYP functionality, emphasizing a shift from traditional ER-based approaches to engineering cross-organelle interactions and tailoring the cellular microenvironment to enhance plant CYP activity in yeast.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cross-organelle Coordination to Advance Plant Cytochrome P450 Functionality in Yeast

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins were digested in-gel following a previously described protocol (Andrej et al., Nat. Protoc. 2006; Wei et al., Anal. Chem. 2023). In brief, gel bands corresponding to proteins with a molecular weight greater than 15 kDa were excised and cut into ~1 mm³ pieces. The gel fragments were sequentially destained using 25% and 50% acetonitrile in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8). Cysteine residues were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 37 °C for 1 hour and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes. Proteins were then digested in-gel with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8) at 37 °C for 16 hours. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by sequential shaking in 25% and 50% acetonitrile containing 5% acetic acid. The resulting tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTip (PierceTM) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The tandem mass tag (TMT, 126 to 131, Thermo Fisher) labeling experiment was performed following a previously described protocol (McAlister, et al., Anal. Chem. 2014). Briefly, the desalted peptides were reconstituted in 8.5 uL of 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and 1.5 uL of TMT reagents were added from stocks dissolved in 100% anhydrous acetonitrile. The peptide-TMT mixture was incubated via vortex at room temperature (RT) for 2 hrs. The labelling reaction was stopped by addition of 0.9 uL of quenching solution (5% hydroxylamine in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) and vortex at RT for 15 min. The labeled samples were mixed with 8.92 uL of 10% formic acid/10% acetonitrile. All the samples were pooled, dried by vacuum centrifugation, desalted, and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw LC-MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.15.0 software. Both MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were set at 20 ppm. Fixed modification was applied for cysteine carbamidomethylation, while variable modifications included methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% false discovery rate (FDR), allowing a maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages. Replicate samples were aligned within a time window of 0.7 min. Protein identification was performed by searching for the mass spectra against a Yeast UniProt database (UP000002311) modified by adding 11 protein sequences (i.e., DWF1, DWF5, DWF7, C90A1, C90B1, C90C1,C85A1, C85A2, DET2, NCPR1, MSBP1) from Arabidopsis as well as GFP, using a target-decoy approach. The identified proteins were filtered at a 1% protein FDR. For protein quantification, intensities for reporter ions (MS2) were utilized.