PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Myocardium; Pericardial fluid; Pericardium; Heart
diseases: Type 2 diabetes mellitus; Heart failure
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; TMT6plex-126 reporter+balance reagent acylated residue; carbamoylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Carrier proteome; Single-cell proteomics; Biomarker discovery

ABSTRACT:
Data-dependent liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is challenged by the large concentration range of proteins in plasma and related fluids. We adapted the SCoPE method from single-cell proteomics to pericardial fluid, where a myocardial tissue carrier was used to aid protein quantification. The carrier proteome and patient samples were labeled with distinct isobaric labels, which allowed separate quantification. Undepleted pericardial fluid from patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and/or heart failure undergoing heart surgery was analyzed with either a traditional LC-MS/MS method or with the carrier proteome. In total, 1398 proteins were quantified with a carrier, compared to 265 without, and a higher proportion of these proteins were of myocardial origin. The number of differentially expressed proteins also increased nearly four-fold. For patients with both heart failure and type 2 diabetes mellitus, pathway analysis of upregulated proteins demonstrated enrichment of immune activation, blood coagulation, and stress pathways. Overall, our work demonstrates the applicability of a carrier for enhanced protein quantification in challenging biological matrices such as pericardial fluid, with potential applications for biomarker discovery.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A carrier-based quantitative proteomics method applied to biomarker discovery in pericardial fluid

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Two separate experiments were conducted. For the optimization experiment, pooled pericardial fluid was analyzed alongside different levels of carrier. For the patient experiment, 80 patient samples of pericardial fluid were run alongside 3.3X carrier.  Pericardial fluid samples were drawn following median sternotomy and centrifuged at 3220 g for 10 min at 4 C. The protein concentration in the resulting supernatant was measured using bicinchoninic acid assay, and  20 µg of protein from sample was reduced, alkylated, and digested overnight with trypsin.   The carrier was sourced from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded myocardial tissue, which was deparaffinized in xylene and proteins were extracted in sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer. Proteins were reduced and alkylated followed by two rounds of acetone precipitation, re-dissolution in urea and digestion with Lys-C for 5 hours followed by trypsin digestion overnight.  Digested peptides were labeled with 11-plex tandem mass tags (TMT). For the optimization experiment, 5 µg peptides from pooled pericardial fluid were labeled with TMT tags 126 – 131N and varying proportions of carrier was labeled with tag 131C. For the patient experiment, 5 µg peptides from pericardial fluid samples were randomly labeled with TMT tags 127N – 131N, the carrier was labeled with tag 131C and pooled pericardial fluid, used to normalize across TMT sets, was labeled with tag 126. Resulting TMT sets were fractionated into 7 fractions by offline high-pH fractionation.  Mass spectrometry analysis was conducted on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-HPLC interface (Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were loaded onto a custom-made fused capillary precolumn (2 cm length, 360 µm OD, 75 µm ID packed with ReproSil Pur C18 5 µm resin (Dr. Maish, GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and separated on a custom-made fused capillary column (25 cm length, 360 µm OD, 75 µm ID, packed with ReporSil Pur C13 1.9 µm resin) using a linear gradient ranging from 90 to 73% solution A (0.1% formic acid) and 10 to 27% B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) over 45 min followed by 2 min at 45% B, 5 min at 95% B and 5 min at 95% A at a flow rate of 250 nL per minute. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode using data-dependent acquisition in a 2 second duty cycle starting with a high resolution MS1 scan in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 350 to 1,400 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 with automatic maximum injection time and 100% acquisition gain control target. MS/MS scans were acquired using a 0.7 m/z isolation window (HCD 35%) with an acquisition gain control target of 200%, automatic maximum injection time, and at a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 60 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.4.0.305). Sequest HT search parameters were set to default except for MS accuracy of 8 ppm, MS/MS accuracy of 0.05 Da for HCD data, trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages allowed. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues, TMT 6-plex N-terminal and TMT 6-plex on lysine residues. Variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation, N-terminal carbamylation, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues. Raw data files were searched against the UniProt database (downloaded 17th June 2020, 42,369 entries). Peptide identifications and peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% FDR using the Peptide and Protein Filter node. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide and with a high confidence (FDR < 1%) were permitted in the final dataset. Reporter ion signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) were used for calculation of relative protein abundances. Protein abundances in the control sample (mass tag 126) were scaled to 100 and sample abundances were scaled up or down accordingly. Protein abundance ratios were calculated by dividing protein expression in each sample by expression in the control sample.  Data normalization was performed in Excel 2016 by dividing protein abundance ratios by the mean protein expression for each sample, thereby compelling mean protein expression in each sample to one. Subsequently log2-transformation was applied. Proteins with less than five values in any of the sample groups were removed from the data. To calculate average sample SNR during optimization of carrier proteome amount, raw abundances corresponding to reporter ion SNRs for PSMs were exported from Proteome Discoverer and the average SNR of sample channels (126 - 131N) was calculated in. The number of proteins with an average sample SNR > 10 was determined by filtering PSMs and using the resulting UniProt accession numbers to identify proteins.

METHODS:
Experimental Procedures
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
First, an optimization experiment was performed where five different carrier amounts were tested (Table 1) to ascertain the level of carrier that would increase proteome coverage without compromising quantitative precision. For each carrier amount, technical triplicates were analyzed, where each replicate consisted of 10 identical samples of pooled pericardial fluid (TMT labels 126–131N) and the carrier (131C). Next, the main analysis was performed where the effect of the carrier proteome was investigated in a clinically relevant setting. This was termed the patient experiment, where pericardial fluid was collected from 80 patients and analyzed twice, once with no carrier and once with 3.3× carrier amount, generating two datasets. Patient characteristics and experimental groups are described below. Pericardial fluid is not routinely accessible; therefore the number of patients and the amount of pericardial fluid utilized was limited. To determine differential protein expression in the patient experiment, data was initially filtered to ensure at least five quantified values for each protein per experimental group; hereafter p-values were calculated using a two-sided Student's t test assuming equal variance comparing each experimental group to the control group. Protein expression levels were calculated as abundance ratios scaled to the control, dividing protein expression in each sample by the control. Abundance ratios were normalized and log2-transformed as described below. Fold changes were calculated as the mean protein expression for the experimental group divided by the mean protein expression in the control group. p-values <0.05 were considered significant. Data were analyzed using R, version 4.2.1. UpSetR package was used for visualization of intersecting sets of differentially expressed proteins. InteractiVenn was used for Venn diagrams.
Patients
The study cohort consisted of 80 patients who underwent cardiovascular surgery (aortic valve replacement and/or coronary by-pass) at the Department of Cardiac, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Odense University Hospital. Patients were divided into four experimental groups, with 20 patients per group: HF, DM, both HF and DM, or neither HF nor DM. HF was defined as left ventricular ejection fraction less than or equal to 45%. DM was acquired from medical history. For statistical analysis, the HF, DM, and HF + DM groups were considered experimental groups. The non-HF, non-DM group was regarded as the control group and hereafter will be referred to as such, with the discernment that this group was used as a control for statistical testing and not as ‘healthy controls.’ Sixty-two patients (78%) were male, the median age of the cohort was 68 years (range 33–86), and the median body mass index was 28 kg/m2 (range 18–40) (Supplemental Table S1). Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections of myocardial tissue were available from four patients.
A written informed content was retrieved from each patient prior to enrollment. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Regional Ethics Committee (S-20100044).
Sample Processing
Pericardial Fluid
Pericardial fluid samples were collected from 2013 to 2017 and were drawn promptly following median sternotomy into K2EDTA/aprotinin-coated tubes (5 ml, BD Vacutainer) and centrifuged at 3220 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The resulting supernatant was allocated in 1 ml fractions (1.8 ml, Nunc cryogenic tube, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −80 °C until analysis. Protein concentration of each sample was measured using bicinchoninic acid assay. Sample equivalent to 20 μg protein was transferred, concentrated by vacuum centrifugation, and redissolved in 20 μl 0.2 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Redissolved proteins were reduced by the addition of 2.2 μl 50 mM DTT and incubated at 50 °C for 30 min. Then, 2.5 μl 150 mM iodoacetamide was added to each sample and left to incubate at room temperature for 30 min. Finally, 1 μg of trypsin was added to each sample in a 20:1 ratio and incubated over night at 37 °C.
Myocardial Tissue
Deparaffinization of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue section was performed by incubating the slices in xylene at room temperature for 5 min. To each tissue slice, 1 μl 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate was added prior to adding 5 μl extraction buffer (2% sodium dodecyl sulfate, 200 mM DTT, 50 mM TEAB). Each tissue slice was then transferred to separate sample tubes and incubated at 99 °C for 20 min prior to incubation at 80 °C for 120 min. Then, 120 μl 200 mM iodoacetamide was added to each sample and left to incubate at room temperature for 30 min prior to acetone precipitation at −20 °C for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min. Acetone was then removed and the pellet was left to air dry before redissolving proteins in 50 μl 0.2 M TEAB followed by a second round of acetone precipitation by the addition of 250 μl acetone followed by incubation, centrifugation, and removal of acetone as mentioned above. Proteins were then redissolved with 5 μl 8M urea and incubated at room temperature for 60 min prior to protein digestion with 0.5 μg Lys-C at 30 °C for 5 h after which 35 μl 200 mM TEAB and 1 μg trypsin was added to each tube and incubated at 30 °C overnight.
Isobaric Labeling of Tryptic Peptides
Digested peptides were chemically labeled with 11-plex TMTs (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to vendor instructions. Briefly, 5 μg of tryptic digest from each sample was randomly labeled with either of the TMT tags 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, and 131N mixed in equal ratios with a peptide pool of all samples tagged with mass tag 126. Ion signals from this mass tag were used for data normalization across TMT datasets and for the calculation of relative protein abundances. Trypsin digest of the myocardial extract was labeled with the 131C TMT tag and pooled with remaining samples in varying proportions relative to the pericardial samples, as described in detail in the Results section.
Proteome Analysis
Offline Fractionation
The resulting TMT sets were fractionated into seven fractions by high-pH fractionation virtually as previously described. Briefly, samples were loaded onto an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class CSH C18 column (130 Å, 1.7 μm bead size, 300 μm id × 100 mm length) using a 25 min linear gradient from 10% solvent B (20 mM ammonium formate in 80% acetonitrile, pH 9.3) to 55% solvent B at 6 μl/min flowrate on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLnano system inline coupled to a Dionex 3000 Ultimate UV detector (210 nm) and a Dionex Ultimate 3000 autosampler configured as a fraction collector (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry
Mass spectrometry analysis of the fractionated samples was conducted on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-HPLC interface (Dionex UltiMate 3000 nano-HPLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples (5 μl) were loaded onto a custom-made fused capillary precolumn (2 cm length, 360 μm OD, 75 μm ID packed with ReproSil Pur C18 5 μm resin [Dr Maish, GmbH]) with a flow rate of 4.5 μl/min for 6 min. The trapped peptides were separated on a custom-made fused capillary column (25 cm length, 360 μm OD, 75 μm ID, packed with ReproSil Pur C13 1.9 μm resin) using a linear gradient ranging from 90 to 73% solution A (0.1% formic acid, Fluka) and 10 to 27% B (80% acetonitrile (J.0020T. Baker) in 0.1% formic acid) over 45 min followed by 2 min at 45% B, 5 min at 95% B, and 5 min at 95% A at a flow rate of 250 nl per minute. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode using DDA in a 2 s duty cycle starting with a high resolution MS1 scan in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 350 to 1400 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 with automatic maximum injection time and 100% acquisition gain control target. MS/MS scans were acquired using a 0.7 m/z isolation window (higher energy collisional dissociation [HCD], normalized collision energy: 35%) with an acquisition gain control target of 200%, automatic maximum injection time, and at a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200. Selected ions were dynamically excluded for 60 s.
Raw Data Processing
All raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (v. 2.4.0.305 or 2.4.1.15, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and searched with the Sequest HT search algorithm. Data from myocardial tissue and the patient experiment were searched with Sequest HT combined with MSPepSearch using the NIST spectral library (Orbitrap HCD 20160923 v.1 [1127970 spectra]). Sequest HT search parameters were set to default except for MS accuracy of 8 ppm, MS/MS accuracy of 0.05 Da for HCD data, and trypsin digestion with two missed cleavages allowed. Fixed modifications were set to carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues, TMT 6-plex N-terminal, and TMT 6-plex on lysine residues. Variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation, N-terminal carbamylation, and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues. Raw data files were searched against the UniProt database (downloaded 17th June 2020, 42,369 entries). Peptide identifications and peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Peptide and Protein Filter node. For quantification, a minimum average signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 10 and a maximum co-isolation of 50% for reporter ions was required at the PSM level. For the optimization experiment only, an additional threshold was applied at the protein level requiring average SNR to be greater than 10 for reporter ions from sample channels. Proteins identified with at least one unique peptide and with a high confidence (FDR <1%) were permitted in the final dataset. Reporter ion SNRs, which are directly proportional to the number of ions in the Orbitrap, were used for the calculation of raw and relative protein abundances. Reporter ion SNRs from all PSMs that passed the quantification filters were summed to infer raw protein abundances. Raw protein abundances were scaled to the control sample (mass tag 126) by multiplying by a protein-specific scaling factor (100/control abundance). Protein abundance ratios were calculated by dividing protein expression in each sample by expression in the control sample. The scaling procedure and abundance ratio calculations were implemented through Proteome Discoverer.
Data Postprocessing
Data normalization was performed in Excel 2016 by dividing protein abundance ratios by the mean protein expression for each sample, thereby compelling mean protein expression in each sample to one. Subsequently, log2-transformation was applied. Proteins with less than five values in any of the sample groups were removed from the data. To calculate average sample SNR during optimization of carrier proteome amount, raw abundances corresponding to reporter ion SNRs for PSMs were exported from Proteome Discoverer and the average SNR of sample channels (126–131N) was calculated in Excel 2016. The number of proteins with an average sample SNR >10 was determined by filtering PSMs and using the resulting UniProt accession numbers to identify proteins.
Pathway Analysis
PANTHER (version 17.0) was used to perform enrichment analysis on data annotated with GO Biological Process terms (released 2023-03-06). Upregulated and downregulated proteins were submitted for analysis separately and compared to a background of all proteins quantified in the data with at least five values in each experimental group (1398 proteins when using the carrier proteome, 265 proteins without a carrier). Fisher’s exact test was used to determine significance with Benjamini–Hochberg correction at 5% FDR.

RESULTS:
Results
Principle of Using a Tissue-Specific Carrier to Aid in Biomarker Discovery
We adapted the SCoPE-MS multiplexing principle to boost sensitivity for detecting tissue-derived low-abundant protein biomarkers in body fluids. We demonstrated the method via the search for heart tissue–specific protein biomarkers in pericardial fluid from patients with or without HF and with or without DM using myocardial protein extracts as a carrier proteome. A tissue-based carrier proteome was chosen rather than depleted pericardial fluid since the absolute abundances of low-abundant peptides are not increased when high-abundant proteins are depleted. Myocardial tissue was utilized to intentionally bias the analysis by increasing the intensity of cardiac-derived proteins. On the other hand, the carrier cannot aid in the detection of proteins which are not present in the pericardial fluid samples, thus the carrier and sample proteomes must overlap.
In principle, peptides measured in MS1 and selected for MS/MS analysis may have three origins (Fig. 1). Firstly, peptides can be carrier-derived (mass tag 131C in present study), where no signal is detected across the pericardial fluid samples (mass tags 127N-131N) or the internal control sample (mass tag 126) (red peptide, Fig. 1). Second, no carrier-derived peptide triggers the MS/MS scan, indicating low-abundant or no heart tissue–derived carrier peptide present (blue peptide, Fig. 1). Lastly, the measured peptide can originate from a protein present in both the pericardial fluid samples and in the heart tissue carrier (yellow peptide, Fig. 1). Here, the reporter ion signals are present in all channels with intensities that reflect the measured protein in each sample.
Optimization Experiment: Optimal Ratio of Carrier to Samples Based on Reporter Ion SNRs
Akin to SCoPE-MS, it is important to optimize the amount of carrier relative to the samples to ensure preservation of quantitative precision, while maximizing the number of the tissue-specific proteins analyzed. To determine the optimal amount of proteome carrier to add to samples, different ratios of the carrier, consisting of myocardial tissue, and pooled samples, consisting of pericardial fluid, were analyzed by LC-MS/MS by DDA as described in “Experimental Procedures”. Each ratio was analyzed in three technical replicates, with each replicate consisting of 10 pooled samples labeled with separate mass tags. For the five ratios tested (Table 1), the signal intensities from pericardial fluid samples comprise the signals from 10 samples relative to the carrier. For instance, when the ratio of carrier to samples was 3:1, the ratio of carrier to each sample channel constituted 30:1. In this case, the signal of each individual reporter ion channel tagged with a single pericardial fluid sample was 30 times lower than the signal for the carrier reporter ion channel, also referred to as ‘30× carrier.’ This calculation of carrier levels was used for all ratios implemented in the experiment (Table 1). Two parameters were used to assess quantitative precision at different carrier-to-sample ratios. The SNR for sample channels (mass tags 126–131N, identical pooled pericardial fluid samples) was used to evaluate reporter ion abundance. For each PSM, the average sample SNR was calculated and the coefficient of variation (CV), a measure of analytical variability, was calculated by dividing the SD of sample channels by the mean of sample channels, then multiplying by 100.
The number of PSMs was increased by adding a carrier until 70× carrier, although a gradual deterioration of quantitative precision was observed (Fig. 2A). Average sample SNR and CV were plotted to provide further insight into the effect of the carrier on the data (Fig. 2, B–G). Without a carrier, 98 ± 0.1% of PSMs had an average sample SNR greater than 10 (Fig. 2B). Based on this, SNR greater than 10 was chosen as a reasonable threshold for subsequent investigations to exclude PSMs only containing signal from the carrier channel and to avoid imprecise relative quantification. A CV threshold of 20% was also chosen to divide PSMs into lower and higher variance. As a reference, for data acquired with no carrier across three replicates, 71 ± 0.2% of the PSMs were in the lower right quadrant, with an SNR greater than 10 and a CV lower than 20% (Fig. 2B). When 1.4× or 3.3× carrier was added, the number of PSMs observed in this quadrant increased, although the proportion of total PSMs decreased (Fig. 2, C and D). The number of PSMs with average sample SNR greater than 10, regardless of CV, was also increased at these carrier levels. Although this includes PSMs with a CV greater than 20%, data with some variance can still provide important biological information, especially in the context of biomarker discovery. However, at higher carrier amounts, the number of PSMs with an SNR greater than 10 and a CV lower than 20% fell substantially (Fig. 2, E–G), indicating significant noise in the data caused by excess carrier signal. At 30× and 70× carrier, data below the SNR threshold were distinctly shaped (Fig. 2, F and G). Here, sample signals were very low, often originating only from a few reporter ions, while CV varied widely, since the relative differences in signal were large. This suggests additional optimization of the MS acquisition method is necessary for these carrier levels to be informative, since most PSMs were below the threshold of reliable quantification. A negative exponential relationship also emerged between CV and average sample SNR, resulting in straight lines in the lower left quadrant. This artifact resulted from PSMs where only two reporter ions were quantified, always with abundances within 0.1 of each other. Due to the very low reporter ion abundances, these PSMs were removed by the quantification filter. Pairwise correlations of raw protein abundances were inversely correlated to the level of carrier, reflecting the increased variation and decreased sample signal seen at the PSM level. Adjacent carrier levels were more highly correlated than distant carrier levels (Supplemental Fig. S1).
Evaluation of unique peptide abundances confirmed that increased carrier amounts were linked to increased variance (Fig. 3). Controls were scaled to an abundance of 100 and other samples were adjusted in turn; however, this simple normalization could not overcome the variance introduced by the carrier. Since the same pool was used in all sample tags, the average peptide abundance should be close to 100 after scaling, while average abundances higher or lower than 100 correlated with higher variance. The proportion of peptides with a CV less than 20% was 69 ± 0.8% without a carrier, decreasing steadily as carrier was added, until finally at 70× carrier, only 8 ± 0.2% of peptides had a CV less than 20%.
For each carrier level tested, the observed ratio of carrier to samples was calculated to compare to the theoretical carrier amount. To calculate the observed ratios, the SNR of the carrier channel was divided by the average sample SNR for each PSM. Although the ratio between the total protein amount of the carrier and pericardial fluid samples was known, the observed ratios of carrier to samples varied widely at the peptide level in all experiments (Fig. 4). At carrier levels of 1.4× and 3.3×, the median-observed carrier ratio was similar to the theoretical carrier ratio (Fig. 4, A and B). At carrier levels of 10× or higher, the median-observed carrier ratio was notably higher than the theoretical carrier amount (Fig. 4, C–E). This could be caused by a high number of PSMs originating solely from carrier peptides, which resulted in very high observed ratios due to a small average sample SNR. At all carrier levels, the observed ratios close to zero indicate PSMs with very low signal in the carrier channel and high signal in sample channels, likely due to peptides exclusively present in pericardial fluid.
Additionally, how different amounts of carrier affected the distribution of average sample SNR for PSMs was investigated (Fig. 5A). Average SNR for sample channels was inversely correlated with carrier amount, demonstrating that when high amounts of carrier were added, reporter ion signal in the sample channels was negatively affected. For experiments containing 10× carrier or less, the median of the average sample SNRs was greater than 10, indicating sufficient reporter ion signal in sample channels. Unsurprisingly, when the carrier proteome was run without the addition of sample tags, insufficient SNR was observed in the sample channels for essentially all PSMs. Scaled abundances for unique peptides also decreased slightly as the carrier level increased, although the effect was less pronounced since the control channel for all peptides, no matter their abundance, was scaled to 100 while remaining channels were scaled accordingly (Fig. 5B). The average sample peptide abundances at high carrier levels (30×, 70×) and empty sample channels showed high variation. Based on the above, a carrier-to-sample ratio of 10× or less was necessary to ensure low variation and sufficient sample reporter ion signals.
Optimization Experiment: Effect of the Carrier on Protein Identification and Quantification
Also important for the determination of the optimal carrier-to-samples ratio was the effect of the carrier proteome on protein identifications and quantifications. For each carrier-to-sample ratio, total identified and quantified proteins were considered as well as proteins with sufficient sample reporter ion signal, which was calculated by filtering PSMs for average sample SNR greater than 10 and determining the number of associated unique UniProt accession numbers (Fig. 5, C–F). Adding a threshold for sample reporter ion signal allowed the removal of proteins only present in the carrier. Identified proteins included all proteins identified by the database search at 1% FDR, while quantified proteins were restricted to proteins where reporter ions passed the quantification filters of minimum average SNR of 10 and maximum co-isolation threshold of 50%. Although the total number of identified proteins increased with increasing carrier amounts (Fig. 5C, red bars), the number of identified proteins with sufficient sample reporter ion signal initially rose but then decreased after 10× carrier (Fig. 5C, orange bars). A similar trend was seen for protein quantifications (Fig. 5D). Many proteins could be identified when only the carrier was added; however, few could be quantified, since there was only signal in the carrier channel. When considering proteins with sufficient sample reporter ion signal, carrier amounts of 3.3× and 10× resulted in an average of 345 and 364 identifications and 339 and 356 quantifications, respectively. Since identifications and quantifications with these two ratios produced similar outcomes, a carrier amount of 3.3× was favored and chosen for the following experiments due to the increased quantitative precision previously demonstrated. At 3.3× carrier, approximately 50% of PSMs and peptide abundances demonstrated a CV less than 20%, which was deemed acceptable considering the gain in protein throughput (Figs. 2D and 3C).
Optimization Experiment: Effect of the Carrier on Carrier-Specific Protein Identification and Quantification
Next, we aimed to investigate the effect of the carrier on identification and quantification of carrier proteome-specific proteins. As described in the methods section, highly fractionated carrier, consisting of myocardial tissue, was used to determine the carrier proteome in detail, identifying 3864 proteins in total (Supplemental Table S2). In pericardial fluid samples run with no carrier, 95 out of 147 identified proteins (65%) were also identified in highly fractionated carrier proteome. This indicated that a significant number of proteins were shared between the pericardial fluid samples and the myocardial carrier, which was not surprising considering their adjacent origins. The proteomes of the carrier and samples must be similar for the carrier to sufficiently boost low-abundant protein identifications (i.e. Fig. 1, yellow peptide). As was the case for total protein identifications, carrier-specific identifications were highest when the amount of carrier was high, although sample reporter ion signals decreased (Fig. 5E). Carrier-specific protein quantifications also mirrored total protein quantifications (Fig. 5F), suggesting agreement between the optimal ratio for total protein detection and the optimal ratio for carrier-specific protein detection. Therefore, whether considering either total proteins or carrier-specific proteins, using a carrier amount of 3.3× increased the number of protein identifications and quantifications while maintaining quantitative precision for the sample channels. At 3.3× carrier, circa 80% of proteins identified (280 of 345) or quantified (276 of 339) with sufficient sample signal were carrier-specific proteins.
Patient Experiment: Effect of the Carrier on Proteome Coverage in Pericardial Fluid Samples from Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Patients and/or HF
To demonstrate the ability of a carrier to promote relevant protein quantification in patient samples, the 3.3× carrier was subsequently used for proteome analysis of pericardial fluid from 80 patients (Supplemental Table S1). Patients were divided into four experimental groups: patients with HF or DM, patients with HF + DM, or controls, with 20 patients in each group. In total, 2035 proteins were quantified when a carrier proteome was added to the samples. Proteins were then filtered to ensure that in each of the four sample groups, at least five values were quantified for each protein, leaving 1398 proteins. For comparison, the same samples were run without the addition of a carrier. When no carrier was present, the total number of proteins quantified was 392, of which 265 remained after filtering. Therefore, total protein quantification was greatly increased when using a carrier, and 223 proteins were shared between the experiments (Fig. 6A), demonstrating that 84% of total proteins quantified with no carrier were also quantified with a carrier. This suggested that the addition of the carrier proteome increased protein quantification without obscuring proteins that would otherwise have been quantified.
The 42 proteins only quantified when no carrier was added included extracellular proteins such as C-reactive protein and sex hormone–binding globulin, as well as proteins from the complement and coagulation cascades. The 1175 proteins unique for when a carrier was added were characterized by skeletal muscle proteins such as desmoplakin, myosin, and myosin-regulating proteins as well as metabolic proteins from pyruvate metabolism and the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Lastly, the 223 shared proteins included apolipoproteins as well as complement and coagulation cascade proteins, such as fibrinogen.
Next, we investigated the number of carrier-specific proteins quantified. As a baseline, proteins quantified in pericardial fluid samples where no carrier proteome was added were compared to the fractionated myocardial carrier proteome (Fig. 6B). This demonstrated that 161 out of 265 (61%) of the proteins quantified in pericardial fluid samples were also quantified in the carrier proteome. When pericardial fluid samples were run with the carrier proteome added, 1180 out of 1398 (84%) of proteins were also quantified in the isolated carrier proteome (Fig. 6C). In conclusion, using a carrier proteome increased the total number of proteins quantified in pericardial fluid samples and increased the proportion of proteins that were tissue-specific for the myocardial carrier.
To determine to what extent the carrier proteome was driving data acquisition, the number of MS/MS spectra used for quantification and PSMs with reporter ion signal exclusively from the carrier or sample channels was counted (Fig. 6D). Sufficient signal was defined as average SNR >10 for sample channels or carrier channel SNR >10. A similar number of total MS/MS spectra were acquired in the patient experiment both with and without the carrier. When a carrier was added, samples were no longer the driver of data acquisition, with most spectra (87%) containing signal from both carrier and samples and 12% of spectra with only carrier signal. A similar pattern was observed with PSMs, although the total number of PSMs was higher when a carrier was added.
Patient Experiment: The Carrier Proteome Increased the Number of Differentially Expressed Proteins
To determine if the myocardial carrier proteome improved the identification of biologically relevant proteins characterizing HF and/or DM, differentially expressed proteins were investigated as well. Protein expression in pericardial fluid samples from patients with HF, DM, or both was compared to protein expression in control samples using a Student’s t test. When the carrier proteome was added to samples, 156 proteins were differentially expressed in pericardial fluid among the three experimental groups (Supplemental Table S3). For comparison, when pericardial fluid samples were run with no carrier proteome, 41 proteins were differentially expressed among the three experimental groups (Supplemental Table S4). Therefore, as could be anticipated, the increased number of total proteins quantified when a carrier proteome was added led to increased detections of differentially expressed proteins compared to the same samples when no carrier was added. Differentially expressed proteins were visualized through volcano plots (Supplemental Fig. S2). Of note, no proteins retained statistical significance after Benjamini–Hochberg correction for multiple testing. This is likely a consequence of the low number of samples due to the inaccessibility of pericardial fluid as well as complex and overlapping pathologies. Although this limits the impact of the biological conclusions, the purpose of this exploratory study was to determine whether a carrier proteome could successfully attenuate protein detection in pericardial fluid samples; therefore, p-values were not corrected for multiple testing to allow proof-of-concept of the methodology.
The number of unique differentially expressed proteins associated with HF and/or DM was visualized with an UpSet plot (Fig. 7), where a bar graph indicated unique and shared proteins (intersection) of different combinations of experimental groups. The highest number of unique differentially expressed proteins was found when using a carrier for all experimental groups. For example, pericardial fluid samples from patients with DM or HF were characterized by 33 unique differentially expressed proteins each, while samples from patients with DM and HF were characterized by 51 unique proteins. In contrast, only 2, 3, or 17 unique differentially expressed proteins were found for samples from patients with HF, DM, or HF and DM, respectively, when no carrier was added. Therefore, using a carrier allowed characterization of the pericardial fluid proteome in greater detail. A considerable amount of information is gained when using a carrier (117 [33+33+51] unique proteins characterizing the three experimental groups), while little information is lost (22 [2+3+17] unique proteins, no carrier experiment).
Figure 7 also demonstrated that few differentially expressed proteins were shared between experimental groups. The distinct proteomes corroborate the knowledge that samples were from separate biological entities. Additionally, few differentially expressed proteins were shared between carrier and noncarrier experiments (Supplemental Table S5 lists proteins in Fig. 7). For 15 proteins which were differentially expressed both with and without the carrier, the direction of regulation was the same for all proteins, and the median Pearson’s squared correlation coefficient was 0.54 (Supplemental Fig. S3). In conclusion, the minimal overlap between differentially expressed proteins discovered when a carrier was added compared to when no carrier was added suggested that the carrier provided orthogonal information.
Patient Experiment: The Carrier Proteome Promoted Biologically Relevant Findings
To investigate the effect of the myocardial carrier proteome on the biological interpretation of results, enrichment analysis using the GO database was used to determine whether biological pathways were enriched or depleted in the data. For samples from patients with both HF and DM, upregulated or downregulated proteins were compared to all proteins quantified in the data.
Fifty-one proteins upregulated when a carrier proteome was added were found to have 38 overrepresented GO terms (Fig. 8 and Table S6). Several pathways were concerned with the innate or adaptive immune system, such as complement activation and humoral immunity. This is likely indicative of the increased activation of immune inflammatory cells in DM, such as macrophages and T lymphocytes. A total of 27 proteins annotated with “response to stress” (GO:0006950) were also enriched, confirming an increase in inflammation and oxidative stress, with detrimental effects on cardiac tissue as well as elsewhere. This GO term included proteins such as attractin, part of the immune inflammatory response, and N-myc downstream regulated 1, a protein upregulated in response to oxidative stress which regulates cell growth and differentiation. “Proteolysis” (GO: 0006508)) and “protein activation cascade” (GO:0072376) were both enriched, indicating an altered metabolic state. Interestingly, terms regarding negative regulation of wound healing, hemostasis, and coagulation were also overrepresented, suggesting an altered response to injury in these patients.
Proteins downregulated in samples from patients with both HF and DM did not contain perturbed pathways after FDR correction. For the same samples, when a carrier proteome was not added, no pathways were significantly enriched or depleted after FDR correction. Therefore, the addition of the myocardial carrier revealed dysregulated biological pathways which would not otherwise have been identified.

INTRODUCTION:
Mass spectrometry–based proteomics allows the untargeted analysis of thousands of proteins in a complex mixture and can therefore be utilized to analyze biological fluids and tissues in great detail. Recent improvements in this technology include the analysis of protein expression at the single-cell level using an isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT)-based multiplexing approach, also denoted single-cell proteomics by mass spectrometry (SCoPE-MS). With this approach, the issue of insufficient peptide ion signals of the reporter channels tagged with proteins from a single cell is addressed by including a mass tag channel tagged with a carrier proteome alongside the single-cell samples. The carrier proteome allows the selection of peptides that would otherwise be below the level of detection for the mass spectrometer, and the increased number of peptide fragments results in higher quality MS/MS scans, thus enabling efficient peptide identification. In SCoPE-MS, single-cell samples are run alongside a carrier typically consisting of 100 to 200 cells or more.
As demonstrated by several recent studies, the depth of peptide identification should be balanced against the accuracy and precision of quantification. When fewer ions are sampled from the “single cell” tag, quantification becomes less precise. Although high levels of a carrier proteome lead to a higher number of protein identifications, this comes at the expense of quantitative precision, where variation in single-cell tags becomes less apparent due to high signal in the carrier tag, thus also affecting biological conclusions. Moreover, increasing Orbitrap instrumental settings, such as normalized collision energy, Orbitrap filling times, or the number of target ions in MS/MS scans, also improve quantification, but at the expense of the number of proteins identified. In contrast, the employment of the real-time search feature of the Tribrid Orbitrap MS instrument with an additional MS3 scan used alongside a carrier to characterize single cells demonstrated improved quantitative accuracy. Despite these improvements in mass spectrometry–based proteomics, important analytical challenges still remain, especially regarding analysis of plasma and other body fluids. Human plasma proteins exhibit clinical relevance regarding the body’s physiological and pathological states and may constitute novel biomarkers that allow early diagnosis of disease events, making detailed analysis of plasma a compelling goal. Unfortunately, discovery of biomarkers in plasma faces a distinct technical challenge during analysis. The dynamic concentration range of plasma proteins spans more than 10 orders of magnitude, and high-abundant proteins such as albumin, immunoglobulins, and complement system proteins dominate data-dependent acquisition (DDA) workflows, making detection of low-abundant proteins challenging. Efficient detection and quantification of low-abundant proteins is of biological relevance, since they may stem from tissue leakage into blood due to damage or disease, thereby constituting novel biomarkers. Other types of body fluids such as urine, cerebrospinal, or pericardial fluid are comparable to plasma in their protein composition with the addition of local proteins specific to the adjacent tissue, thus presenting the same challenges as plasma with respect to the detection of tissue-related biomarkers present in low concentrations.
To address the aforementioned limitation, several methods have been developed to reduce sample complexity of plasma and related fluids. These include immunodepletion, affinity enrichment methods, and/or chromatographic prefractionation methods orthogonal to conventional C18-chromatography such as high-pH chromatography or hydrophilic interaction chromatography. Despite these efforts, mass spectrometry–based proteomics on plasma and other body fluids still lags behind tissue and cellular proteomics in terms of throughput, suggesting these methods do not sufficiently reduce sample complexity. Although the concentration of high-abundant proteins can be lowered, the concentration of low-abundant proteins is likely affected as well, thus the large concentration range remains. These methods are additionally rendered impractical for the analysis of thousands of samples in larger clinical studies due to increased cost and time associated with their use. Therefore, investigating the proteomes of plasma and other related fluids warrants new strategies for low-abundant biomarker discovery.
In the current study, we present proof-of-principle of the utility of SCoPE-MS for increasing proteome coverage of tissue-specific proteins in body fluids by the utilization of a tissue-specific carrier aiding protein discovery with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The carrier increased protein throughput while still allowing precise quantification of differences in protein levels in clinical samples. More specifically, we used myocardial tissue as a protein carrier to characterize the undepleted pericardial fluid proteome in patients with heart failure (HF) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM).

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data availability
Mass spectrometry data (.raw) and database search files (.mztab and .pdResult) have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD053450.
Supplemental Data
This article contains supplemental data.
Supplementary data