PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Breast cancer; Thioredoxin; Heterocomplex; Cxcl12; Hmgb1; Prostate cancer

ABSTRACT:
During inflammation and tissue regeneration, the alarmin High Mobility Group Box 1 (HMGB1), in its reduced isoform, enhances the activity of the chemokine CXCL12, forming a heterocomplex that acts via the chemokine receptor CXCR4. Despite the established roles of both HMGB1 and CXCL12 in tumor progression and metastatic spread to distal sites, the role of the CXCL12/HMGB1 heterocomplex in cancer has never been investigated. By employing a newly established mass spectrometry protocol that allows an unambiguous distinction between reduced (red HMGB1) and oxidized (ox HMGB1) HMGB1 isoforms in cell lysates,  we demonstrate that human epithelial cells derived from breast (MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231) and prostate (PC-3) cancer predominantly express red-HMGB1, while primary CD3+ T lymphocytes from peripheral blood express both HMGB1 isoforms. All these cancer cells release HMGB1 in the extracellular microenvironment together with varying concentrations of thioredoxin and thioredoxin reductase. The CXCL12/HMGB1 heterocomplex enhances, via CXCR4, the directional migration and invasiveness of cancer cells characterized by high metastatic potential that possess a fully active thioredoxin system, contributing to maintain red-HMGB1. On the contrary, cancer cells with low metastatic potential, lack thioredoxin reductase, promptly uptake CXCL12 and fail to respond to the heterocomplex. Our study demonstrates that the responsiveness of cancer cells to the CXCL12/HMGB1 heterocomplex, resulting in enhanced cell migration and invasiveness, depends on the maintenance of HMGB1 in its reduced isoform, and suggests disruption of the heterocomplex as a potential therapeutic target to inhibit invasion and metastatic spread in cancer therapies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Tumor cells express and maintain HMGB1 in the reduced isoform to enhance CXCR4-mediated migration

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Recombinant full length HMGB1-Histidine-tagged was used to set-up the LC-MS/MS protocol for the analysis of the redox status of the protein. HMGB1 (1ug) was dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer containing 8M urea and sonication was performed in a Bioruptor (Diagenode, 15 cycles, 30s on, 30s off, high mode). Reduced cysteines were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA-light) for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Proteins were precipitated over night with 80% Acetone at  20°C. Dried pellets were dissolved in 8M urea in 50 mM ABC, sonicated and incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 20 min at RT in order to reduce previously oxidized cysteines. Newly reduced cysteines were alkylated with 50 mM isotopically labelled iodoacetamide-13C2, 2-D2 (IAA-heavy) for 30 min at RT. Digestion was carried out in 8M urea in 50 mM ABC, overnight at RT with LysC (Wako Fujifilm, 1:100 w/w). Protease activity was stopped by adding 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The samples were subsequently cleared by centrifugation for 5 min. The resulting peptides were purified by loading the supernatant into C18 StageTips (23), and eluted with 80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid. Finally, the elution buffer was eliminated by vacuum centrifugation and purified peptides were resolved in 2% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid, 0.1% TFA for single-shot LC-MS/MS measurements. To determine the redox status of endogenous HMGB1 in the different cancer cell types, for each biological replicate, a cell pellet of approximately 4x106 cells was washed twice in PBS, flash frozen and stored at -80°C. Cell lysis and protein extraction was performed in 8M urea in 50 mM ABC by sonication. Alkylation, enzymatic digestion and peptide purification were performed as for the recombinant protein.

DATA PROCESSING:
MS raw files were processed using the MaxQuant software v.1.6.7.0 (24). The integrated Andromeda search engine (25) was employed to search spectra against the Human UniProt database (June 2019), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate of < 1%. Enzyme specificity was set as “LysC/P” with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and minimum length of 6 amino acids. N‐terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation, and cysteine carbamidomethylation and heavy carbamidomethylation (13C2, 2-D2) were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was used to transfer identifications across samples based on mass and normalized retention times, with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min. Label‐free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm (26) with a minimum required peptide ratio count of 1. Data obtained from the “modificationSpecificPeptides.txt” output table were analyzed by summing the intensities of all the peptides, with 0, 1 or 2 missed cleavages, containing either the light or heavy iodoacetamide derivative-modified form of each of the HMGB1 cysteines, and referring it to the total peptides intensity for the specific position.