PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Pancreatic carcinoma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Erk; Ikkepsilon; Mapk; Tbk1; Kras

ABSTRACT:
A variety of cancers utilize RAS-regulated signaling pathways to promote oncogenic phenotypes. A widely studied example is pancreatic cancer, where mutant KRAS signaling leads to activation of MEK/ERK kinases and downstream signaling which promotes oncogenic mechanisms, including cell proliferation. Importantly, ERK inhibitors have shown efficacy in some cancer clinical trials. Previously, others have studied the effects of the related kinases TBK1 and IKKε in pancreatic cancer where they have been shown to promote cell survival. Here, we show that RAS/MAPK signaling promotes expression of IKKε through control of protein stability and not through control of RNA levels. RNAseq analysis indicate that TBK1 and IKKε contribute to the expression of a subset of ERK-regulated genes. Potentially related to the effects on IKKε, proteomic analysis reveals that ERK functions to stabilize a relatively large set of proteins independent of RNA regulation. Knockdown of IKKε and TBK1 individually does not affect growth of MIA PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells, but dual knockdown significantly inhibits MIA PaCa-2 growth which is mediated through cell death. Concurrent silencing or inhibition of both TBK1 and IKKε also reduces tumor sphere growth in MIA PaCa-2 cells, correlating with a loss of stemness pathways found with RNAseq. The data suggest the importance of regulation of IKKε by ERK in pancreatic cancer cells and of the combined oncogenic activity of TBK1 and IKKε.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
ERK signaling promotes IKKepsilon expression and oncogenic functions in pancreatic cancer cells in association with TBK1

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
MIA PaCa-2 cells were treated for 24 hours with either 0.1% DMSO, 1uM SCH772984 (ERKi), or 1uM Compound 1 (IKKepsilon/TBK1i). Samples were washed 4 times with cold PBS on their respective growth plates before scraping into microcentrifuge tube and brief centrifugation to pellet cells. PBS supernatant was aspirated and cells were lysed in 8M urea, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.8, 1X HALT, 1X EDTA, 1X Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (Sigma). Samples were lysed for 10 minutes on ice before probe sonication (two times for 5 seconds at 40% amplitude) on ice. Lysates were spun down at 13,200 rpm (16,100 rcf) for 15 minutes at 4˚C before the supernatant was saved and quantified using the Bradford Protein Determination Assay (Bio-Rad). Quantified samples were stored at -80˚C until submission to the UNC MAP Core. Protein lysates (n = 9) were precipitated with acetone before resuspension in 1M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Resuspended samples were reduced with 5mM DTT and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were subjected to digestion with LysC (Wako) at 37°C for 2h and trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. The resulting peptides were acidified to 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using Thermo desalting spin columns. Eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation and peptide concentration was determined via Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Assay. All samples were normalized to 0.1 µg/µl. A pooled sample was created by combining an aliquot of each sample. All samples were spiked with iRT standard peptides (Biognosys) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were then analyzed via LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). The pooled sample was injected at the beginning and end of the sequence to assess technical reproducibility. Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 122 min method. The gradient consisted of 5-45% mobile phase B at a 250 nL/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The Lumos was operated in Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) mode. A full MS scan (m/z 350-1200 m/z) was collected; resolution set to 120,000 with a max injection time of 45 ms and AGC target of 250%. Following full MS scan, product ion scan was collected at a resolution of 30,000, with higher collision dissociation (HCD) set to 30, AGC target set to 2000%, maximum injection time to set to 54 ms, 31m/z precursor isolation windows.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data files were processed using Spectronaut (v17; Biognosys) and searched against the Uniprot reviewed human database (UP000005640, containing 20,404 entries, downloaded January 2023) and the MaxQuant common contaminants database (246 entries). The following settings were used: enzyme specificity set to trypsin, up to two missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. Precision iRT calibration was enabled. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was used to filter all data. Imputation was disabled, and single hit proteins were excluded. Un-paired student’s t-tests were conducted and p-values, FDR-corrected p-values (q-values), along with log2 fold change ratios were calculated in Spectronaut. Proteins with an absolute log2 fold change ≥ 0.6 and a q-value (corrected p-value) < 0.05 were considered significant.  Only the results of the ERKi vs. DMSO conditions are described in this manuscript.