PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Heart; Tibialis anterior
diseases: Duchenne muscular dystrophy
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectral Abundance Factor - SAF
keywords: Fear; Proteomics; Duchenne muscular dystrophy; Stress; Cytoskeletal organisation; Mitochondrial function

ABSTRACT:
Extreme heterogeneity exists in the hypersensitive stress response exhibited by the dystrophin-deficient mdx mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Because stress hypersensitivity can impact dystrophic phenotypes, this research aimed to understand the peripheral pathways driving this inter-individual variability. Male and female mdx mice were phenotypically stratified into “stress-resistant” or “stress-sensitive” groups based on their response to two laboratory stressors. Quantitative proteomics of striated muscle (heart and tibialis anterior) revealed clustering of the proteome according to sex and stress hypersensitivity. In both muscles, stress-resistant females were most dissimilar from all other groups, with over 250 proteins differentially regulated between stress-resistant and stress-sensitive females in each muscle. Males showed less proteomic variation with stress sensitivity, however these changes were associated with clear pathway enrichment. In the heart, stress-sensitive males had significant enrichment of pathways related to mitochondrial ATP synthesis, suggesting that increased cardio-metabolic capacity is associated with stress hypersensitivity in male mdx mice. Independent of striated muscle source or sex, stress hypersensitivity was associated with altered expression of beta-actin-like protein 2 (ACTBL2), an actin isoform critical for the formation of focal adhesions and cell motility. Stress-sensitive individuals had higher expression of ACTBL2, indicative of altered cytoskeletal organisation. Despite identifying proteomic signatures associated with stress hypersensitivity, these did not correlate with differences in the serum metabolome acutely after a stressor. These data suggest that the heterogeneity in stress hypersensitivity in mdx mice is partially driven by cytoskeletal organisation, but that sex-specific cardio-metabolic reprogramming may also play a role in this phenotype

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Cardio-metabolic and cytoskeletal proteomic signatures differentiate stress hypersensitivity in dystrophin-deficient mdx mice

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), respectively, and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme: protein) (V5111, Promega, WI, United States)overnight at 37°C. The digestion was inactivated by the addition of 2 μL of formic acid. Tryptic peptides were desalted on a pre-equilibrated C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (A57003100K, Agilent, CA, United States) and eluted in 50 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and dried under vacuum centrifugation.  Samples were analysed by reverse phase C18 liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) as previously described(Cheng et al., 2021). Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and bath sonicated for 20 min. The resuspended peptides were then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min to remove any insoluble debris, and the clarified peptides were analysed by LCMS/MS. The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC column particle size of 2 µm, diameter of 0.075 mm and length of 150 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific), making use of a 60 min gradient (2 – 80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid) running at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides eluted from the nano LC column were subsequently ionized into the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray source was fitted with an emitter tip 10 µm (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 1.6 kV electrospray voltage. The temperature of the capillary was set to 250°C. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent "Top 10" method operating in FT acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. FT-MS analysis on the Q Exactive Plus was carried out at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1 x 106 ions in full MS. MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2 x 104 ions. Maximum injection times are set to 30 and 50 ms, respectively. The charge exclusion was set to unassigned and 1+ with a dynamic exclusion of 20 s. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 25,000 counts, and an isolation width of 2.0 Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 27.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw spectra files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) incorporating the Sequest search algorithm. Peptide identifications were determined using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.1-Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FT-MS and HCD fragmentation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine, deamidation of  asparagine and glutamine, GlyGly residues on lysine, and acetyl modification on N-terminal residues were set as variable modifications allowing for maximum two missed cleavages. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) using intensity-based quantification was carried out. LFQ was carried out according to default parameter settings in the Proteome Discoverer 2.3 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, peptide spectral matches (PSM) were filtered using a maximum delta Cn of 0.05, rank of 0, and delta mass of 0 ppm. PSMs and peptides were, respectively, validated using a strict FDR for PSMs of 0.01 and 0.05 for a relaxed FDR. Peptides shorter than 6 amino acids were filtered out. PSMs were chromatographically aligned for each input file in a sample set with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 min. Peptide groups used for protein quantification were analysed using the default parameters which set a peptide as unique if it is included in only one protein group. The quantification was processed using unique and razor peptides (peptides shared among multiple proteins group or proteins) with the precursor abundance based on the intensity. Protein abundance was calculated as a sum of the individual peptide group abundances and the ratio was based on pairwise ratio using a geometric median of the peptide group ratios. An ANOVA test was used for the hypothesis test and uses the background population of ratios for all peptides and proteins to determine whether any given single peptide or protein is significantly changing relative to that background (Proteome Discoverer User Guide Software Version 2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific).