PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Breast cancer; Endocrine resistance; Cancer stem cells; : adiponectin; Tamoxifen

ABSTRACT:
Overcoming endocrine-resistance is the major challenge in treating Estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. Breast Cancer Stem Cells (BCSCs) are blamed to be the driving force behind poor clinical outcomes and therapeutic resistance. Tumor microenvironment (TME) exerts a selective pressure on the tumor, supporting BCSCs behavior. The most prevalent cellular component of breast TME is represented by adipocytes, which secrete reduced levels of adiponectin in obesity, promoting ERα-positive breast cancer growth and progression. We examined the impact of low adiponectin levels on the enrichment of BCSC subpopulations and the molecular mechanisms by which this may contribute to hormone-resistance in breast cancer.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Adiponectin influences the behavior of stem cells in hormone-resistant breast cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Evaluation of proteomic profile of Wild-Type (WT) and Tamoxifen-Resistant (TR) MCF-7 cells untreated (Control, C) or treated with globular adiponectin at a concentration of 5 μg/ml (A5) for 48h in an adherent condition. Following this, the cells were enzymatically disaggregated and plated in ultralow-attachment plates to obtain mammospheres. The experiment was performed in biological triplicates of secondary generation of mammospheres. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT and alkylated in 20 mM iodoacetamide. Next, Protein Aggregation Capture (PAC) protocol was used to digest 10 ug of each sample. After on-beads precipitation (70% acetonitrile) and washings, beads resuspension was carried out by adding 50 μl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and trypsin (from porcine pancreas) was added to each sample at an E/S 1/50 (200 ng). Harvested peptides were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis without further purification. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Easy LC 1000 nanoscale liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive “classic” (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode. Peptides were separated on a 15 cm pulled silica tip, 75 um id, packed with 3 µm C18 silica particles  by a binary gradient which ramped from 6% to 28% B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA, whereas mobile phase A was 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) in 90 min, then from 28% to 45% in 30 min.  Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) included a full scan at 70000 resolution (AGC target of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms) and 20 DIA scans at 35000 resolution (AGC target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 120 ms and normalized collision energy of 25). Specifically, the isolation window was set to have 4 windows of 30 m/z, 13 windows of 20 m/z, and 3 windows of 50 m/z. The overlap was 1 m/z. The resulting m/z range was 370-900.

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS/MS data were searched using Spectronaut software v.17 against the human reference proteome (79740 seq, Uniprot 11 October 2022) and a database of common contaminants (46 entries). Analysis settings were left as default, with only the following changes to the default parameters: precursor filtering was set to filter out all precursors identified in less than 3 runs for each comparison.  Missing values were imputed using a run-wise imputation strategy. The maximum number of precursors used for quantification was set to 5. For quantification, only peptides shared between proteins of the same protein group (protein group specific) were taken into account. Perseus v. 2.06.0 was then loaded with the resulting report for statistical analysis. For all comparisons, the analysis was performed as follows: Protein Quantities calculated by the Spectronaut software were log2 transformed, the matrix was then filtered to retain only protein groups quantified in at least 3 samples of a group. Then, differentially expressed proteins were identified by applying a two-sided t-test (pval < 0.01).

METHODS:
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Cell Culture
The human breast cancer epithelial cell line MCF-7 (WT MCF-7) was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). Cells were cultured in DMEM/F-12, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 200 mM L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies, Monza, Italy). The tamoxifen-resistant (TR) MCF-7 cell line was obtained by long-term cultivation of parental cells with increasing concentrations of tamoxifen (TAM, 10−6 M 4-hydroxytamoxifen, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Milan, Italy), followed by chronic exposure to TAM at a concentration of 1 µM. The acquired resistance was periodically checked for the absence of TAM-dependent growth inhibition in comparison to the parental cells. Cells were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. For experimental purposes, cells were synchronized in phenol red-free and serum-free media for 24 h and then untreated (Control, C) or treated with globular adiponectin 5 μg/mL (A5, Prospect, Rehovot, Israel) in a phenol red-free medium containing 10% dextran charcoal-stripped FBS. All experiments were performed with mycoplasma-free cells.
2.2. Mammosphere Assay
WT and TR MCF-7 monolayer cells were pre-treated in adherence conditions with adiponectin 5 µg/mL for 48 h and then enzymatically disaggregated to obtain single-cell suspension. Single cells were plated in ultralow attachment plates at a density of 500 cells/cm2 in phenol red-free and serum-free DMEM/F12 supplemented with B-27 (Invitrogen, Life Technology, Milan, Italy) and 20 ng/mL Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF, Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Milan, Italy). After 7 days, mammospheres ≥ 50 μm diameter (primary-generation mammospheres) were counted using a microscope (×40 magnification), collected, enzymatically dissociated, and plated at the same seeding density used in the primary generation to obtain secondary mammospheres. No additional treatments were added in the secondary generation. Mammosphere-forming efficiency (MFE) was calculated by dividing the number of mammospheres formed by the number of single cells seeded per well and expressed as a percentage. Mammosphere data are presented as the percentage of mammosphere formation in adiponectin-treated samples normalized to the percentage of mammosphere formation in control samples. Mammosphere self-renewal was calculated by dividing the number of secondary mammospheres formed by the number of primary-generation mammospheres.
2.3. Flow Cytometric Detection of CD44, CD24 and ALDH1 Expression
Secondary-generation mammospheres were digested using PBS containing 0.25% trypsin, 0.02% EDTA (Life Technology, Milan, Italy) to obtain a single-cell suspension. To detect CD44 and CD24 expression, cells were washed in PBS with 2.5% BSA and stained with FITC anti-human CD44 and PE anti-human CD24 (BD Biosciences, Milan, Italy) according to the supplier’s protocol. To detect ALDH1 expression, cells were incubated in ice-cold methanol for 10 min at −20 °C. Subsequently, the pellet was resuspended in 0.1% Triton X-100 and incubated for 15 min at Room Temperature (RT). Finally, cells were washed in PBS with 2.5% BSA and stained with FITC anti-human ALDH1A1 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Milan, Italy), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Flow cytometric analysis was performed with CytoFLEX flow cytometry (Beckman-Coulter, Milan, Italy) and acquisition data were obtained with CytExpert Beckman Coulter software (version number 2.4).
2.4. Total RNA Extraction, RT-PCR, and qRT-PCR Assay
Gene expression was evaluated by quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) using SYBR Green Universal PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Monza, Italy). 18S mRNA content was used to normalize each sample. The primers used are listed in Table 1.
2.5. Proteomic Analysis
Unless otherwise indicated, all chemicals used in the experiments were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA).
2.5.1. Protein Digestion
A 20 µg aliquot of whole-cell extract obtained from secondary-generation mammospheres was diluted to a final volume of 32 µL with RIPA buffer. To achieve the reduction and alkylation of cysteines, 3.2 µL of 100 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT, 1 h incubation at 37 °C), 3.8 µL of 200 mM iodoacetamide (1 h incubation at 37 °C), and finally 0.6 µL (1 h incubation at 37 °C) of 100 mM DTT were added sequentially. Next, the Protein Aggregation Capture (PAC) protocol was used to digest half of each sample (10 µg). Briefly, for each sample, two sequential washes with 100 µL of 70% acetonitrile (ACN) were performed to equilibrate 5 µL (100 µg) of MagResyn Hydroxyl beads. Samples were then added to the magnetic microparticles, and protein precipitation was achieved by adding ACN to a final organic/water ratio of 70:30. The solution was incubated at 1100 rpm for 10 min. This was followed by a wash with 70% ethanol after three washes with 200 µL ACN. Finally, bead resuspension was carried out by adding 50 μL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and trypsin (from porcine pancreas) was added to each sample at an E/S1/50 (200 ng). After overnight incubation (37 °C, 1100 rpm), the peptide solution was harvested and a single wash of the beads with 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) was performed to recover residual peptides.
2.5.2. Nanoscale Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS)
A Q-Exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operating in positive ion mode, coupled with an Easy LC 1000 nanoscale liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), was used to carry out a mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. The analytical column consisted of a 15 cm pulled silica capillary (75 µm i.d.) packed in-house with 3 µm C18 silica particles (Dr. Maisch). By applying a potential of 2000 V to the front end of the column through a tee piece, nanoelectrospray (nESI) was obtained. A binary gradient was used to obtain eluted peptides, with two mobile phases consisting of 2% ACN/01% FA (v:v) (mobile phase A) and 80% ACN/01% FA (mobile phase B). The flow rate was set to 230 nl/minutes. The mobile phase B ramped from 6% to 28% in 90 min, from 28% to 45% in 30 min, and from 45% to 100% in 8 min. It was then held at 100% for 10 min. The analytical column was equilibrated at 0% mobile phase B for 2 min. Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) included 20 windows with a full scan at 70,000 resolution (AGC target of 1e6 and maximum injection time of 50 ms) and 20 DIA scans at 35,000 resolution (AGC target of 1e6, maximum injection time of 120 ms and normalized collision energy of 25). Specifically, the isolation window was set to have 4 windows of 30 m/z, 13 windows of 20 m/z, and 3 windows of 50 m/z. The overlap was 1 m/z. The resulting m/z range was 370–900.
2.5.3. Data Analysis and Results Reporting
The nLC-MS/MS data were searched using Spectronaut software v.17 against the human reference proteome (79,740 seq, Uniprot 11 October 2022) and a database of common contaminants (46 entries). Analysis settings were left as default, with only the following changes to the default parameters: precursor filtering was set to filter out all precursors identified in fewer than 3 runs for each comparison. Missing values were imputed using a run-wise imputation strategy. The maximum number of precursors used for quantification was set to 5. For quantification, only peptides shared between proteins of the same protein group (protein group specific) were taken into account. Perseus v.2.06.0 was then loaded with the resulting report for statistical analysis. For all comparisons, the analysis was performed as follows: Protein Quantities calculated by the Spectronaut software were log2 transformed, the matrix was then filtered to retain only protein groups quantified in at least 3 samples of a group. Then, differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified by applying a two-sided t-test (p-value < 0.01). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059964.
2.6. MetaCoreTM Analysis
For network and enrichment analysis, we used MetaCoreTM (GeneGo, Clarivate Analytics, London, UK) software, a knowledge database suitable for pathway analysis of experimental data and gene lists. To explore the biological significance of the DEPs obtained from the nLC-MS/MS analysis, enrichment Gene Ontology (GO) annotations were generated. The algorithm “analyze networks” and the high-trust interactions for Homo sapiens species were applied to connect the list of associated network-objects with other nodes in the human interactome. MetaCoreTM matches input genes to more than one object if the gene itself is associated with other gene products or is part of a molecular complex. The obtained networks were mapped to a GO process, linking them to biological function. The comparison was carried out using a fold change (log2-FC) > 1 and an adjusted p-value of <0.05, expressed in -log(p-value) and ranked by statistical significance. MetaCoreTM legend is available at the following link: .
2.7. Cell Cycle Analysis
Disaggregated mammospheres were pelleted, washed with PBS, and fixed in 50% methanol overnight (ON) at −20 °C. Then, cells were stained with a solution containing 50 μg/mL propidium iodide (PI), 20 U/mL RNase, and 0.1% Triton X-100. Cell cycle phases were estimated as a percentage of a total of 10.000 events. DNA content was measured using CytoFLEX flow cytometry (Beckman-Coulter, Milan, Italy) and data were acquired using CytExpert Beckman Coulter software.
2.8. Western Blotting
Equal amounts of total protein were resolved on SDS–polyacrylamide gels and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane by electro-blotting. The membranes were blocked in 5% non-fat dry milk and probed ON at 4 °C with primary antibodies. The antigen–antibody complex was detected by incubation of the membranes for 1 h at RT with a peroxidase-coupled anti-IgG antibody and revealed using an enhanced chemiluminescence system (ECL, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Milan, Italy). Images were acquired by using IBright (ThermoFisher Scientifics, Milan, Italy) and analyzed by ImageJ software.
2.9. Proliferation Assay
Cells isolated from secondary-generation mammospheres were seeded in flat-bottom 96-well plates (10 × 103 cells/well). After 24 h, cells were treated with adiponectin for 48 h in a phenol red-free medium containing 10% dextran charcoal-stripped FBS. Cell viability was assessed using a FluoReporter Blue Fluorometric dsDNA Quantitation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, Monza, Italy) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
2.10. Annexin V/PI Assay
Early apoptotic events were evaluated using a Dead Cell Apoptosis Kit with Annexin V FITC and propidium iodide for flow cytometry (Invitrogen, Life technology, Milan, Italy). Cells obtained from secondary-generation mammospheres were stained with FITC-conjugated Annexin V and PI according to the supplier’s instructions. Samples were analyzed by CytoFLEX flow cytometry (Beckman-Coulter, Milan, Italy) and data were acquired using CytExpert Beckman Coulter software.
2.11. Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Assessment
ROS production was measured using the chloromethyl derivative of 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate CM-H2DCFDA (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Monza, Italy). Secondary mammosphere-derived cells were collected and incubated with 10 µM CM-H2DCFDA following the manufacturer’s recommendations. ROS levels were estimated by using the mean fluorescent intensity of the viable cell population. The results were obtained with CytoFLEX flow cytometry (Beckman-Coulter, Milan, Italy) and analyzed using CytExpert Beckman Coulter software.
2.12. Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Assay
Cells obtained from secondary-generation mammospheres were collected and incubated with 10 µM MitoTracker Orange Chloromethyltetramethylrosamine (CMTMRos, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Monza, Italy) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Changes in mitochondrial membrane potential were detected by CytoFLEX flow cytometry (Beckman-Coulter, Milan, Italy) and analyzed using CytExpert Beckman Coulter software.
2.13. Statistical Analysis
Each data point represents the mean ± S.D. of at least 3 independent experiments. Data were analyzed by Student’s T test using the Prism 7.0 (GraphPad Software) software program. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS:
3. Results
3.1. Effects of Adiponectin on Stem Subpopulation Enrichment in TR MCF-7 Mammospheres
To investigate the specific role of low adiponectin levels in influencing BCSC behavior in the context of hormone resistance, we first analyzed mammosphere formation from WT and TR MCF-7 cells in the presence or absence of adipokine (Figure 1A). In this experimental model, cells are compelled to survive and proliferate under anchorage-independent conditions, forming floating spherical colonies called mammospheres, which allow for the enrichment, proliferation, and characterization of breast cancer cells with a stem-like phenotype. The results of our experiments demonstrated that in tamoxifen resistance conditions, adiponectin increased the MFE of the secondary generation to a greater extent than that observed in the primary generation (Figure 1B). In contrast, in hormone-responsive cells, adiponectin was unable to induce a significant increase in MFE (Figure 1B). These findings were consistent with the observation that TR MCF-7 cells exhibited a greater capability for self-renewal compared to WT MCF-7 cells, which was further enhanced upon adiponectin treatment (Figure 1C). The assessment of characteristic cell surface marker expression was carried out to detect the enrichment of cancer stem cells (CSCs) within mammospheres. Interestingly, adiponectin-treated TR MCF-7 cells obtained from the secondary generation of mammospheres revealed the overexpression of the transmembrane glycoprotein CD44 and the downregulation of the cell membrane sialoglycoprotein CD24 (CD44+/CD24−), as evidenced by flow cytometry and confirmed by qRT-PCR analysis (Figure 1D,E). Moreover, a significantly increased expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase-1 (ALDH1), another marker of stemness, was observed in adiponectin-treated TR MCF-7 cells grown as mammospheres (Figure 1F). On the contrary, in WT MCF-7 mammospheres, a reduction in the ALDH1+ subpopulation was detected (Figure 1F). It is worth noting that high levels of ALDH1 are generally associated with an increased risk of metastasis, poorer prognosis, and unfavorable clinical outcomes in breast cancer patients.
Further evidence supporting the enrichment of stem-like cells in adiponectin-treated TR MCF-7 mammospheres was provided by the high expression levels of genes associated with the maintenance of stemness, such as Oct-4, Notch (isoforms 1, 2, 3, 4), Sox (isoforms 2, 4, 9) and SMAD4 (Figure 2A). In addition, adiponectin treatment resulted in a reduction in E-cadherin gene levels, with a concomitant increase in the expression of mesenchymal markers, including vimentin, α-SMA, and TWIST (Figure 2B), addressing a switch into the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program in hormone-resistant cells. On the contrary, an increase in E-cadherin expression was observed in adiponectin-treated WT MCF-7 mammospheres (Figure 2B). Taken together, these results suggest that low levels of adiponectin may stimulate CSC activity, particularly in hormone-resistant breast cancer cells.
3.2. Proteomic and GO Enrichment Analysis of Differentially Expressed Proteins (DEPs) in MCF-7 Mammospheres
The modulatory role of adiponectin in the proteome profile of WT and TR MCF-7 mammospheres was investigated by label-free liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The analysis of three different biological replicates identified 6283 proteins at a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. Hierarchical clustering, carried out based on protein intensity, highlighted that the identified DEPs can serve as a proteomic signature for distinguishing adiponectin-treated cells vs. control, as well as hormone-responsive vs. hormone-resistant breast cancer mammospheres, as shown by heat map (Figure 3A). Next, we performed GO enrichment analysis of the identified DEPs to gain insights into the biological processes and pathway maps that are affected in the adiponectin-treated TR MCF-7 mammospheres compared to control group by using MetaCoreTM software (Clarivate Analytics), a widely known database for protein–protein signaling. In hormone-resistant mammospheres, which exhibited an augmented adiponectin-induced BCSC subpopulation, we found that DEPs were significantly enriched with the first 20 GO categories linking to cell cycle progression and apoptosis (Figure 3B).
3.3. Impact of Low Adiponectin Levels on Cell Cycle Regulation in TR MCF-7 Mammospheres
It is frequently observed that cell cycle progression is deregulated in breast cancer cells with a stem-like phenotype. This feature enables CSCs to play a pivotal role in tumor initiation, progression, therapeutic resistance, and disease recurrence. Based on this evidence and the results of our GO enrichment analysis, we first explored the closest and most central links between endocrine resistance and cell cycle progression regulated by low adiponectin levels, using the Direct Interaction algorithm. Interestingly, network analysis highlighted a significant interaction between proteins related to cell cycle regulation, such as Cyclin D1, p27kip1, CDK4, CDK8, and those correlated to stem cell activity, including Notch family, SOX9, SMAD4, GATA group, in adiponectin-treated TR MCF-7 mammospheres (Figure 4A,B).
Next, to explore the effects of adiponectin on cell cycle phases in BCSCs, FACS analysis was performed. In TR MCF-7 cells, adiponectin induced a cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase, which was not noticeable in WT MCF-7 cells (Figure 5A). To deeply investigate how adiponectin affects the progression of cell cycle phases in WT and TR MCF-7 mammospheres, the impact of this adipokine on the expression of cell cycle-related proteins was analyzed. The data showed that adiponectin was unable to induce an upregulation of Cyclin D1, Cyclin E, and Cyclin A in hormone-resistant cells (Figure 5B). Moreover, adiponectin treatment resulted in an increased expression of p21 and p27, two cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors involved in the regulation of the cell cycle, in TR MCF-7 mammospheres, but this was not observed in WT MCF-7 cells (Figure 5B). G0/G1 cell cycle arrest was also supported by the assessment of the mRNA expression levels of two key regulators of the S phase transition, Cyclin D1 and p21, which were downregulated and upregulated, respectively (Figure 5C,D). Quantification analysis of DEPs from proteomic profile confirmed the expression pattern of proteins favoring cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase upon adiponectin exposure in hormone-resistant cells (Figure S1). Interestingly, the adiponectin-regulated proteins observed in BCSCs derived from tamoxifen-resistant mammospheres were consistent with their slower proliferation rate (Figure 5E). This was correlated with decreased Ki67 mRNA levels (Figure 5F), which have previously been reported in BCSCs as a worse prognosis marker. On the contrary, an increased growth rate was evidenced in WT MCF-7 cells derived from mammospheres, sustained by high Ki67 levels (Figure 5E,F).
3.4. Events Converging on Apoptosis Inhibition in TR MCF-7 Cells upon Adiponectin Exposure
Another important mechanism through which breast cancer cells with a stem-like phenotype contribute to endocrine resistance is represented by their capacity to escape from apoptosis. Starting from this observation, the MetaCoreTM Direct Interaction algorithm was used to evaluate the possible link between stemness and apoptosis in tamoxifen-resistant cells grown as mammospheres in the presence of low adiponectin levels. Network analysis highlighted a significant interaction between the same DEPs involved in stemness maintenance, as shown above (Figure 4A), and proteins engaged in anti-apoptotic events, such as Bak, Bid, Cytochrome C, and Survivin (Figure 6A,B), as confirmed by the quantification analysis, showing a downregulation of CAPN2 and Bid (Figure S2).
According to these data, a significant reduction in apoptotic events was highlighted by Annexin V assay in TR MCF-7 mammospheres following adiponectin treatment (Figure 7A). The anti-apoptotic effects of adiponectin on hormone-resistant BCSCs were also supported by the upregulation of the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Survivin and the downregulation of the pro-apoptotic molecules Bid, tBid, and Bax (Figure 7B). In contrast, all this was not noticeable in the adiponectin-treated WT counterpart (Figure 7A,B). Furthermore, a reduced mitochondrial release of cytochrome C, with consequent decreased cleavage of Caspase-9 and -3, worked to sustain the escape from apoptosis promoted by adiponectin in TR MCF-7 mammospheres BCSCs-enriched (Figure 7C). In addition, adiponectin caused a reduction in intracellular ROS levels (Figure 7D), which are known to be a further BCSC feature correlated to endocrine resistance and escape from apoptosis. This could be due to the preserved mitochondrial membrane potential, which prevents the release of cytochrome C and thus apoptotic events in adiponectin-treated TR MCF-7 mammospheres (Figure 7E). Thus, our findings demonstrated that adiponectin, by preventing apoptosis, may contribute to the maintenance of the stem-like phenotype in hormone-resistant BCSCs.

INTRODUCTION:
1. Introduction
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) estimated 2.3 million new cases of breast cancer in 2022. These represent 11.6% of all cancer cases worldwide, making breast cancer the most common malignancy in terms of incidence and mortality among women.
Approximately 70–80% of all breast cancers diagnosed express estrogen receptor (ER), which has a positive prognostic value. In clinical practice, the initial treatment option for ER-positive patients is endocrine therapy. This approach aims to inhibit tumor growth by reducing estrogen stimulation. It involves the use of selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as tamoxifen, selective estrogen receptor degraders, or inhibitors of the enzyme aromatase.
Despite the efficacy of anti-estrogen drugs in reducing mortality, approximately 15–20% of ER-positive breast cancers exhibit intrinsic resistance, while an additional 30–40% develop acquired resistance to treatment over time. Among the main endocrine drugs, tamoxifen remains the primary and frontline therapeutic agent for the treatment of ER-positive breast cancers. Thus, overcoming tamoxifen resistance is currently one of the major challenges in clinical practice.
Several mechanisms have been proposed in endocrine resistance, including loss of ERα expression, gain-of-function mutations in ERα, crosstalk between ERα signaling and other pathways, cell cycle deregulation, and heterogeneity of tumor cell population.
In particular, accumulating evidence has identified a subpopulation of undifferentiated cells within the tumor, called breast cancer stem cells (BCSCs), as responsible for resistance to anti-cancer therapies, recurrence, and metastasis. These cells are able to divide asymmetrically in order to preserve their own pool and to generate tumor bulk, and they are also able to grow in low-adherence cell culture conditions. Moreover, BCSCs survive oxidative stress and DNA damage due to their capacity to persist in a long-term quiescent G0 phase and their anti-apoptotic properties. All this makes them critical players in maintaining the tumor and its malignant behavior, as well as in resistance to radiation, chemotherapy, and molecular target therapy.
The intricate interplay between autocrine signals, derived from tumor cells, and paracrine interactions, emerging from the tumor-associated stroma, has been demonstrated to be pivotal in the induction and maintenance of a stem-like state in cancer cells. In breast cancer, there is compelling evidence that tumor microenvironment (TME) components such as adipocytes, stromal fibroblasts, immune cells, and endothelial cells sustain BCSC bulk through the secretion of several growth factors and cytokines. In this context, adipocytes exert a considerable influence on the biological behavior of cancer cells, representing the most abundant cellular component of the breast TME. Furthermore, numerous clinical studies have identified adipocytes as key mediators in the obesity–cancer relationship, with obese adipocytes exhibiting a dysfunctional secretion profile. Among the adipokines released by adipose tissue, adiponectin is the main adipocyte-derived factor, and its levels are reduced in obese compared to normal-weight women.
Several epidemiological studies and clinical investigations have demonstrated an inverse correlation between adiponectin levels and the risk of developing breast cancer, as well as an association between lower adiponectin levels and more advanced stages of malignancy. In addition, these studies highlighted a reduced disease-free survival and overall survival in breast cancer patients with low levels of adiponectin. Recent in vitro and in vivo studies have contributed to elucidating the role of adiponectin in the growth and progression of ER-positive breast cancer, identifying this adipokine as a tumor-promoting growth factor.
Based on this evidence, the present study aimed to ascertain whether low adiponectin levels may promote the enrichment of BCSCs, which are known to fuel endocrine resistance and tumor relapse, in a tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer model, thereby contributing to tumor aggressiveness.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at , Figure S1: Quantification of DEPs from proteomic analysis. Box plots show cell cycle-regulating protein expression in WT and TR MCF-7 mammospheres, untreated (Control, C) or treated with adiponectin 5 µg/mL (A5). Data were analyzed by ordinary one-way ANOVA test using the GraphPad Prism 7 software program. An adjusted p-value cutoff ≤ 0.05 and log fold change cutoff ≥ 1 have been applied to determine significantly regulated proteins in each pairwise comparison by default. Figure S2: Quantification of apoptosis-related DEPs evidenced by proteomic analysis. Box plots show pro-apoptotic protein expression in WT and TR MCF-7 mammospheres, untreated (Control, C) or treated with adiponectin 5 µg/mL (A5). Data were analyzed by ordinary one-way ANOVA test using the GraphPad Prism 7 software program. An adjusted p-value cutoff ≤ 0.05 and log fold change cutoff ≥1 have been applied to determine significantly regulated proteins in each pairwise comparison by default.
Data Availability Statement
The data presented in this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059964.