PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Quadriceps
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Lc-msms; Mitochondrial dysfnoction; Icos ko nod mice

ABSTRACT:
Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs) are severe autoimmune diseases whose pathogenetic mechanisms are still poorly understood. Invalidation of the inducible T cell co-stimulator (Icos) gene on the diabetes-prone NOD mouse background leads to spontaneous autoimmune myositis, providing a tool for studying the pathophysiological mechanisms involved in muscle inflammation. Myositis in Icos-/- NOD mice is characterized by progressive muscle weakness with immune cell infiltration and expression of IFN-associated genes, thus resembling human myositis. Proteomic and spatial transcriptomic analysis of Icos-/- NOD mice muscle brought to light a profound metabolic dysregulation in myofibers. Electron microscopy analysis, mitochondrial respiration assessment and histoenzymology stainings revealed dramatic structural abnormalities and severe dysfunction of muscle mitochondria in diseased Icos-/- NOD mice. Consequently, muscle from these mice exhibited elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and an oxidative stress-transcriptomic signature. Blocking IFN in Icos-/- NOD mice diminished immune cell infiltration and ROS production. Transcriptomic analysis of muscle biopsies from IIMs patients revealed a negative correlation between IFN and mitochondrial gene expression levels, and treatment of human myoblasts with IFN reduced the expression of mitochondrial respiratory chain genes, suggesting a link between IFN production and mitochondrial dysfunction. Sustaining a relevant pathogenic role for oxidative stress in the disease, preventive and therapeutic ROS-buffer treatments also significantly alleviated myositis while preserving mitochondrial ultrastructure and restoring muscle mitochondrial respiration in mice. Notably, preventive ROS-buffer treatment also reduced muscle inflammation. Together, our results suggest that ROS, mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammation are interconnected in a self-maintenance loop, opening perspectives for ROS targeting drugs and/or mitochondria therapy in myositis.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
A pathogenic role for mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in myositis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS Dissected muscles were grinded using FastPrep® technology (MP Biomedicals). Seven hundred µL of solubilisation buffer (Urea 7 M, Thiourea 2 M, DTT 20 mM, CHAPS 2%, C7BzO 0.5% and tributylphosphin 5 µL) were added to each sample in lysing matrix D (Biorad). Homogenization was performed using the following parameters: 4 cycles (40 sec) and speed at 6 m/s. Supernatants were transferred to a clean tube after centrifugation (11,000 g, 7 min) and stored at −80°C. Bradford assay was performed to assess protein concentration according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Biorad). Absorbance at 595 nm was measured with the Wallac 1420 Victor3TM (Perkin Elmer). Peptide fraction was obtained to perform bottom-up analysis. For each extract, 25 µg of proteins were loaded into a 7% polyacrylamide gel (acrylamide/bis-acrylamide 30% [29/1], Sigma-Aldrich) and an electrophoresis was performed (90 min, 10-20 mA) to stack all proteins in a small piece of gel. After Coomassie blue staining, protein bands were excised and immersed in a reductive buffer (5 mM DTT), then in an alkylated buffer (20 mM iodoacetamide). After a washing step using acetonitrile, gel bands were submitted to protein digestion by 1 µg of trypsin (Promega). After overnight incubation at 37°C, several steps of peptide extraction were performed using acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water. Finally, peptide fraction was dried.  Nano LC-MS/MS analysis For each sample (n=30), peptide fraction was solubilized in 0.1% FA to obtain a final concentration of 0.2 µg/µL. Then, 1 µL was analysed on a Q-exactive Plus Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoESI source and coupled to a chromatographic system, RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific). The separation was carried out using an EASY Spray column (50 cm, 3 µm, 0.075 mm, 100 A, flow rate 300 nL/min, Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase was composed of buffer A (H2O/FA [100/0.1]) and buffer B (acetonitrile/H2O/FA [80/20/0.1]). The elution gradient duration was 180 min: 0-2 min, 2% B; 2-130 min, 2-40% B; 130-140 min, 40-9 5% B; 140-150 min, 95% B; 150-180 min, 2% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with HCD fragmentation (capillary voltage 1.9kV, capillary temperature 275°C and m/z detection range 400-1800). The resolution was 70000 in MS1 and 17500 in MS2. The 10 most intense peptide ions were selected and the fragmentation occurred with a normalised collision energy of 28. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursor ions was applied for 20 sec.

DATA PROCESSING:
After MS analysis, raw data were imported in Progenesis LC-MS software (Non-Linear Dynamics, version 4.1). For comparison, one sample was set as a reference and the retention time of all other samples within the experiment were aligned. After alignment and normalisation, statistical analysis was performed for one-way ANOVA calculations. For quantification, peptide features presenting a p-value less than 0.05 were retained. MS2 spectra from selected peptides were exported for peptide identification with Mascot (Matrix Science). Database searches were performed with the following parameter: mus musculus taxonomy (16951 sequences); 1 missed cleavage; variable modifications (carbamidomethyl of cysteine and oxidation of methionine). Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 5 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using a decoy-fusion approach in Mascot. Identified spectrum matches with -10logP value of 17 or higher were kept, at an FDR threshold of 3%. Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis LC-MS. For each condition, the total cumulative abundance of protein was calculated by summing abundances of peptides and used to perform statistical analysis (‘one-way ANOVA’ Progenesis statistical box). Proteins identified with less than 2 peptides were discarded from further analysis. All of dysregulated proteins were integrated as inputs for functional analysis (STRING https://string-db.org/; Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), Qiagen).