PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Bladder
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Bacillus calmette-guérin; Bladder cancer; Human

ABSTRACT:
The alteration of protein expression profile mediated by Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) treatment remains unclear and is rarely studied. Three paired before BCG(pre-BCG) and during BCG(on-BCG) tissues were collected for proteomicsanalyses to describe the proteomic changes caused by BCG.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Quantitative proteomic analysis of tumor tissues before and during Bacillus Calmette-Guérin instillation in bladder cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein extraction commenced with the deparaffinization of a minimum of three 50-μm FFPE tissue sections. Subsequent to trypsin digestion employing the filter-assisted sample preparation technique as previously reported. Desalting was performed using C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog Number 87782) following the manufacturer’s instructions. An iRT-Standard (Biognosys, USA) was incorporated into each sample prior to performing data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

DATA PROCESSING:
Quantification of protein and peptide levels was conducted using Spectronaut software (Omicsolution Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
<h4>Background</h4>Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) is capable of enhancing the infiltration of immune cells into the tumour. However the temporal dynamics of immune cell patterns in patients receiving BCG instillation remains unclear.<h4>Methods</h4>Ninety-six patients who underwent intravesical BCG therapy, comprising 46 responders and 50 non-responders, were retrospectively enroled to explore the evolving immune landscape. This study involved a detailed examination of sequential samples collected before, during, and after BCG treatment to assess BCG's influence on the immune microenvironment, employing techniques such as immunohistochemistry, fluorescent multiplex immunohistochemistry, and mass spectrometry techniques.<h4>Results</h4>Our study found that initial BCG instillation leads to enhanced immune cell infiltration, correlating with treatment efficacy, with responders exhibiting more pronounced increases. Non-responders experience a rise in immune cell infiltration and PD-L1 expression during the first instillation, which returns to baseline after treatment. In non-responders, BCG re-challenge fail to further increase immune cell infiltration into the tumour or improve patient outcomes. Strikingly, proteomics data revealed that GBP1 expression was induced by BCG treatment in non-responders.<h4>Conclusions</h4>Our findings demonstrated the induction of tumour PD-L1 expression by BCG in non-responders, and therefore provide insights for the combination of BCG and anti-PD1/anti-PD-L1 therapy.