PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Colon; Colon
diseases: Colon cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Gel-based experiment
quantification: APEX - Absolute Protein Expression
keywords: 5-fluorouracil; Proteomics; Colorectal cancer; Resistance to neoadjuvant radio-chemotherapy; Mass spectrometry; Predictive biomarkers

ABSTRACT:
Background: Colorectal cancer is the third most common and the fourth most lethal cancer in the world. In the majority of cases, patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage or even metastatic, thus explaining the high mortality. The standard protocol for treating patients with locally advanced non-metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC) is neoadjuvant radio-chemotherapy (NRCT) with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), but the resistance rate to this treatment remains high with approximately 30% of non-responders. The lack of evidence available in clinical practice to predict NRCT resistance to 5-FU and to guide clinical practice therefore encourages the search for biomarkers of this resistance. Methods: From twenty-three formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsies performed before NRCT with 5-FU of locally advanced non-metastatic CRC patients, we extracted and analysed the tumor proteome of these patients. From clinical data, we were able to classify the twenty-two patients in our cohort into three treatment response groups: non-responders (NR), partial responders (PR) and total responders (TR), and to compare the proteomes of these different groups.  Results: We have highlighted 384 differentially expressed proteins between NR and PR, 248 between NR and TR and 417 between PR and TR. Among these proteins, we have identified many differentially expressed proteins identified as having a role in cancer (IFIT1, FASTKD2, PIP4K2B, ARID1B, SLC25A33: overexpressed in TR; CALD1, CPA3, B3GALT5, CD177, RIPK1: overexpressed in NR). We have also identified that DPYD, the main degradation enzyme of 5-FU, was overexpressed in NR, as well as several ribosomal and mitochondrial proteins also overexpressed in NR.  Conclusions: From these retrospective study, we implemented a protein extraction protocol from FFPE biopsy to highlight protein differences between different response groups to RCTN with 5-FU in patients with locally advanced non-metastatic CRC. These results will pave the way for a larger cohort for better sensitivity and specificity of the signature to guide decisions in the choice of treatment.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The response to neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy to 5-fluorouracil in locally advanced colorectal cancer patients: a predictive proteomic signature.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Dewaxing and homogenisation of the FFPE biopsies 100% xylene was added (100 µl for 1 mg of biopsy) for 1 hour under agitation. Xylene is replaced by 50% ethanol to dehydrate the biopsy for 1 hour under agitation. After dehydration, FFPE biopsies were homogenised in MS grade water (300 µl for 1 mg of remaining biopsy) using a TissueRuptor (Qiagen). Biopsies were then incubated in 2.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM dithiothréitol at 98°C for 1 hour. After centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 1 min, the supernatant was collected (Figure 1C).  Concentration, reduction and alkylation.      Solubilised biopsies were concentrated (250 µl to 50 µl) using Nanosep 3K Omega (Pall Life Sciences) and treated with 1X Laemmli and 2 mM dithiothréitol at 98°C for 5 minutes (reduction). 50 mM iodoacetamide was added for 30 min and incubated in the dark for alkylation (Figure 1C).   In-gel separation and tryptic digestion.      50 µg of concentrated biopsies were separated on NuPAGE gel 4-12% bis-Tris 1.5 mm x 10 well (Invitrogen). After migration, the gel is stained with Coomassie Blue (SimplyBlue SafeStain) for 1 hour under agitation and then discoloured overnight under agitation. Each band is divided in four fractions. Each fraction is washed with MS grade water for 15 minutes under agitation then with 50% acetonitrile for 15 minutes under agitation. The fractions are then subjected to a wash cycle (20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 minutes under agitation and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile for 15 minutes under agitation) until the gel is clear. The samples are then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 5 minutes under agitation until the precipitate is solid. Dehydrated samples are digested in 12.5 ng/ml Trypsin Gold (Promega) modified in 50 mM acetic acid and 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, at 30°C overnight under agitation (Figure 1C).  Peptides extraction and purification.      Digested samples underwent twice drying/wetting steps (100% acetonitrile for 30 minutes at 30°C under agitation and 1% formic acid for 20 minutes at 30°C under agitation) for extracting peptides from gel. The samples are then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 10 minutes at 30°C under agitation until the precipitate is solid. Peptides were cleaned-up (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), eluted (50% acetonitrile/1% formic acid) on C18 column Zip-Tip (Thermo Scientific), previously washed with 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, and resuspended in 1% formic acid (Figure 1C).  High performance liquid chromatography separation, coupled to mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS).      Trypsin-digested purified peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 2 µg of the sample in 1% formic acid (v:v) were loaded with a constant flow of 4 µL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0,3 mm id x 5 mm). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted in a PepMap C18 nanocolumn (75 µm x 50 cm) with a linear gradient of 5-35% solvent B over 240 minutes with a constant flow of 200 nL/min.  Mass spectrometry analysis.      The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 seconds and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

DATA PROCESSING:
Quantification and bioinformatics analysis.  Data were processed, searched and quantified using the MaxQuant software package employing the Human Uniprot database [15]. The following settings were used for the MaxQuant analysis: 2 miscleavages allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. The analysis of mass spectrometry data were next carried out with the Perseus software [16] and subjected to a normalization (z-score) and an ANOVA statistical test (comparison of the three groups) or Student’s T-test (comparison of two groups), both corrected with a p-value of 0.05.  Statistical analysis.  The different groups of patients were first compared according to clinicopathological parameters. Due to a small number of patients per group, Fisher's exact test was done with the R software [17]. When the p-value was less than 0.05, the result was considered to have statistical significance.

METHODS:
Methods
Study design and clinical protocol
This is a retrospective study. The eligibility includes all patients diagnosed between September 2013 and September 2015 in the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke (Québec, Canada) with a pathologically confirmed locally advanced rectal adenocarcinoma (T3–T4, any N, M0/any T, N1–N2, M0), treated by standard neoadjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy followed by the surgery. All participants gave informed consent before enrolment in this study. The radiotherapy is composed by 45 Gy in 25 fractions, 5 days per week for 5 weeks, ± 5.4 Gy boost by 3D technique. The concomitant chemotherapy was performed by 1600 mg/m2 intravenous 5-FU or oral capecitabine (Fig. 1a). All secondary effects were reviewed and noted according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0. The TNM stage before the treatment (iTNM) was used according to the routine clinical examination including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for all cases (Table 1) and the post-treatment TNM stage (ypTNM) was defined according to the report of pathology (Table 3). The cancer stage was finally defined according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC). The tumor tissues of initial biopsy were used for the study. Patients were then classified into three distinct groups depending on their pathologic response to treatment evaluated with the AJCC tumor regression grading (TRG) system. TRG0 corresponds to a complete regression (non-viable cancer cells), TRG1 corresponds to a near complete regression (single or small groups of tumor cells), TRG2 corresponds to a moderate regression (residual cancer outgrown by fibrosis) and TRG3 corresponds to a minimal/absent regression (minimal or no tumor cells killed). For the sake of clarity, we have associated TRG0 to the total responders (TR), TRG1 and TRG2 to the partial responders (PR) and TRG3 to the non-responders (NR). The study was approved by ethic committee of Cancer Research Center, CHUS (CRC-CHUS). Patients monitoring was performed on a regular basis to index recurrences. 
Biopsy sample collection
Biopsies were collected, rapidly fixed in formalin and sent to the pathology laboratory of the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Sherbrooke (Québec, Canada), according to the clinical pathological process. They have undergone washings (alcohols and solvents) in order to be degreased and dehydrated before their inclusion in paraffin. Cuts of approximately 3 μm in thickness were made on the paraffin blocks and analysed after staining with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E stain). The areas of interest were selected by the pathologist (Fig. 2a) and punches were made on the paraffin blocks (Fig. 2b) using a Tissue Microarray (TMA) Master II (3DHISTECH) (Fig. 1b). 
Proteomic study
Dewaxing and homogenisation of the FFPE biopsies
100% xylene was added (100 µl for 1 mg of biopsy) for 1 h under agitation. Xylene is replaced by 50% ethanol to dehydrate the biopsy for 1 h under agitation. After dehydration, FFPE biopsies were homogenised in MS grade water (300 µl for 1 mg of remaining biopsy) using a TissueRuptor (Qiagen). Biopsies were then incubated in 2.5% SDS, 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM dithiothréitol at 98 °C for 1 h. After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 1 min, the supernatant was collected (Fig. 1c).
Concentration, reduction and alkylation
Solubilised biopsies were concentrated (250–50 µl) using Nanosep 3 K Omega (Pall Life Sciences) and treated with 1X Laemmli and 2 mM dithiothréitol at 98 °C for 5 min (reduction). 50 mM iodoacetamide was added for 30 min and incubated in the dark for alkylation (Fig. 1c).
In-gel separation and tryptic digestion
50 µg of concentrated biopsies were separated on NuPAGE gel 4–12% bis–Tris 1.5 mm × 10 well (Invitrogen). After migration, the gel was stained with Coomassie Blue (SimplyBlue SafeStain) for 1 h under agitation and then discoloured overnight under agitation. Each lane was divided into four gel slices. Each gel slice was cut into cubes (ca. 1 × 1 mm) and transferred in microcentrifuge tube. Then, they were washed with MS grade water for 15 min under agitation then with 50% acetonitrile for 15 min under agitation until gel slice shrunk and became opaque. The gel slices were then subjected to a wash cycle (20 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 min under agitation and 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate/100% acetonitrile (1:1, vol/vol) for 15 min under agitation) until the gel became clear. The samples were then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 5 min under agitation until the precipitate became white and solid. Acetonitrile was removed and dehydrated samples were digested in 12.5 ng/ml Trypsin Gold (Promega) modified in 50 mM acetic acid and 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate, at 37 °C overnight under agitation (Fig. 1c).
Peptides extraction
After the tryptic digestion, the supernatant was collected in a new microcentrifuge tube. Digested samples were next incubated with 100% acetonitrile (volume equal to the digestion volume in the previous step) for 30 min at 37 °C under agitation. The supernatant was collected and digested samples underwent two incubations in 1% formic acid for 20 min at 37 °C under agitation for extracting peptides from gel. The samples were then dehydrated by washing with 100% acetonitrile for 10 min at 37 °C under agitation until the precipitate became white and solid.
Peptides desalting
Peptides were resuspended in 30 µl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. With a C18 column Zip-Tip (Thermo Scientific) previously washed with 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, peptides were loaded into the column by doing 10 up and down, washed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and eluted with 30 µl of 50% acetonitrile/1% formic acid by doing up and down in a new microcentrifuge tube. Desalted peptides were then dried in a speedvac and resuspended in 1% formic acid (Fig. 1c).
High performance liquid chromatography separation, coupled to mass spectrometry (HPLC–MS/MS)
Trypsin-digested purified peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. 2 µg of the sample in 1% formic acid (v:v) were loaded with a constant flow of 4 µL/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id × 5 mm). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted in a PepMap C18 nanocolumn (75 µm × 50 cm) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B over 240 min with a constant flow of 200 nL/min.
Mass spectrometry analysis
The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column was set to 40 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350–1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.
Quantification and bioinformatics analysis
Data were processed, searched and quantified using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 with the protein database from UniProtKB (Homo sapiens, 16/07/2013, 88,354 entries). The following settings were used for the MaxQuant analysis: 2 miscleavages allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation; mass tolerance of 7 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. We performed quantification based on protein intensities. First, we calculated the sum of the protein intensities obtained for each biopsy. We then divided these protein intensities sums by the lowest protein intensity sum of the cohort to obtain a ratio. Each protein intensity for each biopsy was then normalized to this ratio so that the sums of the protein intensities for each biopsy were equal. Finally, the analysis of mass spectrometry data were next carried out with the Perseus software package and subjected to a normalization (z-score) and an ANOVA statistical test (comparison of the three groups) or Student’s T test (comparison of two groups), both corrected with a p value of 0.05. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008440.
Statistical analysis
The different groups of patients were first compared according to clinicopathological parameters. Due to a small number of patients per group, Fisher’s exact test was done with the R software. When the p value was less than 0.05, the result was considered to have statistical significance.

RESULTS:
Results
Baseline population characteristics
As the first step of study for the purpose of technique, 23 participants were enrolled and studied. Of the 23 patients, 19 were men (83%) and 4 were women (17%). The median age was 58.6 ± 11.1 years (31–75). Ten patients (43%) had low rectal cancer (within 5 cm from the anal verge), 11 patients (48%) had middle rectal cancer (between 5 and 10 cm from the anal verge) and 2 patients (9%) had proximal cancer (over of 10 cm from the anal verge) (Table 1). Tumor differentiation degrees defining by imaging were 5 well differentiated (22%), 9 moderately differentiated (39%) and 9 not specified (39%). TNM stages before NRCT (iTNM) were 3 stage IIA (13%), 1 stage IIIA (4%), 2 stage IIIA-IIIB (9%), 4 stage IIIB (17%), 12 stage IIIB-IIIC (52%) and 1 stage IIIC (4%) (Table 1).
Surgical treatment and complications
Neoadjuvant radiotherapy was delivered to the pelvis with a dose of 45 Gy followed or not by a boost of 5.4 Gy for 21 patients (91%) and 1 patient (4%) respectively or with a dose of 50.5 (4%). Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was concurrently performed on all patients with Xeloda® (oral) or 5-fluorouracil (intravenous) treatment (96 and 4% respectively). After NRCT, 16 patients (70%) had suffered from radiodermatitis (severity degrees are shown in Table 2). 12% of patients had suffered from proctitis and no cases of colitis or mucositis had been listed. On average, surgery delay after the beginning of treatment was 8.6 ± 2.8 weeks (1.4–13.1). Among the 23 patients, 3 patients refused the surgery. In these cases, the response is measured by MRI imaging after the treatment. The others 20 patients had a low anterior surgery (85%), or abdomino-perineal surgery (8%) even an endo-anal surgery (4%) (Table 2). 
Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy post-treatment results
After NRCT and surgery, the response to NRCT has been reported by pathological analysis for all patients operated and noted as standard pathological TNM classification (ypTNM) (Table 3). According to the definition of response and down-staging effects, all patients operated have been attributed in three distinct groups: NR, PR and TR. Among the 23 patients, there were 7 NR (30%), 10 PR (43%) and 6 TR (26%). Perineural and lymphovascular invasion (PNI and LVI) are searched on the surgical piece: 2 and 8 cases of PNI and LVI are listed respectively. 
Identification of differentially abundant proteins between groups
We were able to identify 5329 proteins among the 23 patients of our study with on average more than 4000 proteins per sample. Using Perseus software package, we had first checked distribution of protein intensities for each duplicate biopsy and Pearson correlation coefficient r for each duplicate biopsy to ensure low variability within the same biopsy (n = 1 and n = 2) (Fig. 3). 
From that, we were able to identify 402 differentially abundant proteins between the three groups of responders (Additional file 1: Table S1) (Fig. 4a), 384 between NR and PR (180 over-represented in NR, 204 in PR) (Additional file 2: Table S2) (Fig. 4b), 248 between NR and TR (139 over-represented in NR, 109 in TR) (Additional file 3: Table S3) (Fig. 4c) and 417 between PR and TR (294 over-represented in PR and 123 in TR) (Additional file 4: Table S4) (Fig. 4d). Thanks to the principal component analysis (PCA) realized with the Perseus software package (Fig. 4e), we can observe the groupings of the three responder groups NR, PR and TR. We also performed our analyses by grouping our patients into only two groups: responders and NR, (1) NR versus PR + TR, or (2) NR + PR versus TR. In the first case (1), we found 282 differentially abundant proteins, 139 of which were over-represented in NR and 143 in responders (PR + TR) (Additional file 5: Table S5). In the second case (2), 368 proteins were differentially abundant, of which 93 were over-represented in TR and 275 in non-responders (NR + PR) (Additional file 6: Table S6) (Table 4).  
In terms of protein identification (Additional file 7: Table S7), among the proteins expressed in more than 75% of the TR (≥ 5 patients) and in less than 15% of the NR (≤ 1 patient), we identified the following proteins: PVR, IFIT1, F12, FASTKD2, BPGM, PIP4K2B, MCMBP, CHD1L, ENSA, PVRL1, TRMT5, CNOT10, SLC25A33, FTO, AMDHD2, PHPT1, SLC5A6, LSM12, TSPAN6, CBX1, NOSIP, TSSC4, ARID1B, ALDH3A1, AAMDC, GTF2E1, SNX7 and STX10. In contrast, among the proteins present in more than 75% of the NR (≥ 5 patients) and in less than 15% of the TR (≤ 1 patient), we identified the following proteins (numbers in parentheses representing the relative abundance increase factor of NR over TR for each protein): CALD1 (4.4), CPA3 (9.4), B3GALT5 (55.9), CNNM4 (51.3), MTIF3 (4.1) and CD177 (2). By grouping our patients in two groups, for the first case (1), among the proteins expressed in more than 75% of the responders (PR + TR; ≥ 14 patients) and in less than 15% of the NR (≤ 1 patient), we identified FASTKD2, SLC25A33, FTO and AMDHD2 (proteins already mentioned above). In contrast, among the proteins present in less than 15% of the responders (PR + TR; ≤ 2 patients) and in more than 75% of the NR (≥ 5 patients), we only identified RIPK1 (3.7). For the second case (2), among the proteins expressed in more than 75% of the non-responders (NR + PR; ≥ 14 patients) and in less than 15% of the TR (≤ 1 patient), we only identified CALD1 (already mentioned above). In contrast, among the proteins present in less than 15% of the non-responders (NR + PR; ≤ 2 patients) and in more than 75% of the TR (≥ 5 patients), we identified IFIT1, ABLIM1, CNOT10 (proteins already mentioned above) and ERBB2.
From Human Protein Atlas available from http://www.proteinatlas.org, we analysed the expression of the seven most abundant proteins in non-responders patients: CALD1, CPA3, B3GALT5, CNNM4, MTIF3, CD177 and RIPK1. These seven candidates are expressed in the normal rectal tissue at the protein level (Fig. 5a) and at the gene level (Fig. 5b). For CPA3 and CALD1, protein expression was not detected in the rectum but is expressed in the small bowel and colon respectively. In addition, there is a strong expression of their mRNAs in the rectal tissue. From Colorectal Cancer Atlas available from http://colonatlas.org/index.html, we were able to verify the expression of these seven proteins in 22 colorectal cancer cell lines as well as the presence of gene sequence variants (Fig. 5c). Many mutations have been identified for these genes but none are listed for involvement in deregulated signaling pathways in colorectal cancer. 
We also observed the proteins involved in the metabolism of 5-FU. In the differentially abundant proteins, we find in particular the protein DPYD (dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase), the enzyme involved in the hepatic catabolism of 5-FU. This protein is found to be more abundant in NR compared to TR (P = 3.18 × 10−2), in PR compared to TR (P = 2.63 × 10−2) and in NR + PR compared to TR (P = 1.87 × 10−2). We also find the protein TYMP (thymidine phosphorylase), the enzyme involved in the transformation of 5-FU into FdUMP (fluorodeoxyuridine monophosphate), which is the TS inhibitor (thymidylate synthase), the main target of 5-FU. This enzyme is found to be more abundant in PR compared to NR (P = 3.98 × 10−5), in PR compared to TR (P = 6.81 × 10−3) and in PR + TR compared to NR (P = 2.99 × 10−3).
From these differentially abundant proteins identified above, we looked for the biological processes predominantly represented in each group of responders for each comparison (Additional files 1–6: Tables S1–S6). These analyses were carried out using the DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) v6.8 software (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Among these biological processes, there is a strong representation of ribosomal proteins (RP; RPS and RPL) and mitochondrial proteins (NDUF proteins, included in complexe I of the respiratory chain) in NR compared to the other groups as we can see in Fig. 6 obtained with the STRING software (https://string-db.org/). 

INTRODUCTION:
Background
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer (9.7%) in the world behind lung (13%) and breast (12%) cancers and the fourth most lethal (8.5%) behind lung (19%), liver (9.1%) and stomach (8.8%) cancers. This high mortality can be explained by a late detection of the cancer, so patients are often diagnosed with locally advanced tumor completely invading the wall of the rectum (T3) or peripheral tissues or organs (T4), and often regional lymph node metastases are found (N1 or N2). In fact, the 5-year survival is estimated at 93, 78, 66 and 8% for stages I, II, III and IV respectively. In North America, the standard treatment of locally advanced rectum cancer is neoadjuvant radiotherapy with concomitant chemotherapy with the intravenous 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or its oral analogue Capecitabine (Xeloda®) followed by total mesorectal excision (TME) surgery. This neoadjuvant treatment has been shown to reduce tumor infiltration and decrease the tumor charge (down-staging effect), which is important to increase the complete resection rate (R0, healthy circumferential margin) of surgery and thus improve loco-regional tumor control, disease-free survival (DFS) as well as quality of life by preserving sphincter, urinary and sexual functions.
While 70% of patients show an objective response (OR), including up to 15% with a complete remission, a subset of patients with the same tumor stage and having been treated with the same technique do not respond favourably, suggesting a resistant phenomenon. Moreover, considering the severe secondary effects observed such as radiodermatitis and proctitis, there is a strong need in clinic to have reliable biomarkers in order to predict the outcome of the treatment and to identify the sub-group of patients with resistant phenotype, permitting to avoid long, costly and ineffective procedures but with an adequate personalized treatment.
Many tests exist to detect CRC such as faecal occult blood test (FOBT), double contrast barium enema (DCBE) or colonoscopy, but biopsy remains one of the best ways to get a definitive diagnosis. A new blood test, the ColonSentry® test, was recently developed and is based on the expression profile of seven genes ANXA3, CLEC4D, LMNB1, PRRG4, TNFAIP6, VNN1 and IL2RB. This rapid and non-invasive test represents the world’s first commercially available test for stratifying current risk for CRC. Of all these tests, it appears that the majority of them consist of screening tests but the clinical markers currently used for rectal cancer are not able to predict the individual response of the patient that would allow personalization of the treatment. Relevant biological factors to direct the patient to personalized treatment are lacking to guide the clinician’s decisions. The vast majority of predictive and prognostic biomarkers identified in rectal cancer generally involve genetic mutations such as the activating mutation in KRAS (G12D) which is a predictive biomarker of resistance to EGFR-directed therapy with the monoclonal antibodies cetuximab or panitumumab. Furthermore, response to radiotherapy implicates a lot of factors in cell cycle arrest, DNA damage repair and apoptosis. So far, no reliable biomarker in clinic to predict the response pattern to neoadjuvant radio-chemotherapy, which is well associated with disease-free survival.
In this study, we focused on profiling the tumor protein signature of different groups of responders to NRCT with 5-FU: non-responders, partial and total responders (NR, PR and TR respectively) in patients with locally advanced rectal cancer. The purposes of this study are (1) to extract the protein content from rectal formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsies and to study it by mass spectrometry, (2) to identify the differentially abundant proteins (3) to identify, from these proteins, the signaling pathways predominantly represented in each group and finally, (4) to discuss potential predictive biomarkers of the response to the NRCT with 5-FU.