PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion; Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Ar; Trim33; Rime; Lc-msms

ABSTRACT:
The Androgen Receptor (AR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that drives prostate cancer development and progression. Although, a detailed effect on AR biology has been described for a number of interacting proteins, many AR coregulators remain to be characterized in relation to their distinct impact on AR function. Here, we describe TRIM33 as a conserved AR-interactor across multiple prostate cancer cell lines. We observed that TRIM33 and AR share overall chromatin interaction profiles, in which TRIM33 is involved in downstream responsive transcriptomic output. In contrast to prior reports, we show that TRIM33 does not impact AR protein stability, but instead propose a model in which TRIM33 facilitates maximal AR activity by interfering with H2BK120 ubiquitination levels.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
TRIM33 loss reduces Androgen Receptor transcriptional output and H2BK120 ubiquitination

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
whole proteome: For protein digestion, frozen tissues were lysed in boiling Guanidine (GuHCl)  lysisbuffer as described by Jersie-Christensen et al [01]. Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After dilution to 2M GuHCl, aliquots corresponding to at least 1.05 mG of protein were digested twice (4h and overnight) with trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C, enzyme/substrate ratio 1:75. Digestion was quenched by the addition of FA (final concentration 5%), after which the peptides were desalted on a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). From the eluates, aliquots were collected for proteome analysis, the remainder being reserved for phosphoproteome analysis. Samples were vacuum dried. Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, the peptides were reconstituted in 2% formic acid. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer equipped with an EASY-NLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Samples were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min. For single-run proteome a 90-min gradient was employed containing a 78-min linear increase from 6 to 30% solvent B, followed by a 12-min wash. For phosphoproteome analysis, a 135-min gradient was employed containing a 114-min linear increase from 7 to 30% solvent B, followed by a 21-min wash.  RIME: For mass spectrometry, peptide mixtures were prepared and measured as previously described (Stelloo et al., 2018), with the following exceptions. Peptide mixtures (10% of total digest) were loaded directly onto the analytical column and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a mass spectrometer connected to a nLC system as described in Table 1. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a linear gradient, see supplementary table 2 for gradient details.

DATA PROCESSING:
For proteome data, raw data were analyzed by DIA-NN (version 1.8) [02] without a spectral library and with “Deep learning” option enabled. The Swissprot Human database (20,395 entries, release 2022_02) was added for the library-free search. The Quantification strategy was set to Robust LC (high accuracy) and MBR option was enabled. The other settings were kept at the default values. The protein groups report from DIA-NN was used for downstream analysis in Perseus (version: 1.6.15.0) [03]. Values were Log2-transformed, after which proteins were filtered for at least 2 out of 3 valid values in at least one sample group. For whole cell proteomics the LFQ difference was used as a ranking metric before using ClusterProfiler for GSEA.  RIME: Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (see Table 2, MaxQuant version) (Cox et al., 2014) using standard settings for label-free quantitation (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the Human database (see Table 2, database) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and deamidation (N, Q) were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (see Supplemental Table 2) (Tyanova et al., 2016), after which proteins were filtered as described in supplementary table 3.  LFQ data was then further processed using DEprot (https://github.com/sebastian-gregoricchio/DEprot) , using the built-in missforrest function (Stekhoven and Bühlmann, 2012) to impute missing data. Differential protein abundance was defined as p-value < 0.05 (paired t-test) and LFQ difference > 1. For RIME experiments, over-representation analysis using the WebGestalt (Elizarraras et al., 2024) webtool was used against the CORUM database at default parameters for enriched proteins using the protein coding genome as a background.