PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Monocyte
diseases: Kabuki syndrome
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Neurodevelopment; Tmtpro; Butyrate; Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography; Single-cell rna sequencing; Lysine methyltransferase; Epigenetic; Tandem mass tag

ABSTRACT:
Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a genetic disorder caused by DNA mutations in KMT2D, a lysine methyltransferase that methylates histones and other proteins, and therefore modifies chromatin structure and subsequent gene expression. Ketones, derived from the ketogenic diet, are histone deacetylase inhibitors that can ‘open’ chromatin and encourage gene expression. Single-cell RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry-based proteomics were used to explore molecular mechanisms of disease in individuals with KS (n=4) versus controls (n=4). Pathway enrichment analysis indicated that loss of function mutations in KMT2D are associated with ribosomal protein dysregulation at an RNA and protein level in individuals with KS (FDR <0.05). Cellular proteomics also identified immune dysregulation and increased abundance of other lysine modification and histone binding proteins, representing a potential compensatory mechanism. Our data reveals that lysine methyltransferase epigenetic regulation is associated with ribosomal protein dysfunction, with secondary immune dysregulation. Diet and the production of bioactive molecules such as ketone bodies serve as a significant environmental factor that can induce epigenetic changes and improve clinical outcomes. Integrating transcriptomic, proteomic, and clinical data can define mechanisms of disease and treatment effects in individuals with neurodevelopmental disorders.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Ketogenic diet modifies ribosomal protein dysregulation in KMT2D Kabuki Syndrome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated and lysed with 0.8% Triton X-100, protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were thawed and incubated at 37°C for 30 min with 10 units of benzonase (Sigma). Sodium dodecyl sulphate was added to a final concentration of 2% and tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine to 10 mM. The samples were incubated at 85 °C for 10 min, then cooled and iodoacetamide was added to 20 mM and incubated at 23 °C for 30 min. The samples were precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method. Pellets were dried at 37 °C for 1.5 h. 20 µL of 7.8 M Urea/100 mM HEPES pH 8.0 solution was added with 3 ug LysC (Fujifilm Wako). LysC digestion was for 12 h at 28 °C. Two trypsin digestions were done for 8 h at 28 °C, each with 3 µg of trypsin (TrypZean, Sigma). Peptide quantification used UV absorption at 280 nm. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling was performed using with TMTpro 16plex reagents (KS: 126, 127C, 128N and 128C; Controls: 129N, 129C, 130N and 130C). The TMT-labelled combined sample was desalted using solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak 3cc tC18 cartridges, Waters). The eluate was subjected to hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography separation as described previously (PMID: 30822303), using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (LC Packings) with a 250 mm long and 1 mm inside diameter TSKgel Amide-80 column (Tosoh Biosciences). Fractions were collected into a 96-well plate using a Probot (LC Packings) at 30-second intervals. Selected fractions were combined into similar amounts of peptide using the UV signal at 214 nm. Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system and Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each fraction was loaded directly onto an in-house 300 mm long 0.075 mm inside diameter column packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was heated to 50 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation lab solutions) integrated with the nano flex ion source with an electrospray operating at 2.3 kV. The S lens radio frequency level was 50 and capillary temperature was 250 °C. The 3.5 µL sample was injected into a 20 µL loop and loaded onto the column in 99% reversed phase buffer A (solution of 0.1% formic acid) and 1% buffer B (solution of 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile). The loading was for 17.5 min at 300 nL/min using 1% buffer B. The gradient, at 250 nL/min, was from 1% buffer B to 7% buffer B in 1 min, to 29% buffer B in 101.5 min, to 36% buffer B in 8 min, to 99% buffer B in 1 min, held at 99% buffer B for 2 min, to 99% buffer A in 1 min and held for 8 min as the flow rate increased to 300 nL/min. MS acquisition was performed for 140 min. All samples and fractions were analysed using data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS. The MS scans were at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control target of 1,000,000 for a maximum ion time of 100 ms from m/z 375 to 1500. The MS/MS scans were at a resolution of 35,000 with an automatic gain control target of 200,000 and maximum ion time of 100 ms. The loop count was 12, the isolation window was 1.1 units of the m/z scale, the first mass was fixed at m/z 120 and the normalised collision energy was 31. Singly charged ions and those with charge >8 were excluded from MS/MS and dynamic exclusion was for 37s.

DATA PROCESSING:
For computational analysis, the raw LC-MS/MS data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.7.0. Variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus) and deamidation (NQ). Carbamidomethyl (C) was a fixed modification. Digestion was set as the proteolytic enzyme trypsin/P with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. The TMTpro correction factors were entered (Lot: XA340093). Minimum reporter peptide ion faction was 0.6. The Homo sapiens reference proteome with canonical and isoform sequences downloaded March 26, 2023 with 80,791 entries and 20,591 genes. The inbuilt contaminants FASTA file was used and second peptides search was enabled. The peptide spectrum matching and protein false discovery rates were set at 1%. All modified peptides and counterpart non-modified peptides were excluded from protein quantification. All other settings were default.

METHODS:
Methods
Patients and controls
Children with a clinical diagnosis of KS confirmed by genetic testing were recruited to participate in the study following referral from paediatric neurologists across the Sydney Children's Hospital Network. Written informed consent was obtained from carers. Age and sex-matched children with no neurodevelopmental conditions or significant health conditions were recruited for the control group. All participants were well at the time of blood sampling, with no history of infection in the preceding two weeks. The study was approved by the Sydney Children's Hospital Network ethics committee (2021/ETH00356).
Ketogenic diet
Based on preclinical studies of KD in KS, patient KS-I was commenced on a trial of the Modified Atkins Diet (MAD) by a ketogenic dietitian (E.T). Carbohydrate was initially restricted to 15 g/day, with fat provision at 65–70% of total energy intake, and protein at minimum 1.5 g/100 kcal to optimise growth. During the 12-month trial period, dietary intake was optimised at 1900–2100 kcal per day, of which 75–80% of total energy intake was derived from fat, 18–20% from protein, and 2–3% from carbohydrate. A daily food diary was kept for the 12-month period via the electronic application Easy Diet Diary®, with dietary analysis conducted using the Australian nutrition database Foodworks™. Ketosis was maintained at this ∼1.5:1 ketogenic ratio, with consistent urinary ketones of 8 mmol/L and serum BOHB levels of 1.90–4.86 mmol/L indicating good compliance to the diet (comparable to ideal blood ketone ranges in paediatric epilepsy of 2–5 mmol/L). His weight and height continued to track along the 3rd centile (CDC charts).
Neuropsychological assessment procedure
Patient KS-I completed comprehensive neuropsychological assessment pre-diet, and then at 12 months after commencement of the KD. Each assessment took approximately 4 h to complete, and all were completed on one day with frequent breaks provided. To obtain additional information regarding reported day-to-day changes in functioning, standardised parent-, teacher- and self-report questionnaires were also completed pre-diet, and then at 6, 12 months on diet. Standardised neuropsychological measures were used to assess general intellectual functioning (including verbal comprehension, visuospatial, fluid reasoning indices); as well as measure of psychomotor speed; working memory; attention; memory; executive functioning; and academic skills. Standardised questionnaires assessed functional cognitive skills, mood, behaviour, and fatigue. All questionnaires used are displayed in Supplementary Table S1. For normative comparison, all standardised scores were converted to z-scores. Individual test scores falling at or below z = −1.0 were considered ‘borderline impaired’ and those at or below z = −1.5 were deemed ‘impaired’, unless otherwise noted.
Single-cell RNA sequencing and bioinformatics
Sample preparation
Venous blood samples of 4 mL were collected in Vacutainer ACD tubes (BD Biosciences, BD367756) from patients KS-I and KS-II, and respective controls and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated. Whole blood was transferred into 15 mL Falcon tubes (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 339650) and diluted 1:1 with wash buffer (Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS (−Ca2+/−Mg2+) + 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (DPBS: Thermo Fisher Scientific, 14190144, FBS: Cytiva, SH30084.03)). 4.5 mL of Ficoll Histopaque (Cytiva, 17144002) was added to 15 mL SepMate™ Tubes (Stemcell Technologies, 85415) and 8 mL of diluted blood was layered on top, ensuring separation of layers. The samples were centrifuged at 1200×g at room temperature for 15 min. The separated PBMC layer was aspirated and cells were washed with wash buffer and centrifuged at 250×g at room temperature for 6 min (twice). The cells were counted and resuspended in 1 mL aliquots of freezing media (95% FBS + 5% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, J66650.AK)) at a concentration of 10 × 10ˆ6 cells per mL. Samples were put into a controlled cooling chamber and stored at −80° for 24 h before being moved to liquid nitrogen for long term storage until use.
10× Genomics single-cell RNA sequencing
PBMC aliquots were thawed in a 37 °C water bath and transferred to a Falcon tube with culture media (RPMI 1640 media +10% FBS + 0.01% GlutaMAX™) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 35050061). Cells were centrifuged at 250×g at room temperature for 10 min, counted, and resuspended in wash buffer (DPBS (−Ca2+/−Mg2+) + 2% FBS) at a concentration of 1 million cells/uL. PBMCs were stained with DAPI and sorted into a single cell suspension of live cells using the BD FACSAria™ III Cell Sorter. Cells were immediately transported on ice for single-cell RNA Sequencing (scRNA-Seq) analysis at the Children's Medical Research Institute (CMRI) Single Cell Analytics Facility. Cell concentrations were adjusted to 1000 cells/μL and loaded onto a Chromium Next GEM Chip G (10× Genomics, PN-1000157) for a target output of 10,000 cells per sample. Single-cell droplet capture was performed on the Chromium Controller (10× Genomics) and the cDNA library was prepared in accordance with the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ v3.1 (dual index) protocol. The samples were sequenced by AZENTA Life Sciences (China) on an Illumina HiSeq4000 instrument (2 × 150 base pair paired end run) for a depth of 20,000 reads per cell.
Raw sequencing reads were processed using Cell Ranger (v 6.1.1) and mapped to the human reference genome (GRCh38). Multi-copy reads were discarded and only uniquely mapping reads were carried forward to unique molecular identifier (UMI) counting. The UMI count matrices were imported into the R package Seurat in the R statistical environment (v 4.2.3). Cells with a high mitochondrial transcript ratio (>0.15) were excluded. The gene expression matrices were then integrated using canonical correction analysis (CCA), batch-corrected, and scaled to linear transformation using the Seurat ‘ScaleData’ function. Principal component analysis (PCA) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) dimensionality reduction was applied to the integrated data for visualisation. Clustering was performed by first creating a shared nearest neighbour graph using Seurat ‘FindNeighbors’, then clustering based on Louvain algorithm with ‘FindClusters’. To assign celltypes, scPred was used as a supervised method, producing seven main cell types: B cells, CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, non-classical monocytes (ncMonocytes), classical monocytes (cMonocytes) and natural killer (NK) cells. Significant differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with an FDR p-value < 0.05 were analysed for pathway enrichment in Reactome pathways using Over-representation Analysis (ORA) with clusterProfiler package. This method is based on the hypergeometric test—Fisher's exact test.
Proteomics
Sample preparation
PBMCs from all four patients with KS were isolated using Ficoll, as previously described, with wash buffer (DPBS (−Ca2+/−Mg2+)). After the PBMC layer was isolated, washed, and counted, cells were lysed using 200 μL 1× Lysis Buffer with Detergent [50 mM Tris (1610794, BIO-RAD) pH 7.4, 0.8% v/v Triton X-100 (108603, MERCK), Complete EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (04693132001, MERCK), PhosSTOP (PHOSS-RO, MERCK)] + 2 μL of 200 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF, P7626-5G, MERCK) in ethanol. Samples were vortexed for 20 s and heated at 85 °C for 10min in a heating block. Samples were transferred to −80 °C freezer for storage.
LC-MS/MS analysis
Samples were thawed and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min with 10 units of benzonase (E1014, MERCK). Sodium dodecyl sulphate 1610416, BIO-RAD) was added to a final concentration of 2% and tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (646547-10X1ML, MERCK) to 10 mM. The samples were incubated at 85 °C for 10 min, then cooled and iodoacetamide (I1149-25G, MERCK) was added to 20 mM and incubated at 23 °C for 30 min. The samples were precipitated using the chloroform-methanol method (CA038, Chem-supply; LC230, Honeywell). Pellets were dried at 37 °C for 1.5 h. 20 μL of 7.8 M Urea (BIOUB0148–500G, Astral Scientific)/100 mM HEPES (H3375-100G, MERCK)/100 mM HEPES (H3375-100G, MERCK) pH 8.0 solution was added with 3 ug LysC (129-02541, Fujifilm Wako). LysC digestion was for 12 h at 28 °C. Two trypsin digestions were done for 8 h at 28 °C, each with 3 μg of trypsin ((TrypZean, T3568-10 MG, MERCK). Peptide quantification used UV absorption at 280 nm. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling was performed using with TMTpro 16plex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scinetific, A44522) (KS: 126, 127C, 128N and 128C; Controls: 129N, 129C, 130N and 130C). The TMT-labelled combined sample was desalted using solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak 3cc tC18 cartridges, WAT054925, Waters). The eluate was subjected to hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography separation as described previously, using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (LC Packings) with a 250 mm long and 1 mm inside diameter TSKgel Amide-80 column (0021487, Tosoh Biosciences). Fractions were collected into a 96-well plate using a Probot (LC Packings) at 30-s intervals. Selected fractions were combined into similar amounts of peptide using the UV signal at 214 nm. Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (84,865.260, VWR Chemicals) for LC-MS/MS analysis.
The LC-MS/MS was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano system and Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each fraction was loaded directly onto an in-house 300 mm long 0.075 mm inside diameter column packed with ReproSil Pur C18 AQ 1.9 μm resin (r119. aq, Dr Maisch). The column was heated to 50 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation lab solutions) integrated with the nano flex ion source with an electrospray operating at 2.3 kV. The S lens radio frequency level was 50 and capillary temperature was 250 °C. The 3.5 μL sample was injected into a 20 μL loop and loaded onto the column in 99% reversed phase buffer A (solution of 0.1% formic acid) and 1% buffer B [solution of 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile (34,967, Honeywell)]. The loading was for 17.5 min at 300 nL/min using 1% buffer B. The gradient, at 250 nL/min, was from 1% buffer B to 7% buffer B in 1 min, to 29% buffer B in 101.5 min, to 36% buffer B in 8 min, to 99% buffer B in 1 min, held at 99% buffer B for 2 min, to 99% buffer A in 1 min and held for 8 min as the flow rate increased to 300 nL/min. MS acquisition was performed for 140 min.
All samples and fractions were analysed using data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS. The MS scans were at a resolution of 70,000 with an automatic gain control target of 1,000,000 for a maximum ion time of 100 ms from m/z 375 to 1500. The MS/MS scans were at a resolution of 35,000 with an automatic gain control target of 200,000 and maximum ion time of 100 ms. The loop count was 12, the isolation window was 1.1 units of the m/z scale, the first mass was fixed at m/z 120 and the normalised collision energy was 31. Singly charged ions and those with charge >8 were excluded from MS/MS and dynamic exclusion was for 37s.
Differential abundance protein analysis
For computational analysis, the raw LC-MS/MS data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.7.0 to generate “proteinGroups.txt” file. Variable modifications were oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-terminus) and deamidation (NQ). Carbamidomethyl (C) was a fixed modification. Digestion was set as the proteolytic enzyme trypsin/P with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages. The TMTpro correction factors were entered (Lot: XA340093). Minimum reporter peptide ion faction was 0.6. The Homo sapiens reference proteome with canonical and isoform sequences downloaded March 26, 2023 with 80,791 entries and 20,591 genes. The inbuilt contaminants FASTA file was used and second peptides search was enabled. The peptide spectrum matching and protein false discovery rates were set at 1%. All modified peptides and counterpart non-modified peptides were excluded from protein quantification. All other settings were default.
For data normalisation, the MaxQuant data was cleaned to have at least one unique peptide per protein while removing any entries in the contaminants (CON__ prefix) or the reverse sequence decoy databases (REV__ prefix). The “reporter intensity corrected” column were used for further analysis. Proteins with one or more missing values in any samples were removed from further analysis. UniProt accession was identified for each protein group following rules from Engholm-Keller et al. Multi-mapped proteins were excluded to avoid false enrichment due to alignment errors. Of the accepted proteins, 10% had 1 unique peptide and 90% had 2–15 unique peptides. The samples were log (base 2) transformed and between sample normalisation was performed using the ‘scaled’ normalisation from the ‘limma’ R package (v 4.2.3). To remove the batch effects from biological data, the remove unwanted variation (RUV) R package was used. This method relies on having a set of endogenous negative control proteins, which are proteins with little changes in protein abundances between different cell types or experimental treatments. For this study, a set of 500 empirical negative control proteins with little or no change in protein expression across samples (q-value <0.05) was identified from an initial ANOVA test. The RUVIII method was used to remove the unwanted variations across the samples and four unwanted components (k = 4) were removed by the tool. The RUVIII method requires the experiment design matrix, a matrix describing the replicates for each treatment condition, and the list of negative control proteins. Differential abundance analysis of proteins was performed using the adjusted abundance matrix. The results from this differential abundance analysis were then used for all analyses.
For linear modelling, differential abundance analysis of proteins was performed for comparing each time point with time zero. The limma R package was used, the linear model for comparing each pair of time points was fitted using the ‘lmFit’ function and the p-values calculated using the empirical Bayes method ‘eBayes’ function. Trended and robust analysis were enabled. The Benjamin-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied to the moderated p-values by calculating the q-values. Significant differentially expressed proteins were defined as those with q-values less than 0.05. Differentially expressed proteins were analysed for pathway enrichment in Reactome pathways and Gene Ontology (GO) terms.
Role of funders
Funding sources had no role in the design or data collection for this study, and did not have any role during its execution, analyses, interpretation of the data, or decision to submit results.

RESULTS:
Results
Clinical cohort
To characterise the transcriptomic and proteomic profile of individuals with KS, peripheral blood samples were collected from four individuals with KS KMT2D variants (3 females and 1 male, mean age 14 years, range: 9–19 years). The demographics, clinical data and gene variants of this cohort are summarised in Table 1.
Single-cell RNA sequencing profile of kabuki syndrome indicates dysregulated ribosomal protein and gene translation processes
To characterise the transcriptomic profile of individuals with KS, we performed scRNA-Seq of PBMCs in children with KS compared to age- and sex-matched controls. Pairwise analysis of KS-I (12-year-old male) at baseline compared to sibling control, determined differentially expressed genes (DEGs) across cell types. Enrichment for DEGs by cell type was conducted using Reactome pathway analysis, and the FDR correction p-value < 0.05. Analysis of CD8+, CD4+, NK cells (Fig. 1c, e and g), and B-cells (Supplementary Figure S2) revealed that the most downregulated pathways were related to mRNA translation and peptide elongation (Fig. 1c, e and g), predominantly due to significant downregulation of RPL and RPS ribosomal protein genes (Fig. 1d, f and h). No upregulated pathways were identified. To explore this ribosomal protein dysregulation further, we performed scRNA-Seq in patient KS-II (17-year-old female) and matched control. In patient KS-II, CD8+ cells revealed that the most upregulated pathways were related to mRNA translation and peptide elongation, which was predominantly due to upregulation of RPL and RPS ribosomal protein genes (Fig. 2c and d). By contrast, ncMonocytes exhibited downregulation of the same translational pathways with downregulation of RPL and RPS ribosomal protein genes (Fig. 2e and f). The ncMonocytes also demonstrated upregulation in pathways associated with neutrophil degranulation, immune function and interferon signalling (Fig. 2g and h), with the highest log2FC differences in S100AB, LYZ, MNDA, CLEC12A, FCN1, HLA-DRB1 genes (Fig. 2h). There were no other upregulated or downregulated pathways identified in any cell type in KS-II.
Proteomic profile of KS indicates reduced ribosomal protein abundance
We also performed bulk proteomics on PBMCs from four children with KS (including KS-I and KS-II) versus controls. Principal component analysis of differential protein abundance between cohorts (four KS v four respective controls) indicated clear separation between KS and controls across the first- and second-principal components (Fig. 3a). The abundance of 2643 proteins were significantly increased, whereas 2353 proteins were significantly decreased compared to controls (FDR p-value < 0.05) (presented as volcano plot, Fig. 3b). With similar themes to the transcriptomic profile, proteins with significantly reduced abundance showed enriched Reactome pathways related to neutrophil degranulation, regulation of SLITs and ROBOs, mRNA translation, peptide and mitochondrial elongation in patients with KS versus controls (Fig. 3c). The Gene-Concept Network (CNET) plot, which connects enriched pathway terms with genes annotated with the specific pathway term, is depicted for the Reactome pathway neutrophil degranulation in Supplementary Figure S2. By contrast, enriched Reactome pathways of increased protein abundance were related to MAPK signalling, interferon immune signalling, and tRNA processing (Fig. 3d).
Pathway analysis using Gene Ontology (GO) found that proteins with reduced abundance were enriched in pathways related to the ribosome, cytoplasmic translation, and neutrophil granulation (ficolin-1-rich and azurophil granules) (Fig. 3e). Proteins encoding the small and large ribosomal subunits in the cytoplasm (RPS and RPL) and mitochondria (MRPS and MRPL) were significantly reduced as demonstrated in the CNET plot (Fig. 3g). By contrast, enriched GO pathways of significantly increased protein abundance were related to chromatin and epigenetic regulation such as MLL1 complex, and DNA binding (Fig. 3f). Notably, lysine modification (KMT2A, KMT2C, KDM2B, KDM5A, KAT6B, KAT8), and histone binding proteins (MLLT3, MECP2) exhibited increased abundance (Fig. 3h).
Ketogenic diet treatment
Patient KS-I was a 12-year-old male with KS, who was diagnosed postnatally with coarctation of the aorta, a hypoplastic aortic arch, a ventricular septal defect and sub-aortic stenosis, for which he underwent three cardiac surgeries. He had a complex history of developmental delay, bilateral hip dislocation repair and submucous cleft palate repair, and visual deficit due to coloboma in the right eye and associated microphthalmia.
He had chronic glue ear and ear infections requiring seven sets of grommets insertion. He has a small stature, with weight and height tracking along the 3rd percentile, and is treated with human growth hormone. He exhibited an immune deficiency with low levels of IgG and IgA, but had not required treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin. Furthermore, he suffered from recurrent and protracted bacterial infections, primarily affecting his ears, sinuses and tonsils requiring courses of antibiotics. Notably from 9 years of age, he presented with intermittent 2–6 weeklong periods of ‘brain fog,’ characterised by episodic periods of cognitive regression including worsening attention, memory, engagement, and behaviour. Such episodes were typically triggered by infection and occurred 1–3 times per year, typically during winter. Although he attended a mainstream school and kept up with mainstream requirements, his baseline executive issues, and the episodes of cognitive decline were impacting significantly on his performance, happiness, and function.
Given the preclinical evidence of the effect of the ketogenic diet in KMT2D loss of function animal models, the KD was trialled to improve cognitive function and the ‘brain fog’ episodes. Compliance and efficacy of the diet was measured using urinary ketones (consistently 4–16 mmol/L acetoacetate—Supplementary Figure S1) and serum BOHB (Fig. 4a). The KD was well-tolerated with no issues with compliance, largely due to the plethora of recipes curated by the parents. There were no reported issues with nausea, vomiting, constipation, or high symptomatic ketones, however lethargy was reported in the first 3 weeks of starting the diet and coincided with bacterial infection requiring antibiotics. Over the 12-month period, KS-I did not experience a single brain fog episode, and made significant cognitive improvements across several domains. As shown in Fig. 4b, standardised neuropsychological assessment at baseline and 12 months indicated significant improvements in attention, abstract conceptual reasoning, and impulse control (as measured by improvements in scores from ‘impaired >1.5 standard deviations (SD) from the mean, to ‘within normal range’ <1 SD from the mean) (Fig. 4b). Subjective parent-, teacher-, and self-report questionnaire data at baseline, 6, and 12 months indicated significant improvements in overall executive functioning, inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity for all raters, as well as self-reported improvements in fatigue (Fig. 4c). The improvements seen on neuropsychological assessment were reflected in school reports taken pre-diet, 6-months on diet, and 12-months on diet by the same classroom teacher. Absenteeism reduced from 8.5 days per semester pre-KD, to 3 days per semester at 12 months on KD. Furthermore, there were decreased ear infections and need for antibiotics (parenteral and ear drops), with 8.5 courses of antibiotics per year before KD (2015–2020), and 3.7 courses per year on KD (2021-ongoing). We hypothesise that the ketogenic diet improved the vulnerability of KS-I's brain response to infection, thereby eliminating the cognitive regression episodes associated with the infections. Due to clear benefits of the KD, KS-I continues on the diet (currently ongoing for 3.2 years), without any further brain fog episodes.
The ketogenic diet partially reversed ribosomal protein dysregulation in KS-I
To determine the effects of the KD on gene regulation, we performed scRNA-Seq of patient KS-I at 12 months on KD compared to KS-I at baseline. The scRNA-Seq at 12 months exhibited upregulation of Reactome pathways in CD8+ and NK cells related to mRNA translation and selenocysteine synthesis (Fig. 4d and f), the same pathways that were downregulated at baseline in KS-I compared to sibling control (Fig. 1c and g). The Reactome CNET plots (Fig. 4e and g) further revealed that the following RPS and RPL ribosomal protein genes were upregulated (RPS4X, RPS14, RPS27A, RPL13, RPL18A) after 12 months on KD compared to KS-I baseline. These same ribosomal protein genes were downregulated at baseline in KS-I compared to sibling control.

INTRODUCTION:
Research in context
Evidence before this study
Neurodevelopmental disorders affect 10% of children, and are increasing in prevalence, with few disease modifying therapies. Preclinical studies have explored the epigenetic effects of diet in disease, indicating that ketones derived from the ketogenic diet are histone deacetylase inhibitors that can ‘open’ chromatin and promote gene expression. These epigenetic changes have been associated with rescued hippocampal memory neurogenesis in mice with Kabuki syndrome. To date, there have been no human studies exploring both the molecular and clinical effects of the ketogenic diet in Kabuki syndrome.
Added value of this study
Our ex vivo transcriptomic and proteomic data shows that ribosomal protein dysregulation is the primary abnormality in Kabuki syndrome, in addition to immune dysfunction. We demonstrate the epigenetic effects of diet and bioactive molecules such as ketone bodies, including significant improvements in ribosomal protein transcriptomic profile and cognitive function.
Implications of all the available evidence
We observed that individuals with Kabuki Syndrome exhibit ribosomal protein dysregulation, and given that ketones derived from the ketogenic diet have known epigenetic effects, this intervention may present a promising therapeutic agent in this condition. We were able to identify statistically significant differentially expressed genes and differentially abundant proteins, highlighting the power of single-cell RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry proteomic methods in precision medicine for rare disorders.
Introduction
Epigenetics describes the mechanisms by which environmental factors influence gene expression, and such regulatory processes are designed to preserve cell survival during stress. The classic epigenetic processes include DNA methylation, histone modification (via methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation of lysine or other amino acids) and microRNA. Exploring cellular function in mendelian disorders of epigenetic machinery (MDEM) can provide insights into common gene–environment interactions. An important MDEM is Kabuki Syndrome (KS)–a rare monogenic disorder characterised by DNA mutations in KMT2D (a lysine methyltransferase) or KDM6A (a lysine demethylase), which result in the clinical presentation of intellectual disability, immunological dysfunction, congenital cardiac disease, small stature, and craniofacial abnormalities. The KMT2D protein results in lysine methylation of histone proteins that alter chromatin accessibility and therefore gene transcription, however KMT2D may also induce post-translational modifications of lysine residues of other proteins. KS occurs in ∼1 in 32,000 live births and despite significant disease burden, there are no accepted therapeutic options. Understanding the downstream pathways that are perturbed in KS, and how these relate to the clinical phenotype, may provide insights into potential therapies. Preclinical studies have shown the potential benefit of the ketogenic diet (KD), specifically ketone bodies such as beta-hydroxybutyrate (BOHB), which is a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor that promotes an ‘open’ chromatin state and can activate gene expression. Notably, mice with KS treated with a 4:1 classical KD exhibit amelioration of hippocampal memory deficits and rescued neurogenesis. It is recognised that there is significant functional interplay between histone methylation and acetylation enzymes.
In this study, we utilised high-throughput single-cell RNA sequencing and mass spectrometry-based proteomics to characterise the transcriptomic and proteomic profiles of children with KS compared to controls. We show that ribosomal protein dysregulation is a key cellular finding in individuals with KS. We also describe the benefit of a KD in a 12-year-old boy with KS whose cognitive function improved on the diet, with concomitant improvement in the ribosomal protein dysregulation. By integrating transcriptomic, proteomic, and clinical data, we highlight the effects of ketone bodies on gene regulation and protein production, which may have applications to common epigenetic disease.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2024.105156.