PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cardiac muscle cell; Heart
diseases: Cardiovascular system disease
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Heart failure; Cardiac remodelling; Signalling; Tac; Phosphorylation

ABSTRACT:
Trans-aortic constriction (TAC) is a widely used murine model to study pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure. Despite its high prevalence during aortic stenosis or chronic arterial hypertension, the global alterations in cardiac proteome and phospho-proteome dynamics following TAC remain incompletely characterised. Here, we present a comprehensive database of detailing the phospho-proteomic signature of the mouse heart one day and seven days after TAC. Utilising proteomic and phosphor-proteomic analyses, we identified and quantified thousands of proteins and phosphorylation sites, revealing hundreds of differential phosphorylation events that are significantly altered in the cardiac response to pressure overload. Our analysis highlights significant changes in pathways related to hypertrophic signalling, metabolic remodelling, contractile function, and the stress response. We also present proteomic data from the main cardiac cell types (endothelial cells, fibroblasts and cardiomyocytes) after TAC to reveal the cellular localization of the detected phosphoproteins. The dataset offers insights into temporal and site-specific phosphorylation events, facilitating the potential discovery of novel therapeutic targets and biomarkers. By making this resource publicly available, we aim to enable further exploration of the molecular basis of cardiac remodelling and advance translational research in heart failure.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The cardiac phospho-proteome during pressure overload in mice

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Please enter the sample processing protocol here. Please enter the sample processing protocol here. Please enter the sample processing protocol here.

DATA PROCESSING:
Please enter processing protocol here. Please enter processing protocol here. Please enter processing protocol here. Please enter processing protocol here. Please enter processing protocol here. Please enter processing protocol here.