PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: Cysteinyl; Hex
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Lc-ms/ms; Cysteine modifications

ABSTRACT:
The nanomechanical properties of elastomeric proteins determine the elasticity of a variety of tissues where modifications present at the covalent disulfide bonds can enhance protein stiffness. We propose an alternative chemical route to promote non-enzymatic oxidative protein folding via disulfide isomerization. Mass spectrometery has been used to determine the dynamics of S-thiolation and its role in modulating protein nanomechanics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Tailoring protein nanomechanics with chemical reactivity

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
A single Ig domain of the cardiac protein titin was used to study the cysteine residue modifications. Monomeric protein samples were diluted in PBS pH 7.4 containing L-cysteine, homocysteine and N-acetyl cysteine. Trypsin digestion of the protein was performed at a ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:substrate) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4; ThermoFisher). Processed raw data was searched using the Mascot algorithm (v2.2; matrix science) against an in-house database containing the protein sequence of interest. Mascot .dat output files were uploaded into Scaffold 4 software (v4.6.1 20160606) for manual verification of mass spectra.

METHODS:
Methods
Protein engineering
The (I27E24C–K55C)8 and (I27G32C–A75C)8 polyproteins were constructed using the BamHI, BglII and KpnI restriction sites (polyprotein sequences shown in Supplementary Table 2). The engineered polyproteins and the I27E24C–K55C monomer (synthetic gene, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were then cloned into the pQE80L (Qiagen) expression vector, and transformed into the BLR(DE3) Escherichia coli expression strain (VWR International). Cells were grown at 37 °C and supplemented with 100 μg ml−1 ampicillin. After an OD600 of ∼0.6 was reached, cells were induced with Isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (1 mM) and incubated overnight at 20 °C. Cells were disrupted using a French Press. The polyproteins obtained after lysis were purified by metal affinity chromatography on Talon resin (Clontech) using equilibration buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 300 mM NaCl), washing buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM Imidazole) and elution buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.0, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM Imidazole). This was followed by gel-filtration using a Superdex 200 10/300 GL column (GE Biosciences) using PBS buffer pH 7.3. We measured the protein concentration using the Bradford assay.
Force-clamp spectroscopy
To perform the single-molecule force-clamp spectroscopy atomic force microscopy experiments we used both a home-made set-up and a commercial Luigs and Neumann force spectrometer. We deposited 1–10 μl of protein in PBS solution (at a concentration of 1–10 mg ml−1) onto a freshly evaporated gold coverslide. Prior to each experiment we independently calibrated the cantilever (Si3N4 Bruker MLCT-AUHW) by means of the equipartition theorem, exhibiting a typical spring constant of ∼12–17 pN nm−1. Individual polyprotein molecules were fished by pressing the cantilever onto the gold surface at forces spanning 500–1,500 pN, thus enhancing non-specific physisorption. The deflection of the cantilever (force) was then kept constant throughout the experiment (up to ∼80 s) thanks to a proportional, integral and differential amplifier (PID) feedback system, achieving a time response to ∼2–5 ms. The data was filtered at 1 kHz with a pole Bessel filter. In the disulfide bond rupture kinetics experiments, the protein was first unfolded at 150 pN for 0.5 s, and subsequently the force was raised up to 200 pN and left constant for a large, variable period of time to capture the full kinetics of disulfide reduction for each studied nucleophile. In the oxidative folding experiments, the protein was unfolded at 150 pN for 0.5 s, followed by a high force pulse (varying between 200 and 300 pN depending on the use nucleophile) for 3 s. The quench pulse where the pulling force is completely removed was set in all cases to tq=8 s. Experiments were carried out by keeping the concentration of the deprotonated form of L-cysteine and N-aceyl-cysteine nucleophiles constant to 0.7 mM, whereas the deporotonated form of DL-homocysteine was kept at 0.55 mM due to solubility issues, and the total concentration of each nucleophile in the measuring solution was likewise adjusted according to the pKa of each compound. The different thiol nucleophiles (L-cysteine (Santa Cruz biotechnology, 98%), DL-homocysteine (Sigma-Aldrich, 95%), N-acteyl-cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich, 98%) and TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich)) were diluted into a sodium phosphate buffer solution, specifically, 50 mM sodium phosphate (Na2HPO4 and NaH2PO4), 150 mM NaCl. The final pH of in each solution was adjusted by adding the required amounts of HCl/NaOH solutions. Measuring solutions were filtered through a 0.2-μm membrane prior to each experiment. Each solution was freshly prepared prior to every experiment.
Data analysis
Both the acquisition and analysis of the experimental data was perfomed using customized software written in Igor Pro 6.0 (Wavemetrics). For the kinetics studies, we only analysed trajectories exhibiting at least five unfolding events (15 nm steps) followed by five reduction events (10 nm steps). We followed the same criteria for the oxidative folding experiments, and we considered only trajectories whereby the test pulse reached the full unfolded length characterizing the initial pulse. We used the boostrap method, to estimate the standard error of the mean (s.e.m.) for the refolding fraction.
DFT calculations
Electronic structure calculations using DFT were performed using the Gaussian 09 software. The B3LYP correlation function was employed with the 6-311+G(d,p) basis set. All structures were optimized in implicit water solvent consisting of a dielectric medium using the PCM model. Frequency calculations in the gas phase were performed on these optimized structures. The reported free energies correspond to the sum of gas-phase energy at 0 K, correction for solvation, zero-point energy, and thermal correction at 298 K. The HOMO energy levels, the electrostatic potentials and the charges (obtained using the Natural Bond Orbital analysis implemented in Gaussian) were determined from the optimized structures in implicit solvent.
To mimic protein–protein and mixed disulfide bond, we considered dimers of cysteines or its derivatives. At neutral pH, amino acids would be present in a zwitterionic NH3+…COO− form. However, as already observed for amino acids (including cysteine), the neutral tautomer NH2…COOH was found to be more stable in most cases. Only the inclusion of explicit water molecules would provide the necessary stabilization of the zwitterionic state by the formation of strong hydrogen bond with water, but it is beyond the scope of the current work. The reported energies therefore refer to the NH2…COOH forms of thiolates for cysteine and homocysteine. For NAC, the NH2 group is replaced by an amide group, which is not protonated at neutral pH, so the NH…COO− form was considered.
Mass spectrometry experiments
Enzymatic digestion. The I27E24C–K55C monomer samples were prepared by diluting 20 μl of protein (0.5 μg μl−1) in 20 μl PBS pH 7.4 containing L-cysteine, homocysteine and N-acetyl cysteine at the same concentration as used in the single molecule experiments. Prior to the MS analysis, samples were exposed for 2 h at 37 °C to trypsin digestion at a ratio of 1:20 (enzyme:substrate).
Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry. An EASY NanoLC system (ThermoFisherScientific, UK) was used to conduct the hromatographic separations. We used a reversed phase chromatography on a 75 μm C18 column to resolve the peptides from a total protein amount on column of 2 μg. A three-step linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid was employed to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1 over 60 min. The eluate was ionized by electrospray ionization using an Orbitrap Velos Pro (ThermoFisherScientific, UK) operating under Xcalibur v2.2. Precursor ions were selected according to their intensity using the collision-induced fragmentation employing a Top20 CID method and a Top10 high-energy collision dissociation method. The MS/MS collision dissociation analyses were performed by using the collision energy profiles, which were chosen according to both the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and the charge state of the peptide.
Ultraviolet spectrophotometric measurements for pK a determination
Absorbance measurements were performed with a JENWAY 6305 Spectrophotometer at room temperature. Absorbance measurements of L-cysteine and N-acetyl-L-cysteine at a final concentration of 250 μM in PBS buffer were performed at λ=240 nm from acidic to alkaline pH values, by successive addition of small aliquots of sodium hydroxide. All absorbance measurements were performed at λ=240 nm (refs) at a final concentration of 250 μM with 1 mM of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine to prevent dimerization in PBS buffer. The basal absorbance of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at λ=240 nm was subtracted from the total absorbance signal in the pKa determination procedure. All samples were homogenized by strongly stirring immediately before each measurement and their pH value was measured with a Mettler Toledo pH-metre. The pKa values were determined by fitting the Henderson–Hasselbach equation to the absorbance-pH data.
Mass spectrometry of L-cysteine and L-homocystine
ESI-MS experiments were performed with a Thermo LTQ XL linear ion Trap mass spectrometer with electron transfer dissociation source. The electrospray voltage was kept at 4.00 kV, the capillary temperature was set at 350 °C and the capillary voltage was 19 V. A full MS (m/z 107–400) scan was acquired with a nominal mass resolution. Samples were delivered by means of flow injection. MS data was analysed with Xcalibur version 2.0.7 software. L-homocysteine was freshly prepared right before the MS experiment at a pH of 9.2 and a final concentration of 63 μM, and was confirmed by following the m/z molecular ion peak at 136m/z. Dimerization to L-homocystine was induced by preparing a 63 μM L-homocysteine solution at pH 9.2, and measured after 15 h of sample preparation. L-homocystine was confirmed by following the m/z molecular ion peak at 269m/z. Both species present in the same spectrum were obtained by bubbling the measuring solution with N2 prior to MS determination.
Data availability
The MS proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD005981. Additional information and the data supporting this research, including the single-molecule nanomechanics experiments, can be obtained from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Additional information
How to cite this article: Beedle, A. E. M. et al. Tailoring protein nanomechanics with chemical reactivity. Nat. Commun. 8, 15658 doi: 10.1038/ncomms15658 (2017).
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

RESULTS:
Results
S-cysteinylation promotes non-enzymatic oxidative folding
We applied a constant force to a polyprotein composed of eight identical domains of a titin Ig27 mutant (I27E24C–K55C)8 that harbours a buried disulfide bond between amino acids 24 and 55 (Fig. 1a). A specifically designed five-pulse force protocol measures the protein elongation over time in the presence of 13.3 mM of L-cysteine (Fig. 1b), enabling the independent capture of each individual disulfide bond rupture and reformation event, with single bond resolution (Fig. 1c). Applying a short (500 ms) pulse of 150 pN to the (I27E24C–K55C)8 polyprotein elicits steps of ∼15 nm, corresponding to the unfolding of the protein up to the position of the rigid disulfide bond (grey), which becomes exposed to the solution. A second pulse at a higher force (300 pN) triggers a ∼10 nm stepwise increase in the protein length (red), corresponding to the force-catalysed rupture of each individual disulfide bond by the attacking L-cysteine nucleophile. The initial pulse, composed of ∼10 nm and ∼15 nm steps (Fig. 1d), results in a fully stretched and reduced protein form exhibiting a free cysteine thiolate and a mixed disulfide conformation between the native cysteine and the attacking L-cysteine (Fig. 1b).
Removal of the pulling force for tq=8 s (a period of time that is long enough to ensure quantitative protein refolding) triggered the collapse and folding of the protein. A second test pulse that mirrors the initial pulse probes the folding success of the folding reaction for a given tq. Similar to the initial pulse, the elongation of the protein in the test pulse occurs in steps of ∼15 nm (unfolding) followed by the sequential reduction of each individual disulfide bond (∼10 nm steps, Fig. 1e). This sequence of events fingerprints the success of non-enzymatic oxidative folding process. In particular, the presence of ∼10 nm steps in the test pulse unambiguously hallmarks the non-enzymatic reformation of individual disulfide bonds, surprisingly occurring in the absence of any oxidasing agent, and its intricate link to the successful refolding of the protein.
S-homocysteinylation blocks oxidative folding
To probe the generality of the small thiol-mediated non-enzymatic oxidative folding process, we next probed the outcome of oxidative folding in the presence of the chemically analogous homocysteine nucleophile (Fig. 2a), only differing from L-cysteine in the presence of an extra methylene group next to the nucleophilic thiolate (Fig. 2b). Surprisingly, in this case the test pulse was mostly populated by steps of ∼25 nm, and the proportion of ∼10 nm steps, hallmark of disulfide reformation, was vanishingly small (Fig. 2a). The presence of ∼25 nm in the 150 pN test pulse stands for a mechanically weaker protein that has properly folded but has not reformed its internal stiff disulfide bond. The percentage of reduced, folded protein (∼25 nm steps) is dramatically higher (∼40%) than in the case of L-cysteine (∼3%), whereas the situation is completely reversed in the case of disulfide bond reformation, which is favoured with L-cysteine (∼30%) and significantly reduced (∼10%) when Hcys is the attacking nucleophile (Fig. 2c,d). Altogether, these results conclude that the attacking nucleophile has a profound effect on the nanomechanics of the refolded protein; while L-cysteine promotes a stiff, refolded protein with a properly reformed disulfide bond, S-homocysteinylation blocks oxidative folding but eventually allows the protein to fold into a more compliant native state conformation void of the reformed disulfide bond. The dramatic contrast in the effect that both analogous post-translational modifications have on the oxidative folding fate of the protein and on its nanomechanical properties is certainly surprising given the closely related chemical structures of both low-molecular-weight thiols.
The mixed disulfide plays a key role in disulfide formation
It is very plausible that the mechanism underpinning the non-enzymatic reformation of a protein disulfide bond observed for L-cysteine and also—to a much lower extent—for homocysteine, involves the reactivity of the mixed disulfide intermediate. MS measurements on the I27E24C–K55C monomer detected with high evidence the post-translational modification of both 24 and 55 cysteines by both L-cysteine and homocysteine (Supplementary Figs 1,2 and Supplementary Table 1), which unambiguously confirmed the presence of the mixed disulfide. Noteworthy, given the different degree of solvent exposure of the protein disulfide bond obtained in MS and mechanical measurements, the yield of protein modification is not comparable in both experimental approaches. To prove the necessary participation of the mixed disulfide adduct in the dynamics of disulfide bond reoxidation, we conducted analogous experiments on an equivalent (I27G32C–A75C)8 polyprotein using the phosphorus-based TCEP nucleophile (we chose the I27G32C–A75C mutant, harbouring the buried disulfide bond in a different position within the protein structure, because TCEP can partially reduce the disulfide bond of the (I27E24C–K55C)8 polyprotein in the absence of force). In the case of the P-based nucleophile TCEP, the force-induced SN2 disulfide cleavage obviously does not yield a stable mixed disulfide, but rather a highly reactive mixed S–P thioalkoxyphosphonium cation intermediate (Supplementary Fig. 3), which can be easily displaced by water molecules to render a completely unfolded protein with two reduced thiolates (Fig. 3a). Analysis of the test pulse in our refolding trajectories (Fig. 3b) reveals the absolute absence of ∼10 nm steps, indicating that no disulfide bond is present in the otherwise successfully refolded protein (confirmed by the presence of ∼25 nm steps, Fig. 3c). These experiments demonstrated the crucial implication of the mixed disulfide species in the thiol-mediated mechanism of oxidative folding.
Homocysteine exhibits an anomalous high pK a
To elucidate the molecular origin of the markedly different behaviour observed for L-cysteine and homocysteine, we investigated how the physicochemical properties of both small thiols could determine their reactivity within the context of a nucleophilic substitution (SN2) reaction. It is well established that a charged thiolate will be a better nucleophile than a protonated thiol. Hence, there is a general direct connection between the goodness of a particular nucleophile/leaving group and its acid–base properties. Although basicity is a thermodynamic property and nucleophilicity is a kinetic phenomenon, a good correlation between both properties has been observed, generally following the rule of thumb stating that good leaving groups are the conjugate bases of strong acids. While L-cysteine is reported to exhibit a pKa=8.15 (ref.)−8.3 (ref.), there is a surprising disagreement in the literature regarding the pKa value for homocysteine, for which two largely disparate values (pKa=8.7 (ref.) and pKa=10 (refs)) are reported. To resolve such a dichotomy, we independently measured the pKa of both compounds by monitoring the free thiol absorbance at λ=240 nm (refs) as a function of pH for both L-cysteine and homocysteine compounds (Fig. 4a). While an expected pKa=8.4 was measured for L-cysteine, the pKa of homocysteine was found to be significantly higher (pKa=9.9) in our experimental conditions, supporting previous findings. Crucially, our homocysteine measurements required reducing conditions to attenuate its fast dimerization, especially under basic conditions (Supplementary Fig. 4). The dissimilar pKa value found for both isolated compounds in solution is likely to account for their different reactivity when selectively bound to a protein via a protein post-translational modification.
DFT calculations provide a thermodynamic perspective
To obtain a more precise understanding of the thermodynamically allowed reactivity between the different thiol species involved in our experiments (namely (i) the initial disulfide bond between two structurally close cysteines, (ii) the newly mixed disulfide bond species; (iii) the resulting free cysteine thiol after disulfide bond cleavage and (iv) the free small thiol nucleophile species in solution), we performed DFT calculations on model thiol and disulfide species using the expanded 6-311+G(d,p) basis set and the B3LYP functional, which has been used in the context of thiol-disulfide exchange (Table 1). Noteworthy, in this simplified approach any free-energy contributions arising from a protein conformational change upon formation of a native or mixed disulfide are neglected (only the free-energy associated with an isolated disulfide bond rupture is computed).
The attack of the Cysprot–Cys mixed disulfide bond by a solution L-cysteine is, from a free-energy perspective, an equilibrium process with no net energy contribution (ΔG=0 kcal mol−1 reaction 1, Table 1), whereas the rupture of the mixed non-equivalent disulfide between Cysprot–Hcys by free Hcys in solution (reaction 2, Table 1) is favourable (ΔG=−4 kcal mol−1). By contrast, the attack of the same mixed disulfide (Cysprot–Hcys) by the freed protein cysteine (reaction 3, Table 1) is not favourable (ΔG=+2.6 kcal mol−1). Hence, these results can rationalize a few key non-expected experimental observations, namely that: (i) the symmetric mixed disulfide formed by two equivalent cysteines can be attacked by the freed protein thiolate when in close physical proximity to reform a disulfide bond (Fig. 4b); by contrast, (ii) the asymmetric Cysprot–Hcys is not quantitatively attacked by the free thiol protein cysteine to reform the previously cleaved disulfide bond but (iii) can be attacked by free homocysteine molecules in solution, thus resolving the mixed disulfide and leaving the protein with two reduced thiolates able to succesfully refold in the absence of a formed disulfide bond giving rise to the ∼25 nm steps.
The distinct nucleophilic power of L-cys and Hcys
While free-energy DFT calculations agree with our (thermodynamic) acid–base measurements, full understanding of the SN2 nucleophilic substitution reaction would also require kinetic considerations. At the fundamental level, thiol-disulfide exchange is a classical bimolecular nucleophilic exchange SN2 reaction that occurs through a linear (S–S–S) Walden transition state complex. Crucially, mechanical force accelerates disulfide cleavage by lowering the kinetic barrier. To compare the nucleophilic power of both small thiols, we measured the rate of disulfide reduction at the same stretching force (F=200 pN) for two solutions containing the same concentration of active, deprotonated thiolate species at the same pH (Fig. 5a). Our results demonstrate that the rate of disulfide reduction is clearly higher for homocysteine (r=1.11 s−1) than for cysteine (r=0.08 s−1), thus highlighting the better nucleophilic nature of homocysteine (Fig. 5b). From the computational perspective, a very crude estimate of the relative nucleophilic character of both cysteine and homocysteine compounds can be obtained by comparing the energies of the HOMO orbitals of the isolated small compound. Our calculations revealed (Supplementary Fig. 5) that the HOMO energy for Hcys is higher than that of L-Cys, suggesting an enhanced reactivity toward electrophiles. Similarly, the effective electrostatic negative charge localized on the attacking sulfur atom in homocysteine is more negative (−0.81e) than in L-cysteine (−0.77e). Altogether, these results suggest that Hcys is a better nucleophile (and thus, a worse leaving group) than L-Cys (Supplementary Fig. 5), qualitatively agreeing with the experimental results and the DFT free-energy calculations (Table 1).
Noteworthy, precise quantification of both thermodynamic and kinetic parameters defining the system would require taking into account the subtle yet important effects of the larger and complex protein environment, and also the non-trivial, catalytic effect that the pulling force has on the reaction kinetics. Further free-energy calculations at the QM/MM level with explicit solvent, hopefully coupled with a force perturbation (which goes beyond the scope of the current work), will help elucidate the finer parameters (for example, solvation, bond orientation) regarding the mechanistic dynamics of the process. In any case, our simple estimates regarding thermodynamic and kinetic considerations of the isolated reactants provide a good general qualitative description of the experimental results, describing a localized chemical reaction occurring in the core of a much complex protein environment.
The experimental approach predicts the reactivity of NAC
To further test if these considerations are sufficient predictors of disulfide reactivity and thus, of the final outcome of the oxidative folding reaction, we conducted similar nanomechanical experiments using N-acetylcysteine (NAC) as a nucleophile (Fig. 6a,b). NAC is a drug derivative of cysteine with an acetyl group attached to its nitrogen (Fig. 6a), which has been used in clinical practice for decades as a mucolytic agent and also employed in the treatment of numerous disorders including paracetamol intoxication and vascular and cardiac injury. The uniqueness in the action of NAC stems from its particular physicochemical properties, which render it an optimal reducing agent of protein disulfide bonds. Measurement of the pKa for NAC through our absorbance experiments yielded a value pKa=9.6 (Fig. 6c). Similarly, DFT calculations predicted that, from a thermodynamics perspective, the reaction whereby a free protein cysteine attacks a NAC–Cysprot mixed disulfide bond is energetically impaired (ΔG=+7 kcal mol−1, reaction 4, Table 1). By contrast, the NAC–Cysprot mixed disulfide can be attacked by free solution NAC molecules (ΔG=−7.7 kcal mol−1, reaction 5, Table 1). Moreover, HOMO and electrostatic calculations (Supplementary Fig. 5) highlight the high nucleophilic power of NAC with respect to L-cysteine. Hence, from the physicochemical viewpoint, NAC is closely related to Hcys. In effect, our single-molecule folding trajectories in the presence of NAC (Fig. 6b) certify that while the protein can fold into its reduced form (Fig. 6d), its ability to effectively reform the previously reduced disulfide bond is vanishingly small (showing an even smaller percentage than homocysteine, Fig. 6e). The presence of the NAC–protein mixed disulfide was further certified through MS analysis (Supplementary Fig. 6).

INTRODUCTION:
Modular proteins represent a natural strategy to achieve highly elastic materials with enhanced mechanical properties. For example, the giant protein titin is formed by a large number of stiff immunoglobulin (Ig) and Fibronectin-like (Fn) domains intercalated between non-structured, extensible sequences (PEVK, N2B) that are mechanically compliant. Combined, the distinct mechanical properties of both structurally diverse components regulate the large-scale passive elasticity of muscle under physiological conditions. At the local scale, modulation of the nanomechanics of a single protein is mainly achieved through four specific molecular mechanisms; first and foremost (i), forced unfolding converts the mechanically rigid native state into an elastic unfolded conformation devoid of mechanical stability. (ii) Secondly, a simple strategy to alter the mechanical properties of the protein's native state is through site-directed mutagenesis in well-defined positions within the force-bearing (‘mechanical clamp') structural motif. Alternatively, (iii) ligand binding can drastically increase the mechanical stability of a folded protein, or prevent an unfolded polypeptide from recovering its native mechanical stability by blocking successful refolding. Both strategies often result in an all-or-none switch between both extreme mechanical stabilities. (iv) A far less explored mechanism to modulate protein mechanics is achieved via post-translational modifications, through subtle yet crucial changes in chemical reactivity within the protein core. The most relevant protein modification with a mechanical impact is arguably the formation of disulfide bonds, which are crucial modulators of protein extensibility. Disulfide bonds establish a rigid, molecular shortcut that impairs the complete force-induced unfolding of a variety of proteins including titin, and the extracellular cell adhesion molecules (CAM) protein superfamily. In these cases, modulation of protein elasticity is generally dynamic and occurs under redox control; while oxidizing conditions guarantee the presence of the covalently rigid disulfide bond, reducing conditions induce its rupture, thereby triggering full protein unfolding under force. Hence, the ability of the protein to form a disulfide bond during its folding route, a process known as oxidative folding, emerges as a crucial functional determinant of protein mechanics.
In vivo, the formation of disulfide bonds occurs through two independent pathways. Within the ‘redox route', a cysteine thiol can be oxidized via one or two electrons to a higher oxidation state species. Most typically, the free thiol is first oxidized to sulfenic acid, which then condenses with a neighbour protein thiol to form a protective disulfide bond that prevents irreversible protein damage due to cysteine overoxidation. The second and most prevalent means of disulfide bond formation is catalysed by a superfamily of dedicated oxidoreductases—including thioredoxin, glutaredoxin, the bacterial Dsb and the eukaryotic protein disulfide isomerase enzymes—that share a common active site containing two highly conserved catalytic cysteines. Their mechanism of action employs a thiol-exchange nucleophilic reaction, creating a transient yet obligatory mixed-disulfide intermediate between a substrate cysteine and the N-terminal cysteine of the enzyme's active site. The determinant role of the mixed disulfide conformation to orchestrate oxidative folding has deserved great attention. While the static conformational picture has been accessed through a variety of protein structures, the dynamics of this crucial fleeting mixed disulfide intermediate has only now begun to be understood.
Inspired by the functioning of oxidoreductases enzymes, we now aim to acquire a deep understanding of the naturally employed chemical tactics to rationalize the molecular mechanisms underpinning other closely related protein S-modifications. We will use this ad hoc acquired knowledge to design new experimental strategies that rationally exploit the chemical properties of naturally occurring small molecules to modulate protein elasticity. A main advantage of this experimental approach is that it is not restricted to enzymatic activity, thus having the potential to be scaled up to large quantities, it has a predictive character and it offers exquisite control over the chemical selectivity of the small molecules as it avoids the inextricable conformational changes involved during protein-protein interactions that define enzymatic catalysis.
The most obvious candidates for the small chemical modulators are low-weight molecular thiols (LMW-SH), especially encompassing cysteine (Cys), cysteinylglycine (CysGly), homocysteine (Hcys) and glutathione (GSH). Present both intracellularly and also in the human plasma, these small thiols are often regarded as biomarkers for oxidative stress, and their presence as mixed-disulfide with proteins increases with age. While GSH reactivity has been the focus of extensive research, the reactivity of Cys and Hcys and their related protein post-translational modifications, namely S-cysteinylation and S-homocysteinylation, have comparatively received much less attention. In particular, high levels of Hcys have been associated to reduced muscle function and integrity. In fact, hyperhomocysteinemia is considered as an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and has been linked to pathological alterations in mechanically functional proteins such as the impaired fibrillin–fibronectin assembly. Despite important efforts, a direct molecular link between the presence of S-homocysteinylation and the pathological mechanical effect is not completely understood.
Here we use single-molecule force-clamp spectroscopy, supported by mass spectrometry (MS) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, to provide mechanistic insights into the direct link between the chemical reactivity of biologically relevant LMW thiols and their effect on mechanical protein folding. Our results demonstrate that the life-time of the ephemeral mixed disulfide intermediate structure is an essential modulator of the nanomechanics of cardiac titin, switching between two successfully refolded conformations with markedly different stiffness properties.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions S.G.-M. conceived research. A.E.M.B. and S.G.-M. designed experiments. A.E.M.B. conducted single-molecule mechanical experiments and analysed data. M.M. performed absorbance experiments and small compound mass spectrometry experiments. S.L. performed protein-based mass spectrometry experiments and analysed data.; G.S. performed and analysed DFT calculations. A.E.M.B. and S.G.-M. wrote the paper. All authors contributed in revising and editing the manuscript.