PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Pluripotent stem cell
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Cntnap2; Gaba/glutamate. akt/mtor; Autism; Brain organoids

ABSTRACT:
We developed a human cerebral organoid model derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) with targeted genome editing to abolish protein expression of the Contactin Associated Protein-like 2 (CNTNAP2) autism spectrum disorder (ASD) risk gene, mimicking loss-of-function mutations seen in patients. CNTNAP2-/- cerebral organoids displayed accelerated cell cycle, ventricular zone disorganisation and increased cortical folding. Proteomic analysis revealed disruptions in glutamatergic/GABAergic synaptic pathways and neurodevelopment, highlighting increased protein expression of corticogenesis and neurodevelopment-related genes such as Forkhead box protein G1 (FOXG1) and Paired box 6 (PAX6). Transcriptomic analysis revealed differentially expressed genes (DEG) belonging to inhibitory neuron-related gene networks. Interestingly, there was a weak correlation between the transcriptomic and proteomic data, suggesting nuanced translational control mechanisms. Along these lines we find upregulated Protein Kinase B (Akt)/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signalling in CNTNAP2-/- organoids. Spatial transcriptomics analysis of CNTNAP2-/- ventricular zones demonstrated pervasive changes in gene expression, particularly in PAX6- cells, implicating upregulation of cell cycle regulation pathways, synaptic and glutamatergic/GABAergic pathways. We noted a significant overlap of all omics datasets with idiopathic ASD (macrocephaly) iPSC-derived telencephalic organoids DEG, where FOXG1 was upregulated, along with aberrant expression of Glutamate decarboxylase 1 (GAD1) and T-Box Brain Transcription Factor 1 (TBR1), suggesting altered GABAergic/glutamatergic neuron development. These findings potentially highlight a shared mechanism in the early cortical development of various forms of ASD, further elucidate the role of CNTNAP2 in ASD pathophysiology and cortical development and pave the way for targeted therapies using cerebral organoids as preclinical models.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
GABA/Glutamate neuron differentiation imbalance and increased AKT/mTOR signalling in CNTNAP2-/- cerebral organoids

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
D30 organoids were transferred from culture plates, briefly washed in ice-cold DPBS (XXX), depleted from matrigel using the cell recovery solution (Corning Cat. No. 354253), supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors, and subsequently lysed in a lysis buffer consisting of 4% SDS, 0.1M DTT, 0.1M Tris pH 7.4. For each biological replicate, 3-4 organoids were pooled and lysed together. The samples were sonicated (Sonifier XXX), heated for 3 min at 95oC, followed by a centrifugation step for 15 min at 17000 x g. The lysed samples were processed according to the Sp3 protocol(23) including an alkylation step in 200 mM iodoacetamide (Acros Organics). 20 ug of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag carboxylate-modified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. Protein clean-up was performed on a magnetic rack. The beads were washed two times with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical). Proteins captured on beads were digested overnight at 37oC under vigorous shaking (1200 rpm, Eppendorf Thermomixer) supplemented with 0.5 µg Trypsin/LysC (MS grade, Promega) prepared in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Next day, the supernatants were collected, and the peptides were purified using a modified Sp3 clean up protocol and finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water), sonicated and the peptide concentration was determined through absorbance at 280 nm measurement using a Nanodrop instrument. LC-MS/MS. Samples were processed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC online with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptide samples were directly injected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75 µm ID) using an 90 minutes long run, starting with a gradient  of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 28% Buffer B for 63 min, followed by an increase to 36% in 7 min and a second increase to 95% in 0.5min, and, then kept constant for equilibration at 7% Buffer B for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and max IT of 60ms followed by data independent analysis using 8 Th windows (39 loop counts) with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and a normalised collision energy (NCE) of 26. Each biological sample was analysed in three technical replicates.

DATA PROCESSING:
Orbitrap raw data was analysed in DIA-NN 1.8 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks)(24) through searching against the reviewed Human Uniprot database containing 27246 proteins  (retrieved 4/2021) in the library free  mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyse them. DIA-NN default settings have been used with oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. N-terminal methionine excision was also enabled. The match between runs (MBR) feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.