PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Skin
diseases: Melanoma
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: L-proline residue; residues isobaric at 128.058578 Da; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation; Acetyl
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Melanoma; Cerebral melanoma metastases; Drug resistance; Map kinase inhibitor; Proteomics; Braf mutation

ABSTRACT:
Background MAP kinase inhibitor (MAPKi) therapy for BRAF mutated melanoma is characterized by high response rates but also development of drug resistance within a median progression-free survival (PFS) of 9 to 12 months. Understanding mechanisms of resistance and identifying effective therapeutic alternatives is one of the most important scientific challenges in melanoma. Using proteomics, we want to specifically gain insight into the pathophysiological process of cerebral metastases. Methods Cerebral metastases from melanoma patients were prepared for MS analysis by tryptic digestion. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a QExactive HF hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nanospray ion source, coupled with a nano HPLC system.  Results In this pilot study, we were able to identify 5,977 proteins by LC-MS analysis. Samples were classified into good and poor responders based on PFS. By evaluating these proteomic profiles according to gene ontology (GO) terms, KEGG pathways and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), we could characterize differences between the two distinct groups. We further detected an EMT signature, V-type proton ATPases, calcium ion binding proteins, eukaryotic translation initiation factors, cell adhesion proteins and several transporter and exchanger proteins to be significantly up-regulated in poor responding patients, whereas good responders showed an immune-activation and involvement of extracellular matrix structural constituents, among other features. Subsequently we identified the most class-discriminating proteins based on nearest shrunken centroids. Conclusions Using proteomics helped to identify already known extra-cerebral resistance mechanisms in the cerebral metastases and further discovered possible brain specific mechanisms of drug efflux, which might serve as interesting targets, especially for treatment of these types of metastases or as predictive marker.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomics-based insights into mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor resistance of cerebral melanoma metastases

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
All Experiments were carried out according to the Declaration of Helsinki principles after approval by the ethics committee (Swissethics, Kantonale Ethikkommission Zurich, vote number 2014-0425). Cerebral melanoma metastases (n = 18) originating from surgical excisions and autopsy specimens were selected based on the clinical information and patients’ different progression-free survival (PFS) after MAPKi treatment. For subsequent data analysis patients with a PFS ≥ 8 months were classified as a good responder (n = 5), whereas patients with a PFS ≤ 3 months were classified as a poor responder (n = 13).  MS sample preparation Of each cryopreserved tissue sample, 2¬–5 mg was homogenized in 100 μl sample buffer using ultrasound. For protein denaturation urea was added to the lysates. Protein concentrations were determined according to Bradford et al. [23]. For proteomics analyses we prepared in-solution digests as previously described [24]. Briefly, 20 µg of each lysate was concentrated onto a 10 kDa MWCO filter (Pall Austria Filter GmbH, Vienna, Austria) and prewashed with LC-MS grade water (Merck Chemicals and Life Science GesmbH, Vienna, Austria). Proteins were then reduced with dithiothreitol (5 mg/ml dissolved in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (10 mg/ml in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer). After centrifugation, proteins on top of the filters were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, followed by digestion with trypsin and Lys-C for 18 hours (Trypsin/Lys-C Mix Mass Spec Grade, 0.1 µg/µl; Promega). After digestion, peptides were collected with 0.5 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and we performed sample clean-up with C-18 spin columns (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, eluted peptide samples were acidified to a final concentration of 1 % TFA and loaded onto prewashed and equilibrated spin columns. After a washing step with 5 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.5 % TFA, peptides were eluted twice with 50 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA and once with 80 % ACN and 0.1 % TFA. Samples were finally dried and stored at –20°C until further MS analyses were performed.   LC-MS/MS analysis As described previously [24,25], dried samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30 % formic acid (FA) containing 10 fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides (allowing us to monitor the quality of the chromatographic separation) and diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (98 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.1 % FA). Of this solution 2.5 µl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first concentrated on a 2 cm x 75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, separation of the peptides was achieved by eluting them from the pre-column to a 50 cm x 75 µm Pepap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min and using a gradient of 8 % to 40 % mobile phase B (80 % ACN, 20 % H2O, 0.1 % FA), over 190 minutes for the analysis of samples. The mass spectrometric analysis was performed on a QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to the nano HPLC system. For detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400–1,400 at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z = 200). MS/MS scans were performed choosing a top 12 method; HCD fragmentation was applied at 27 % normalized collision energy and analysis in the orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z = 200).

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification and qualitative data analysis. Protein identification was achieved searching against the SwissProt Database (version 11/2015 with 20 193 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

METHODS:
Methods
All experiments were carried out according to the Declaration of Helsinki principles after approval by the ethics committee (Swissethics, Kantonale Ethikkommission Zurich, vote number 2014-0425). Cerebral melanoma metastases (n = 25) originating from surgical excisions and autopsy specimens were selected based on the clinical information and patients’ different progression-free survival (PFS) after MAPKi treatment. For subsequent data analysis patients with a PFS ≥ 6 months were classified as a good responder (n = 9) and showed low progression, whereas patients with a PFS ≤ 3 months were classified as a poor responder (n = 16) and showed fast progression in their disease. Further validation steps included melanoma cells derived from cerebral metastases (n = 5) and FFPE (formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded) cerebral melanoma metastases tissue samples (n = 23), corresponding to patients from the initial metastases cohort. A clinical table with age, gender, treatment, response distribution, PFS, mutational status, all number of samples, IC50 of the cell systems and the applied methods can be found as Additional file 2: Table S1.
LC–MS sample preparation
2–5 mg of each cryopreserved tissue sample and cell pellets from confluent 75 cm2 tissue culture flasks were homogenized in 100 μl sample buffer (7.5 M Urea, 1.5 M Thiourea, 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT), 4% 3-[(3-Cholamidopropyl)dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 0.05% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) using ultrasound. Protein concentrations were determined according to Bradford et al.. For proteome analysis we prepared in-solution digests using a variation of the FASP protocol, as previously described. Of each lysate 20 µg protein was concentrated onto a 10 kDa MWCO filter (molecular weight cut-off filter; Pall Nanosep Centrifugal Devices with Omega Membrane, #OD010), which was prewashed with LC–MS grade water (Merck Chemicals and Life Science GesmbH, Vienna, Austria), by centrifugation at 14,000×g for 15 min to remove all particles smaller than 10 kDa. Samples containing proteins were then reduced with 200 µl dithiothreitol (DTT) solution (5 mg/ml dissolved in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8) and incubated at 56 °C for 30 min. After centrifugation at 14,000×g for 10 min, a washing step with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer was performed. For alkylation 200 µl iodoacetamide (IAA) solution (10 mg/ml in 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer) was added and incubated at 30 °C for 30 min in the dark. After centrifugation at 14,000×g for 10 min, proteins on top of the filters were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Afterwards, filters were placed in a new Eppendorf tube, and 100 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer as well as 10 µl of protease solution (Promega Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade, #V5073, 0.1 µg/µl) were added, and incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. After digestion, peptide samples were cleaned up with C-18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific Pierce C18 spin columns, #89870). Peptides were collected with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA. C-18 columns were prewashed two times with 500 µl acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 200 µl of 5% ACN and 0.5% TFA by centrifugation at 1500×g for 1 min. Eluted and acidified peptide samples were loaded onto prewashed and equilibrated spin columns. After centrifugation at 1500×g for 1 min, the flow-through was reloaded on the column to maximize peptide binding and again centrifuged. After a washing step with 5% ACN and 0.5% TFA, peptides were eluted twice with 40 µl 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA and once with 40 µl 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA into a new Eppendorf tube. Digested peptide samples were finally dried at 40 °C using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (miVac GeneVac Duo Concentrator) and stored at − 20 °C until further MS analyses were performed.
LC–MS/MS shotgun analysis
As described previously, dried samples were reconstituted in 5 µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10 fmol each of 4 synthetic standard peptides (allowing us to monitor the quality of the chromatographic separation) and diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). Of this solution 2.5 µl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first concentrated on a 2 cm × 75 µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 10 µl/min using mobile phase A. Afterwards, separation of the peptides was achieved by eluting them from the pre-column to a 50 cm × 75 µm Pepap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min and using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA), over 190 min for the analysis of samples. The mass spectrometric analysis, with a technical replicate for each of the 18 samples, was performed on a QExactive HF orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to the nano HPLC system. For detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400–1400 at a resolution of 60,000 (at m/z = 200). MS/MS scans were performed choosing a top 12 method; HCD fragmentation was applied at 27% normalized collision energy and analysis in the orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000 (at m/z = 200).
LC–MS shotgun data analysis
Protein inference as well as label-free quantitative (LFQ) data analysis was performed using the open source software MaxQuant 1.3.0.5 including the Andromeda search engine and the Perseus statistical analysis package, a commonly used workflow for processing and statistical assessment of shotgun proteomics data. Protein inference was achieved searching against homo sapiens in the SwissProt Database (version 01/2013 with 20,264 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 5 ppm for MS spectra and 20 ppm for MS/MS spectra as well as a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. In addition, carbamidomethylation on cysteins was included as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation was included as variable modifications. Furthermore, search criteria included a minimum of two peptide identifications per protein, at least one of them unique, and the FDR calculation based on q-values performed for both, peptide identification as well as protein inference, less than 0.01. Prior to statistical analysis, proteins were filtered for reversed sequences, contaminants and a minimum of three independent identifications per protein. The mass spectrometry-based proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD007592 and https://doi.org/10.6019/pxd007592. Label-free quantification resulted in LFQ values for each individual protein and was used for quantitative assessment of protein regulation. For all samples the same initial protein amount of 20 µg was used and served for normalization. Using the Perseus statistical analysis package, differences of LFQ values were calculated. By applying a two-sided t test with p < 0.05 and an FDR-based permutation correction, significantly up- and down-regulated proteins with a minimum of a twofold abundance difference (log2 fold change) were determined. All proteins meeting these criteria were considered in the present study. Subsequent annotation enrichment analysis was performed based on gene ontology terms biological process, cellular component and molecular function using DAVID (DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways according to Geiger et al. were visualized using Pathview package of R. The expression of proteins was also analyzed for significantly enriched protein sets using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA). Process using the GSEA software with the parameters set to ranking according to log fold change, minimum gene set size 15, maximum gene set size 500. To identify a potential biomarker profile, a classifier based on nearest shrunken centroids was constructed using ClaNC and R. Priors were chosen according to the number of samples. The performance of the classifier was tested by leaving-one-out cross validation.
Targeted LC–MS analysis
MRM method was developed based on shotgun data and using Skyline software (v.4.1), as described recently. Targeted MRM analysis was conducted on an Agilent 6490 triple quadrupole mass spectrometer coupled with a nano-Chip-LC Agilent Infinity Series HPLC1290 system. Peptides were separated by applying 19 min gradient from 8 to 30% acetonitrile. The statistical analysis of MRM data was performed with MSstats (v.2.3.5).
Cell culture
Melanoma cell cultures were established from surplus cerebral melanoma metastases after having obtained written, informed consent approved by the local IRB (EK647 and EK800). Cells were grown in RPMI (Sigma RPMI-1640, #R0883) supplemented with 5 mM l-glutamine (gibco l-glutamine, #25030), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Sigma sodium pyruvate, #S8636) and 10% FBS (PAN biotech FBS Premium heat inactivated, #P30-1902, Aidenbach, Germany). Culture medium was changed every 2–3 days to ensure optimum conditions of growth, using aseptic techniques and a laminar flow bench. Cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination (Invivogen PlasmoTest Mycoplasma Detection Kit, #rep-pt) prior to their use for the described techniques.
Viability assay
Melanoma cells were seeded into 96-well plates in a density of 1.5 × 103 cells per well. After 24 h cells were treated with Raf inhibitors Encorafenib (Selleckchem LGX818, #S7108) or Vemurafenib (Selleckchem PLX4032, RG7204, #S1267) and MEK inhibitor Binimetinib (Selleckchem MEK162, ARRY-162, ARRY-438162, #S7007) in different concentrations and incubated for 72 h. Proliferation and viability of the cells was determined with a standard colorimetric assay using 7-hydroxy-3H-phenoxazin-3-one-10-oxide sodium salt (Sigma Resazurin sodium salt, #R7017), where the bioreduction of the dye was measured at 595 nm. IC50 values were determined by nonlinear regression using the dose–response equations built into GraphPad Prism software version 5 (GraphPad Software Inc., USA).
Western blot
Patient derived melanoma cells were washed twice with cold PBS (gibco PBS, pH 7.4 (1X) without calcium or magnesium, #10010) and lysed with RIPA cell lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA 1% Triton-X 100, 1 mM Na3VO4, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche cOmplete ULTRA Tablets, Mini, EASYpack, #05 892 970 001), 1X phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche PhosSTOP EASYpack, #05 906 837 001)). Total protein content was quantified using a colorimetric assay (Bio-Rad DC Protein Assay, #5000112) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as standard. SDS–polyacrylamide gels were hand casted with 8% separating gel and for each sample 5 µg of total protein was loaded and separated by electrophoresis for 150 min by applying 100 V (using Bio-Rad Mini-Protean Tetra Cell). Using a semi-dry transfer unit (Hoefer TE70X semi-dry blotter) proteins were blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Bio-Rad Nitrocellulose membrane 0.45 µm, #162-0115) for 90 min at 70 mA. After a blocking step for 1 h at room temperature with 5% milk (Bio-Rad nonfat dry milk Blotting-Grade Blocker, #1706404) in TBS-T under agitation, the primary antibody (Cell Signaling E-Cadherin (24E10) Rabbit mAb, #3195; Cell Signaling N-Cadherin (D4R1H) XP Rabbit mAb, #13116) diluted 1:1000 in TBS-T was incubated overnight at 4 °C. After a washing step, the secondary antibody (Amersham ECL Peroxidase labelled anti-rabbit antibody, #NA934) was diluted 1:2000 in 5% milk in TBS-T and incubated under agitation for 1 h at room temperature. After a washing step bound antibodies were detected with enhanced chemiluminescence horseradish peroxidase (Thermo Fisher Scientific SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent Substrate, #34080) in the dark room.
Immunohistochemical staining
Cerebral melanoma metastases tissue used for immunohistochemistry was fixed in 4% formaldehyde solution and embedded in paraffin. The 4 µm sections were then deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated. Epitope retrieval was performed in antibody specific buffers (Agilent Dako Target Retrieval Solution, pH9). Staining was performed on an immunohistochemistry stainer (Agilent Dako Autostainer Link 48) using a labeled streptavidin–biotin method visualized by AEC as chromogen (Agilent Dako REAL Detection System, Peroxidase/AEC, Rabbit/Mouse, #K5003). The antibodies used were: CD3 (Dako Monoclonal Mouse Anti-Human CD3 Clone F7.2.38, #M7254; 1:50); CD4 (Dako Monoclonal Mouse Anti-Human CD4 Clone 4B12, #M7310; 1:80); CD8 (Biocare Medical CD8 [C8/144B], #ACI3160A; 1:300). All slides were counterstained with hematoxylin (Agilent Dako REAL Hematoxylin, #S2020).
Immunocytochemical staining
Melanoma cell lines from cerebral metastases were taken out of cell culture and fixated with 7.5% formaldehyde solution. After two washing steps with PBS cells were concentrated onto glass slides using a cytospin centrifuge. Immunocytochemical staining was performed using a biotin-free detection system with horseradish peroxidase polymer and AEC chromogen (Thermo Fisher Scientific Lab Vision UltraVision LP Detection System, #TL-015-HA). The antibodies used (Cell Signaling E-Cadherin (24E10) Rabbit mAb, #3195; Cell Signaling N-Cadherin (D4R1H) XP Rabbit mAb, #13116) were diluted 1:1000 in 1% BSA in PBS and incubated overnight at 4 °C. After chromogenic development all slides were counterstained with hematoxylin (Merck Papanicolaou’s solution 1a Harris’ hematoxylin, #109253).
TGFβ treatment, RNA extraction and microarray data analysis
The BRAFV600E mutated primary human melanoma cell line M000921 has been established from surplus material from cutaneous melanoma metastases. This cell line has been previously characterized as a proliferative-phenotype melanoma culture (by means of melanoma phenotype-switching model) and shared with multiple studies and international laboratories. Expression data from a Affymetrix HG-U133 plus 2.0 oligonucleotide microarray is deposited on GEO (GSM700745). Written informed consent was approved by the local IRB (EK647 and EK800). Clinical diagnosis was confirmed by histology and immunohistochemistry. Melanoma cell culture was grown in RPMI (Sigma RPMI-1640, #R0883) including 5 mM l-glutamine (gibco l-glutamine, #25030), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Sigma sodium pyruvate, #S8636) and 10% FBS (PAN biotech FBS Premium heat inactivated, #P30-1902, Aidenbach, Germany). M000921 melanoma cells were kept in medium containing 5 ng/ml human recombinant TGFβ (R&D Systems, #240-B) for a period of 12 days. Medium containing fresh TGFβ protein was changed every 3 days. RNA was extracted from both untreated and TGFβ treated cell culture using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, USA) following manufacturer’s protocol. RNA labelling, hybridization to microarray (HG-U133 plus 2.0, Affymetrix) and data were statistically analyzed as described previously.
TCGA data
Gene expression and clinical information were derived from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, cutaneous melanoma dataset (n = 456)). Briefly, patients were segregated according to the upper and lower quartile of gene expression and significant differences in survival rates are evaluated with the log-rank statistical test (p value < 0.05). The survival curves were visualized by Kaplan–meier plots.

RESULTS:
Results
Proteome profiling of cerebral melanoma metastases
In this study we generated proteome profiling data out of cerebral melanoma metastases by shotgun proteomics. As a result, a total of 5977 proteins were detected in the tissue samples, assembled from 49,501 distinct peptides, were identified and assessed using a label-free quantification approach. Like previously described, the shotgun proteomic strategy has a unique potential to discover novel functional aspects of proteins and to determine relative abundance levels of proteins identified in different samples. For our comparison we assigned the samples to two groups based on patients’ PFS. For further evaluation, all proteins with p < 0.05 and fold change differences  2.0 (student t-test difference) were taken into consideration. This corresponded to 1636 proteins more abundant in the poor responder group (patients with PFS  3 months) and 271 proteins in the good responder group (patients with PFS  6 months).
Functional discrimination of the subgroups
For a functional discrimination between good and poor responder we used gene ontology (GO) annotations (Fig. 1). In order to gain a better understanding on the molecular interaction and connection of the individual candidates we mapped differentially regulated proteins to functional KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways (Fig. 2). Furthermore, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was applied and showed very similar results (see Additional file 3: Fig. S2 for enriched pathways and Additional file 4: Table S2 for GSEA statistics). By both methods, we could show that cell adhesion molecules, calcium signaling pathway and MAPK signaling pathway proteins were overrepresented in poor responders, while complement and coagulation cascade proteins were overrepresented in good responders.  
We identified significant differentially expressed protein groups between the good (with higher PFS) and poor (with lower PFS), shown in the volcano plot (Fig. 3). 
Identification of proteins involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, V-type proton ATPases, calcium ion binding proteins, eukaryotic translation initiation factors, proteins involved in cell adhesion, neuronal proteins, transporter and exchanger proteins were significantly up-regulated in the poor responder group compared to the good responder group. Samples from patients who responded poorly to MAPKi treatment also showed a significant higher expression of Cadherin-2 (CDH2), also known as N-Cadherin.
Whereas patients who responded well to MAPKi showed a strong immunogenic signature, as well as proteins associated with the extracellular matrix (ECM), a subgroup of cell adhesion proteins, which are involved in immunological responses and apolipoproteins were found to be elevated amongst this subgroup. Individual proteins can be found in Tables 1 and 2.  
Identification of discriminative proteins
To generalize our proteomic findings and enable the translation of the results towards clinical application, we constructed a classifier based on nearest shrunken centroids to identify a potential biomarker profile. We were able to identify 9 proteins that are needed to discriminate between good and poor responders shown in Table 3 and illustrated in Fig. 4.  
EMT feature as a major classifier between good and poor prognosis validated in primary melanoma cell cultures
With the LC–MS shotgun approach we could show that samples from patients who responded poorly to MAPKi treatment showed a significantly higher expression of Cadherin-2 (CDH2), also known as N-Cadherin. For independent validation, we performed immunocytochemistry on primary melanoma cell cultures derived from cerebral melanoma metastases and Western blot on the lysates of these cells with E- and N-cadherin antibodies. The melanoma cells are classified as either sensitive (n = 3) or resistant (n = 2) based on the IC50 values for the BRAF/MEK inhibitors as determined by a viability assay. By these experiments we could show that the sensitive cells are E-cadherin positive, whereas the resistant cells were N-cadherin positive. This data strongly suggests EMT as a major classifier between good and poor prognosis (Fig. 5). 
Validation of discriminative signature by CPL/MUW proteome database
To further assess the discriminative signature (Table 3, Fig. 4) on protein level we tested the candidates using CPL/MUW proteome database, including 255 cell cultures, cell states and tissue, leading to a high protein similarity (57.14%) to the resistant melanoma cell line TMFI. In addition, we found one protein of our signature exclusively in TMFI, supporting our observation that this set of proteins is apparently characteristic for resistance (Additional file 5: Fig. S3).
Validation and quantification of discriminative proteins by a targeted LC–MS analysis
Furthermore, we validated and quantified the discriminative protein signature (Table 3, Fig. 4) with a targeted MS approach. We were able to validate our previous findings by the shotgun MS screen demonstrating significant protein expression between the groups of good and poor responding patients (Fig. 6). 
EMT-like signature induced by TGFβ can be correlated to the signature of poor responder
TGFβ-induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal-like transition (EMT-like) has been described in melanoma recently and is characterized by melanoma cells switching from a proliferative phenotype to an invasive phenotype which is accompanied by induced drug-resistance to BRAF and MEK inhibitor treatment. Here we have correlated genes upregulated by TGFβ (EMT genes) to proteins up-regulated in brain metastasis of melanoma patients treated with BRAF and MEK inhibitors (see Fig. 7 for functional annotation categories (DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases) and Additional file 6: Table 3 for full list of overlapping data between TGFβ induced signature in microarray data and shotgun proteomics data in cerebral melanoma metastases). Correlation of factors regulated in TGFβ induced EMT with the proteome signature of the patients that showed poor response was significant. 
Correlation of the resistance signature to patient survival
To demonstrate clinical relevance of the protein signature we researched the melanoma dataset (n = 456) of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and were able to show that three candidates, DDB1- and CUL4-associated factor 7, Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2 Q1 and Anamorsin, out of the 9 discriminative proteins correlate with patients’ survival (Fig. 8). 
Increased immune cell presence in the cerebral metastases of good responder
The proteome signature of good responders was defined also by the up-regulation of immunogenic markers which we confirmed by immunohistochemical staining on the different T cell populations (CD3, CD4, CD8) on the FFPE cohort of clinical samples. These samples were classified as either good responder (n = 7) or poor responder (n = 15) based on PFS. The stained slides were evaluated by a dermatopathologist. Here we were able to demonstrate that poor response is characterized by less immune cell infiltrate in melanoma brain metastases, confirming our observation of higher immunological potential in the good responder (Fig. 9). 

INTRODUCTION:
Background
The incidence of melanoma is increasing rapidly worldwide, including countries with historically low rates. This increase is occurring at a faster rate than with any other neoplasm. Up to one-fifth of melanoma patients develop metastatic disease, which has mainly been treated by chemotherapy, achieving response rates between 10 and 30%. After cancers of the lung and breast, melanoma is the third most common cause of central nervous system (CNS) metastases. In patients with newly diagnosed stage IV disease, brain metastases are present in 20% of cases and among patients with documented brain involvement, these lesions contribute to death in up to 95%. In 40–60% of all melanoma patients, mutational activation of BRAF V600E can be found, resulting in constitutive activation of the serine-threonine protein kinase BRAF and the Ras-RAF-MEK-ERK signaling pathway, also known as mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway. Until 2011, standard treatment for patients with inoperable metastatic melanoma was dacarbazine (DTIC). In August 2011, the US Agency of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Vemurafenib, a BRAF inhibitor (BRAFi), for the treatment of metastatic or unresectable melanoma with BRAF V600E mutation. Brain metastases pose special challenges because of the poor associated prognosis. They are a major cause of mortality in patients with advanced melanoma. However, relatively little was known about the intracranial effectiveness of selective inhibitors because patients with brain metastases have historically been excluded from clinical trials. Recently a few studies investigated BRAFi treatment for melanoma patients with brain metastasis. An open-label pilot study assessed Vemurafenib therapy in patients with BRAF V600 mutation positive metastatic melanoma with non-resectable, previously treated brain metastases and concluded that Vemurafenib can safely be used for the therapy of advanced symptomatic melanoma with metastasis to the brain and can result in meaningful tumor regression. In more than 50% of these cases clinical response, up to a complete remission, were achieved by Vemurafenib. Systemic therapy revolutionized melanoma treatment but unfortunately high initial responses are followed by acquired drug resistance after a median time of only 6–8 months. About 15% of the patients treated with BRAFi do not achieve tumor regression, because of intrinsic (primary) mechanisms of resistance and most patients who respond to therapy ultimately develop mechanisms of acquired (secondary) resistance, leading to progressive disease. Initial success was made by BRAFi therapy, but due to the reactivation of the MAPK signaling pathway, patients showed resistance to therapy. Therefore a combination therapy of BRAF and MEK inhibitors (MEKi) was implemented and improved the effectiveness of targeted therapy even further by improving median PFS. Unfortunately, resistance to therapy is still challenging and especially the high mortality of brain metastases poses a huge ongoing clinical problem. It is questionable whether there are brain specific efflux transporters contributing to the resistance of intracranial metastases and where differences or similarities between visceral and cerebral metastases can be found. The phenotype-switching model was first described in melanoma by Hoek et al. and characterizes two transcriptional distinct melanoma cell populations, a proliferative and an invasive type. Melanoma cells are able to switch back and forth between these two phenotypes and therefore explain the heterogeneous nature of melanoma cells. It accounts for disease progression and tumor heterogeneity, as well as aspects of resistance. Proliferative melanoma cells have been shown to be more responsive to MAPK pathway inhibition than invasive phenotype cells, independently of their mutation status. On the other hand, proliferative melanoma cells have shown to change their phenotype from proliferative to invasive state in response to long-term treatment with targeted therapy (BRAFi and MEKi), which is associated with drug resistance. The major role in phenotype switching and the transition from a proliferative to an invasive cell type and ultimately leading to metastasis is played by EMT-like mechanisms. Identifying critical switches in EMT processes and finding a way to block these, might serve as a strategy to prevent metastasis and to decrease therapeutic resistance. Especially, the down-regulation of E-cadherin, balanced by the increased expression of mesenchymal neural cadherin (N-cadherin), this, so called cadherin switch, alters cell adhesion and is considered to be a fundamental event in EMT, leading to a loss of cell–cell contact, increased invasive properties and typical morphological changes.
In this study we showed, by analyzing brain tissue samples of patients with low and high PFS in response to MAPKi treatment, distinct differences between the two groups, using proteome profiling by shotgun MS. We analyzed the data according to gene ontology (GO) terms, KEGG pathways and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). We were further able to identify an EMT mechanism (up-regulation of N-cadherin), V-type proton ATPases, calcium ion binding proteins, eukaryotic translation initiation factors, cell adhesion proteins, several transporter and exchanger proteins in poor responding patients, whereas good responders showed an immune activation and involvement of extracellular matrix structural constituents, among other features. Based on nearest shrunken centroids we furthermore detected the most discriminating proteins between those two groups. We validated the EMT like signature using primary melanoma cells derived from cerebral metastases with different response based on the IC50 to BRAF and MEK inhibitors. To validate the discriminative signature we used the CPL/MUW proteome database. By a subsequent targeted approach, we performed a quantification and validation step of this discriminative signature. Functional analysis of the EMT signature was performed by inducing EMT in a primary melanoma cell culture. As a final step we validated our findings clinically by correlating our protein signature with survival over TCGA analysis and immunohistochemical staining (for study design see Additional file 1: Fig. S1).