PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Spleen; Skeletal muscle; Urinary bladder; Liver; Lung; Kidney; Brain; Heart; Intestine
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X; LTQ Orbitrap XL
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Protein expression levels; Tissue specificity; Integral membrane proteome; Ca2+ homeostasis; Mouse brain

ABSTRACT:
LC-MS/MS analysis with label-free quantification was used to determine the expression levels of ion transporters, particularly those involved in Ca2+ homeostasis

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Integral membrane proteome of adult mouse brain and other organs

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Membranes were prepared from snap-frozen tissues isolated from adult mice as described in [Schwenk, J. et al., Neuron 84, 41-54 (2014)]. 1 mg of each membrane preparation was then extracted with 1 ml 100 mM Na2CO3 (pH 11). After ultracentrifugation, the pellets containing the integral membrane proteins were solubilized with 100 µl ComplexioLyte91 (CL-91, Logopharm GmbH, Germany). Samples were briefly run on SDS-PAGE gels and silver-stained. Gel lane sections were then excised and subjected to standard tryptic in-gel digestion (Pandey, A., Andersen, J.S., and Mann, M. (2000). Sci STKE 2000, pl1.). Extracted and dried peptides were then dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a precolumn (C18 PepMap100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm; particle size 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, Germany) using a split-free UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Bound peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient (eluent A: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid; eluent B: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile): 5 min 3% B, 120 min from 3% B to 30% B, 20 min from 30% B to 50% B, 10 min from 50% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 15 min 3% B (flow rate 300 nl/min). Eluted peptides were separated in a PicoTip™ emitter (75 µm i.d.) manually packed 23.5 cm with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (C18; particle size 3 µm; Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany) and electrosprayed (2.3 kV; transfer capillary temperature 300 °C; funnel RF level 45.0) into a LTQ Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Instrument settings have been described in [Schwenk, J. et al., Neuron 84, 41-54 (2014)].

DATA PROCESSING:
Peak lists were extracted from fragment ion spectra using the ‘‘msconvert.exe’’ tool (part of ProteoWizard; http:// proteowizard.sourceforge.net/; v3.0.11098; Mascot generic format with filter options ‘‘peakPicking true 1-’’ and ‘‘threshold count 500 most-intense’’) and the precursor m/z values were shifted by the median m/z offset of all peptides assigned to proteins in a preliminary database search with 50 ppm peptide mass tolerance. Corrected peak lists were searched with Mascot 2.6.2 (Matrix Science, UK) against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (mouse, rat and human entries). Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), Oxidation (M), Phospho (S, T, Y), and Propionamide (C) were chosen as variable modifications, peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set to ± 5 ppm and ± 20 mmu, respectively. One missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. The expect value cut-off for peptide assignment was set to 0.5. Related identified proteins (subset or species homologs) were grouped using the name of the predominant member.

METHODS:
Methods
Ethical Information
Ethical approval was provided by Regierungspräsidium Freiburg (Germany).
Cell culture and transfection
CHO cells (in wildtype form) and CHO cells stably expressing Cav2.2 channels (Cav2.2α1; Cavβ1, α2δ1 subunits) were transiently transfected with cDNAs having the following GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank) accession numbers: Q08460 (BKCa), NM_001036684.3 (PMCA2), NM_009145.2 (Neuroplastin), NM_078619.1 (NCX2). The fusion proteins of PMCA2 or NCX2 with green fluorescent protein as well as Neuroplastin with red fluorescence protein were prepared and verified by sequencing. Cells were incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 and measured 2 to 4 days after transfection. Lck-GCamp6s (addgene #52924) was subcloned into the eukaryotic expression vector pN1-CMV, verified by sequencing and used for transfection using the standard lipofectamine 2000 protocol; recordings were done 30–36 h after transfection.
Electrophysiology
Whole-cell patch clamp recordings were performed at room temperature using a HEKA EPC 10 amplifier. Currents were low-pass-filtered at 3–10 kHz and sampled at 20 kHz. Leak currents were subtracted with a P/4 protocol at a holding potential of −90 mV. Serial resistance was 50–70% compensated using the internal compensation circuitry. The standard extracellular solution contained (in mM): KCl 5.8; NaCl 144; MgCl2 0.9; CaCl2 1.3; NaH2PO4 0.7; D-Glucose 5.6, and HEPES 10 (pH 7.4). Recording pipettes pulled from quartz glass had resistances of 2–3.5 MΩ when filled with internal solution.
For recordings of BKCa-currents in unmodified CHO cells intracellular solution contained (in mM): KCl 139.5, MgCl2 3.5, DiBrBAPTA 2, HEPES 5, Na2ATP 2.5, Na3GTP 0.1 (pH 7.3); CaCl2 was added to obtain the following free [Ca2+]pip: 100 nM, 1 μM, 10 μM and 50 μM.
WEBMAXC STANDARD [https://somapp.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/pharmacology/ /bers/maxchelator/webmaxc/webmaxcS.htm] was used for calculation of the appropriate amount of calcium to be added to the internal solution; final free Ca2+ concentrations were checked with a Ca2+-sensitive electrode (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, USA). Steady-state activation of BKCa channels at distinct [Ca2+]i was determined using test pulses ranging from −80 to +200 mV (in 10 mV increments), followed by a repolarization step to 0 or −50 mV. Conductance–voltage relations were determined from tail current amplitudes measured 0.5 ms after repolarization to the fixed membrane potential and normalized to maximum. Data were fitted with a Boltzmann function g/gmax = gmax/(1+exp((Vh-Vm)/k)), where Vh is voltage required for half maximal activation and k is the slope factor.
BKCa-currents in CHO cells stably expressing Cav2.2 channels were recorded using internal solution containing (in mM): KCl 127.5; MgCl2 3.5; HEPES 5; Na2ATP 2.5; Na3GTP 0.1 and K2EGTA 0.1 oder 10 (pH 7.3). For determination of PMCA-mediated Ca2+-clearance via the deactivation time course of BKCa channels a previously established voltage-protocol was used. Briefly, a depolarizing voltage-step (from −90 to 70 mV) activated Cav2.2 (and a minor portion of BKCa) channels without inducing Ca2+ influx (due to the lack of driving force); Ca2+ influx was triggered by a 0.8 ms voltage-step to −60 mV. The resulting increase in [Ca2+]i activated BKCa channels and thus triggered transient (in the presence of PMCA and NPTN) or long-lasting (control) K+ currents that were measured at a potential of 70 mV. The current decay was fitted with a mono-exponential function yielding values for the respective time constant (τ decay). For the multiple calcium influx protocol (Fig. 1c, Fig. 4c) 2 or 5 repolarization pulses to −60 mV at 2 ms intervals (500 Hz) were applied between the pre- and the test-pulse. Data analysis and fitting was done using Igor Pro9 (WaveMetrics).
All chemicals except DiBrBAPTA (Alfa Aesar) were purchased from Sigma.
Fluorescence microscopy
CHO cells were recorded in the whole-cell voltage-clamp mode using a EPC10 amplifier (Heka, Germany) under control of Pulse 8.5 (HEKA Electronic). Patch-pipettes had a resistance of 2–4 MΩ when filled with the intracellular solution described above. Cells with an average access resistance of 3–12 MΩ, with 50–75% resistance compensation and <20pA leak-current were used for analysis. Current signals were low-pass filtered at 2.9 kHz (four pole Bessel filter EPC10) and digitized at 50 kHz. Ca2+ signals were recorded simultaneously. Lck-GCaMP6s fluorescence was acquired with an Evolve EMCCD camera (Visitron, Germany) using a Zeiss Plan Apochromat 40x oil immersion objective (NA 1.3) on a Axiovert200 microscope (Zeiss). Fluorescent images were captured at 100 Hz with custom written macros in VisiView (Visitron, Germany), processed offline using ImageJ 1.43 software and Igor Pro5. Background was deducted by subtracting the F0 image (average of three pre-stimulus images) from all subsequent images (ΔFn = Fn-F0). Regions of interest of identical size (10×10 pixels) were placed over the plasma-membrane reacting to the electrical stimulation and fluorescence changes were tracked throughout the stack.
Electron microscopy
Sample preparation, CHO cells
For determination of the density of Cav2.2, PMCA2 and NCX2 protein(s) in CHO cells the SDS-FRL technique was used as previously described with some modifications. CHO cells constitutively expressing Cav2.2 were transiently transfected with the aforementioned plasmids (coding for PMCA2-GFP, NPTN-RFP, NCX2-GFP) or an empty vector with Jet-PEI transfection reagent according to the manufacture’s instruction. After 2 days of incubation, cells were rinsed with 25 mM phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Roth, Germany) in PBS for 10 min. Cells were harvested by scraping, pelleted by centrifugation (500 g, 5 min); cell pellets were sandwiched between copper carriers for high-pressure freezing (HPM100, Leica, Austria). Frozen pellets were then fractured into two parts at −120 °C and the fractured facets were coated with carbon (5 nm), platinum-carbon (2 nm) and an additional layer of carbon (20 nm) in a freeze-fracture replica machine (ACE900, Leica). Replicas were digested at 60 °C in a solution containing 2.5 % SDS and 20% sucrose diluted in 15 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.3) for 48 h followed by 37 °C for 20 h. The replicas were washed in washing buffer comprising 0.05 % bovine serum albumin (BSA, Roth, Germany) and 0.1% Tween20 (Tw20, Roth, Germany) in 50 mM Tris-buffered saline (TBS) and then blocked in a solution containing 5% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 in TBS at room temperature (RT) for 1 h. Subsequently, replicas were incubated at 15 °C two overnights (O/Ns) in the following mixtures of primary antibodies in a solution containing 1% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 made up in TBS: (i) PMCApan (5F10, mouse /Ms/, 1:3000, Invitrogen, Cat. MA3-914) and Cav2.2 (rabbit, 1.67 µg/ml, Synaptic Systems, Cat. 152303) or (ii) NCX2 (SLC8A2, 0.5 µg/ml, Alomone, Cat. ANX-012). Replicas were washed in washing buffer then reacted with 6 nm (Rb) or 12 nm (Ms or Rb) gold particle-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:60, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, PA) at 15 °C overnight.
Sample preparation, cerebellum
Immunogold labeling of replicas was performed as previously described. Adult mice (n = 3; Charles River, Germany) were narcotized with isoflurane then anesthetized with pentobarbital (80 mg/kg). Cerebelli were removed and immersed into a fixative containing 2% paraformaldehyde and 15% saturated picric acid in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB) for 4 h at 4 °C. Cerebellar slices (100 µm) were cut on a vibrotome (VT 1000, Leica) and cryoprotected with 30% glycerol in 0.1 M PB O/N at 4 °C and then frozen by the high pressure freezing machine. Frozen samples were placed onto double replica tables then fractured at −140 °C and coated by deposition with carbon (5 nm), platinum (2 nm) and carbon (18 nm) in a freeze-fracture replica device (BAF 060 BAL-TEC, Liechtenstein). Replicas were digested at 80 °C for 18 h in a solution containing 2.5 % SDS and 20 % sucrose diluted in 15 mM TB. They were washed in 50 mM TBS containing 0.05% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 and then incubated in a blocking solution. Subsequently, replicas were incubated in the mixture of the following primary antibodies: anti-PMCA1-4 (PMCApan, Mouse, 1:3000, Invitrogen, Cat.# M;A3-914) and anti-Cav2.1 (Guinea pig, Gp, 5 μg/mL,) prepared in 50 mM TBS containing 1% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 at RT. After washing them in TBS they were reacted with a mixture of 5 nm (Gp) and 10 nm (Ms) gold particle-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:50, BioCell Research Laboratories, Cardiff, UK) at 15 °C overnight.
Microscopy and quantification
Finally, replicas were washed in TBS followed by distilled water, mounted on Formvar-coated 100 mesh grids, and analyzed with transmission electron microscopes (CM100, Philips or Zeiss LEO 906 E). All antibodies targeted intracellular epitopes of proteins, immunoreactivity was therefore observed on the protoplasmic face (P-face) of the plasma membrane. The density of immuno-particles labeling protein(s) of interest was calculated by dividing the absolute number of gold particles by the surface area of CHO cells, dendritic shafts of Purkinje cells, and varicosities of parallel fibers. Data are given as individual data points and mean values ± SEM. Statistical significance was assessed by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test.
Biochemistry and proteomic analysis
Quantitative MS analysis on membrane fractions
Tissues from adult mice were freshly collected and snap-frozen before they were subjected to a simple total membrane isolation protocol. 1 mg of membrane suspension was then extracted with 1 ml 100 mM Na2CO3 (pH 11) to reduce sample complexity. After ultracentrifugation, the pellets were solubilized with 100 µl ComplexioLyte91 (CL-91, Logopharm GmbH, Germany) and aliquots run on a short SDS-PAGE gel. After silver staining, the gel lanes were excised and subjected to standard tryptic in-gel digestion. Extracted and dried peptides were then dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a precolumn (C18 PepMap100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm; particle size 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, Germany) for 5 min at 20 µL/min with 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid using a split-free UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Bound peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient (eluent A: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid; eluent B: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile): 5 min 3% B, 120 min from 3% B to 30% B, 20 min from 30% B to 50% B, 10 min from 50% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 15 min 3% B (flow rate 300 nl/min). Eluted peptides were separated in a PicoTip™ emitter (75 µm i.d.) manually packed 23.5 cm with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (C18; particle size 3 µm; Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany) and electrosprayed (2.3 kV; transfer capillary temperature 300 °C; funnel RF level 45.0) in positive ion mode into a LTQ Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) with the instrument settings described in ref. .
For each dataset, a peak list was extracted from fragment ion spectra using the “msconvert.exe” tool (part of ProteoWizard; http:// proteowizard.sourceforge.net/; v3.0.11098; Mascot generic format with filter options “peakPicking true 1-” and “threshold count 500 most-intense”) and the precursor m/z values were shifted by the median m/z offset of all peptides assigned to proteins in a preliminary database search with 50 ppm peptide mass tolerance. Corrected peak lists were searched with Mascot 2.6.2 (Matrix Science, UK) against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (mouse, rat and human entries). Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), Oxidation (M), Phospho (S, T, Y), and Propionamide (C) were chosen as variable modifications, peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set to ±5 ppm and ±20 mmu, respectively. One missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. The expect value cut-off for peptide assignment was set to 0.5. Related identified proteins (subset or species homologs) were grouped using the name of the predominant member. Proteins either representing exogenous contaminations (e.g., keratins, trypsin, IgG chains) or identified by only one specific peptide were not considered.
Label-free quantification of proteins was carried out following the principles and procedures described in refs. . Peptide signal intensities (peak volumes, PVs) from FT full scans were determined and offline mass calibrated using MaxQuant v1.6.3.3 (https://www.maxquant.org). Peptide PV elution times in evaluated datasets were pairwise aligned using LOESS regression (reference times were dynamically calculated from the median peptide elution times over all aligned datasets). PVs were then assigned to peptides based on their m/z and elution time obtained either directly from MS/MS-based identification or indirectly (i.e., from identifications in parallel datasets) using in-house developed software (matching tolerances of ±2 ppm and ±1 min). The obtained matrix of protein-specific peptide intensities / run was then subjected to consistency-based evaluation and used for weighted fitting to a global reference. Molecular abundances of proteins (Fig. 2A and Supplementary Fig. 2) were estimated using the abundancenormspec measure.
Cryo-slicing BN-MS
Synaptosome-enriched membranes were prepared from whole mouse brain, solubilized with CL-47 (Logopharm GmbH, Germany; 1 ml/mg membrane protein, protease inhibitors added), and resolved on a preparative scale blue native polyacrylamide gradient (BN-PAGE) gel as described. The section of interest was excised from the gel lane, embedded and cryo-sliced (stepsize 0,33 mm) as detailed in ref. . In-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed as follows: Peptides were dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a precolumn (C18 PepMap100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm; particle size 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, Germany) for 5 min at 20 µL/min with 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid using a split-free UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Bound peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient (eluent A: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid; eluent B: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile): 5 min 3% B, 120 min from 3% B to 30% B, 20 min from 30% B to 50% B, 10 min from 50% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 10 min 3% B (flow rate 300 nl/min). Eluted peptides were separated in a SilicaTip™ emitter (75 µm i.d.) manually packed 23.5 cm with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (C18; particle size 3 µm; Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany) and electrosprayed (2.3 kV; transfer capillary temperature 300 °C; funnel RF level 45.0) in positive ion mode into a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Full MS scan range was 370–1700 m/z with a target value of 3*106 ions at a nominal resolution of 240,000. Each precursor scan was followed by up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS fragmentation spectra with a target value of 105 ions (min. 8*103 ITmax = 200 ms), isolation window 1.0 m/z, resolution of 15,000. Isotopes and charge states +1, >+8 were skipped, dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.
LC-MS (PV) data were extracted and assigned to peptides as described above and then further processed following the steps outlined in ref. : Slice-to-slice sample variations in peptide recovery and ionization efficiency of the LC-MS setup were corrected for by calculating the median PV offset of each slice from its predecessor and subsequent PV rescaling of each dataset by the median of all offset values inside a window of ±20 slices. Resulting PV data for each protein were filtered for outliers and false-positive assignments as identified by a correlation-based consistency check. Protein abundance distribution profiles were calculated from the resulting PV matrix by fitting the data to a globally determined abundancenormspec reference for each individual protein. Slice numbers were finally converted to apparent complex molecular weights by linear regression (log10(MW) versus slice number of the respective protein profile peak maximum) of the marker protein complexes (from the mitochondrial oxidative respiratory chain) described by Schägger and Pfeiffer.
Computational modelling
BKCa-currents in response to voltage-changes at constant [Ca2+]i (activation curves under steady-state conditions as in Fig. 1b), as well as to time-dependent changes in [Ca2+]i at constant voltage(s) ([Ca2+]i pulse-experiments as in Fig. 1c) were modelled in a spherical 3D-reaction-diffusion model with dimensions of an average CHO cell (‘model cell’) equipped with PMCA-NPTN complexes and Cav channels at the experimentally derived densities; 30% of the intracellular volume represents freely diffusible space, while 70% are inaccessible to free diffusion (all values and parameters summarized in Supplementary Table 1).
Spatio-temporal profiles for intracellular Ca2+ concentration
Under steady-state conditions (as in the experiments of Figs. 1b and 4a), free Ca2+ in the diffusion-accessible volume obeys the stationary diffusion equation  with influx and outflux of Ca2+ defined as follows (see also Supplementary Table 1): Dirichlet boundary conditions at the pipette-cell contact area (∂Ωpip) , and von Neumann boundary conditions at the cell surface (∂ΩPMCA) outside the pipette-covered areawhere  is the Ca2+ current by the PMCA2-NPTN-mediated transport given asand  is a constant Ca2+ leak current. In Eq. 2,  denotes the cycle rate of the PMCA pumps,  is their experimentally determined density of 50/µm2 (Fig. 2) and  describes the concentration dependence of PMCA transport-activity;  is a Hill-function of the local Ca2+ concentration  at the membrane with values for c1/2 and Hill-coefficient of 0.43 µM and 2, respectively. Setting  fixed the net flux of Ca2+ to zero at the resting Ca2+ concentration  of 0.1 µM. For determination of spatial [Ca2+]i profiles in the diffusion-accessible intracellular volume under steady-state conditions with [Ca2+]pipette of 10 µM and variable values for , the stationary diffusion equation with boundary conditions (Eqs. 1, 2) was numerically solved using FreeFEM + + (Fig. 3a).
Under the dynamic conditions of the ‘pulsed Ca2+-experiments’ (Figs. 1c, f, 4c), the time-course of [Ca2+]i after the 0.8 ms-influx pulse is modeled by reaction-diffusion equations for Ca2+ and buffer (EGTA) concentration,  and , respectively:
 and  are the diffusion constants for Ca2+ and EGTA, respectively,  and  the binding and unbinding rates of Ca2+ to EGTA, and btot the total EGTA concentration (0 or 10 mM, all parameters in Supplementary Table 1). Ca2+ influx and outflux are described by von Neumann boundary conditionswhere  is Cav2-mediated Ca2+ current (during the 0.8 voltage-pulse),  and  are as in Eqs. 1, 2.  is experimentally determined average number of Ca2+ ions entering the cell during the 0.8 ms-pulse (1.2 ∙ 106 / 0.8 ms) divided by the cell surface (300 µm2), and zero otherwise. The accessible intracellular volume (30% of total) resulted in a [Ca2+]i at the end of the 0.8 ms-influx pulse of around 10 µM, a minimal value to account for the observed rapid onset of the Ca2+-activated BKCa currents.
For determination of the spatio-temporal evolution of [Ca2+]i following the 0.8 ms-influx pulse with or without buffer, with variable values for , the above formulated reaction diffusion problem (Eqs. 3–5) was numerically solved using FreeFEM + +.
Gating model of BKCa channels
For theoretical approximation of measured BKCa-currents (Figs. 1, 4) we used a previously established model for BKCa channel gating. Briefly, this model comprises a total of 10 distinct states, five open (O 0-4) and five closed (C 0-4) states, and four binding sites for Ca2+ ions (occupancy designated 0-4). Transitions between states Oi and Ci (i = 0,…, 4) are voltage-dependent, while transitions between states Oi and Oi+1 and Ci and Ci+1 (i = 0,…, 3) are dependent on [Ca2+]i (Supplementary Tables 2, 3).
For steady-state conditions, the open probability of the model (Popen) is given bywhere V denotes membrane voltage, Q is elementary charge, and R, T and F having their usual meaning; L(0) is open to close equilibrium constant at 0 mV with no Ca2+ bound. The Ca2+ concentration dependent factor  is given by
KCi and KOi are the dissociation constants for Ca2+ binding to closed and open states of the BKCa channels, respectively.
This gating model was calibrated with experimentally determined BKCa-activation curves (as in Fig. 1b) for [Ca2+]i values of 0.1, 1, 10, 50 µM via an optimization routine. The respective values obtained for L(0), Q and the reaction constants KCi and KOi (detailed in Supplementary Table 2) were finally used together with the spatial intracellular [Ca2+]i profiles, , to calculate the open probability  of the channels distributed over the entire surface of the model cell. Averages of these  provided the activation curves under steady-state conditions with a fixed [Ca2+]pipette of 10 µM and variable values for  (Fig. 3a).
For modelling BKCa-responses to the dynamic conditions given in the ‘Ca2+-pulse experiments’ (as in Fig. 1c), the channel model was extended to include forward and backward rates (Supplementary Table 3). The open probability Popen (t) is given as
The extended model was calibrated with experimental data previously obtained on BKCa channels exposed to sub-millisecond switches of [Ca2+]i under constant membrane potential conditions (; Supplementary Fig. 5); the respective values for Q and the reaction constants fitting the experimental data best are summarized in Supplementary Table 3.
Again, these parameters were used together with the time-dependent intracellular [Ca2+]i profiles, , to compute the time course of  that provided the response(s) of the BKCa-model to the 0.8 ms-pulses of [Ca2+]I under defined values of  (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Fig. 5c).
Quantification and data analysis
All statistical details are indicated in the figure legends. Data are given as mean ± SEM throughout the manuscript and are analyzed as detailed in the Method section. Significance was assessed by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test, significance levels are indicated (***, **, * for p values < 0.001, 0.01, 0.05, respectively; n.s. is not significant).
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.

RESULTS:
Results
Fast and effective Ca2+-clearing by PMCA-NPTN pumps
The Ca2+-pump activity of PMCAs critically depends on intact cellular boundaries, in particular sufficient supply of ATP and physiological levels of phospholipids (including PIP2 (phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate)) in the plasma membrane. In fact, our structural analysis of PMCA2-NPTN complexes by cryo-EM identified a PIP2 molecule that is inserted into a pocket close to the Ca2+-passageway and that is obligatory for the transport function of the pump complex (Fig. 1a). For investigating the Ca2+-transport in PMCA-NPTN complexes we, therefore, turned to heterologous expression in CHO cells, an epithelial line established for analysis of membrane proteins with phospholipid-dependence. To reliably determine transport function in intact cells, we chose to monitor intracellular Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i, rather than ATP-consumption or pH-changes resulting from the Ca2+−2H+ countertransport) using co-expressed BK-type Ca2+-activated K+ channels (BKCa, homomeric BKα, see Methods) as native sensors. These channels sense apparent [Ca2+]i in the physiological range (0.1–10 µM) at the plasma membrane and convert changes in [Ca2+]i into changes in channel gating (and K+ currents) with ms-resolution (Supplementary Fig. 1). Importantly, BKCa channels do not interfere with [Ca2+]i as they do not effectively act as buffers (due to their low number, in contrast to soluble (fluorescent)-indicators that depend on stoichiometric Ca2+ binding).
Three types of experiments were used to analyze PMCA2-NPTN-mediated Ca2+-transport in distinct cellular settings, with the first set investigating extrusion of Ca2+ ions against a high concentration of 10 µM free Ca2+ constantly infused into the cell by the de-facto unlimited reservoir of a whole-cell patch pipette (Fig. 1b, left inset). The BKCa activation curves recorded under these steady-state conditions in the absence (control) and presence of the pump complexes were largely different: PMCA2-NPTN fueled by 2.5 mM ATP (through the patch pipette) induced an extensive right-shift of the activation curve compared to control, placing it slightly below the calibration curve determined with 0.1 µM free Ca2+ and thus indicating a pump-mediated decrease in [Ca2+]i at the plasma membrane of more than 2 orders of magnitude (Fig. 1b, right inset).
In a second set of experiments, the pumps were challenged with a 0.8 ms-‘[Ca2+]i-step’ generated by a voltage-commanded Ca2+ influx through stably expressed N-type voltage-gated Ca2+ (Cav2.2) channels (see Methods). In CHO cells perfused with 0.1 mM EGTA, the equivalent of cytoplasmic Ca2+-buffering in most CNS neurons, such an action potential-like Ca2+ influx resulted in a lasting increase in [Ca2+]i reflected by activation of persistent (slowly decaying) BKCa-mediated outward K+ currents (Fig. 1c, control trace). In contrast, when EGTA (in the perfusing pipette solution) was increased to 10 mM, BKCa-currents activated by the same brief Ca2+ influx displayed a rapid decay (Fig. 1c, d, traces in blue) with time constants (τ decay) of ∼8 ms (mean ± SEM: 8.4 ± 0.6 ms, n = 9, Fig. 1g). This τ decay perfectly matched the time constant of channel deactivation (at 50 mV, Supplementary Fig. 1a) indicating complete absorption of the incoming Ca2+ ions by EGTA-buffering within less than a millisecond. Surprisingly, Ca2+-triggered BKCa-currents with very similar decay kinetics could also be recorded at low intracellular EGTA of 0.1 mM upon co-expression of PMCA2-NPTN complexes (Fig. 1c, d, traces in red). The respective value for τ decay was ∼13 ms (mean ± SEM: 13.2 ± 1.2 ms, n = 10, Fig. 1g) indicative of pump-mediated removal of Ca2+ at a speed resembling that by buffering with 10 mM EGTA. These conclusions were further corroborated by measuring the [Ca2+]i transients in the same step experiments with the membrane-tethered Lck-GCaMP6 (Supplementary Fig. 2, Methods;) replacing BKCa channels as Ca2+-indicators: The Ca2+-triggered fluorescence signal, after an initial increase (Fig. 1e, right panel), displayed complete decay with both 10 mM EGTA (in the cytoplasm) or PMCA2-NPTN co-expression (at low intracellular EGTA of 0.1 mM), but persisted and declined slowly under control conditions with 0.1 mM EGTA in the cytoplasm (Fig. 1e). The respective τdecay of ∼740 ms determined with 10 mM EGTA and PMCA2-NPTN co-expression closely matched the dissociation-time measured for Ca2+ ions from GCaMP6s in stopped-flow fluorimetry with one ms-mixing, supporting the fast Ca2+-clearing determined with BKCa channels before (Fig. 1c, d).
In a third set of experiments, Ca2+ extrusion by either PMCA2-NPTN (at 0.1 mM EGTA) or 10 mM EGTA was further probed in experiments where two or five 0.8 ms-pulses of Ca2+ influx were elicited at a frequency of 500 Hz. These additional Ca2+ pulses interrupted by 2 ms non-influx intervals (Fig. 1f, upper inset) led to an increased [Ca2+]i as reflected by the concomitant increase of the BKCa-current maxima. The subsequent Ca2+-clearing, however, appeared only slightly prolonged in either case (Fig. 1f, Supplementary Fig. 3). The latter is indicated by the respective increase in τ decay (from 8.4 to 12.4 ms (10 EGTA), and from 13.2 to 18.5 ms (PMCA2-NPTN); Fig. 1f, g; Supplementary Fig. 3b). Interestingly, [Ca2+]i did not prominently increase with the number of Ca2+ pulses, pointing to sufficient supply of Ca2+-free EGTA and to fast extrusion of Ca2+ by the pump complexes during the 2-ms non-influx intervals, respectively.
Together, the results of all three sets of experiments unequivocally indicated that PMCA2-NPTN complexes can terminate increased [Ca2+]i in the ms-range as already noticed in some neurons, and raised the fundamental question whether this fast Ca2+ extrusion may be due to fast transport of individual pump complexes or rather result from a high-density expression in the plasma membrane combined with slow pumping activity.
Membrane densities and amounts of PMCA pumps in cells and tissues
In pursuit of this question, we next used immunogold electron-microscopy (immuno-EM) on SDS-digested freeze-fracture replicas (SDS-FRL) of brain neurons and CHO cells, as well as quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) on membrane fractions from various tissues. Labelling with a PMCA-specific antibody (PMCApan, see Methods) at saturating concentration showed that PMCAs1-4 are distinctly distributed over the surface membrane of different brain neurons. Thus, on dendrites of cerebellar Purkinje cells the density of PMCAs amounted to ∼250 µm2 (equivalent to more than 10% of all intra-membraneous particles), while roughly 50 PMCAs/µm2 were found in the active zone of parallel fiber varicosities (or pre-synaptic terminals) of the granule cell-to-Purkinje-cell synapses (Fig. 2a, upper panel). Application of the PMCApan antibody to freeze-fracture replicas from CHO cells expressing PMCA2-NPTN complexes indicated a density of ∼55 pump complexes per µm2 exceeding the endogenous levels of PMCAs in these epithelial cells by more than ten-fold (Fig. 2a, lower panel). In the same CHO cells the density of stably expressed Cav2.2 channels stained with a target-specific Cav2.2 antibody (Methods) exhibited a mean value of ∼52/µm2 (Fig. 2a, lower panel) thus demonstrating about equal amounts for both, Ca2+-source and Ca2+-transporter, in our testing system (Fig. 1). Noteworthy, the majority of the Cav2.2 immuno-particles appeared in clusters (of up to 10 proteins), while the PMCA-particles were more homogenously distributed; preferred co-clustering between both Cav2.2 and PMCA2-NPTN was not observed.
In addition, we assessed the amounts of Ca2+-transport systems in brain and other tissues of adult mice by quantitative MS on integral membrane fractions (, Methods). These analyses unraveled PMCAs as the most abundant Ca2+-transporters in the brain exceeding both the Na+/Ca2+-exchangers (NCX) and the Ca2+-pumps of the endo/sarcoplasmic reticulum (SERCA) by several-fold and indicated that PMCA2 exhibits highest expression among the four PMCA proteins (Fig. 2b, Supplementary Fig. 4). Conversely, PMCA-pumps are largely outnumbered (more than five-fold) in brain membranes by the Na/K-ATPase, another P-type ATPase in the plasma membrane (Fig. 2b, right panel). Interestingly, the observed excess of PMCAs over both NCX and SERCA is a unique feature of the brain (forebrain and cerebellum), while in all other tissues analyzed, SERCA is the most abundant Ca2+-transport system. In these tissues PMCA dominated over NCX in the surface membrane, except for heart and kidney where the PMCA-to-NCX ratio was slightly less than one (values of 0.75 and 0.95, respectively; Fig. 2c, inset).
Computational modelling of transport cycles in PMCA pumps
With the precise data acquired on [Ca2+]i dynamics and BKCa-gating (Fig. 1), as well as on densities of PMCA2-NPTN complexes and Cav2.2 channels in the plasma membrane of CHO cells (Fig. 2), we next turned to computational modeling for determining the rates of Ca2+ -transport in individual pump complexes. For realistic representation of the experimental conditions, the following procedures were applied: (1) BKCa-gating was described by the response of a well-established 10-state model whose transition rates were calibrated by machine-learning procedures using experimental data with defined variations in [Ca2+]i and transmembrane voltage as an input (Methods, Supplementary Tables 1-3, Supplementary Fig. 5a, b,); (2) spatio-temporal profiles for [Ca2+]i were determined in a three-dimensional diffusion model (of a spherical cell) without and with Ca2+ efflux mediated by transport of the (homogenously distributed) PMCA2-NPTN pumps at defined density (50 µm2), but variable cycling rates (Fig. 3a, inset); (3) Ca2+ influx was either stationary through a single reservoir (pipette) or transient (0.8 ms) through a density-defined number of Cav channels (50 µm2) providing an experimentally determined mean number of Ca2+ ions (equations and parameters used are detailed in Methods and Supplementary Tables 1-3).
In a first step, we recapitulated the pump-mediated shift in activation curves (Fig. 1b) by computing the response of the calibrated BKCa model to [Ca2+]i profiles obtained with constant Ca2+ influx (10 µM) from the pipette and increasing cycle rates for the PMCA complexes. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, the resulting BKCa response(s) perfectly matched the experimentally determined calibration curves ([Ca2+]i of 10 and 0.1 µM in the absence of pumps, dashed lines in Fig. 3a), and showed that increasing cycle rates of the Ca2+-pumps shifted BKCa activation towards positive membrane potentials (Fig. 3). Interestingly, the experimentally observed shift generated by PMCA2-NPTN required the pumps to operate at rates of ≥5.000/s (Fig. 3a). Currently assumed pump rates of 50 s failed to produce a visible shift of the activation curve.
In a second step, we modelled the BKCa current-transients recorded upon the pulsed increases in [Ca2+]i in the presence of either high buffer concentrations or PMCA complexes (Fig. 3b, traces in blue and red, respectively). In these calculations, [Ca2+]i at the end of the 0.8 ms-influx pulse was 10 µM, a minimal value to account for the observed rapid onset of the Ca2+-activated BKCa currents, while the resting [Ca2+]i was set to 0.1 µM. The response determined with 10 mM EGTA as a cytoplasmic Ca2+-buffer (with known kinetics) was used for validation of the model’s performance. As illustrated in Fig. 3b, the experimentally determined current traces were closely approximated by the responses of the BKCa model when [Ca2+]i was removed either by EGTA (dashed line in blue) or by PMCA2-NPTN operating at a rate of ∼20.000 s (dashed line in orange). Lower transport rates failed to match the experimental traces with respect to both peak-current (time to amplitude maximum) and decay kinetics of the current traces (Fig. 3b, dashed traces in yellow; Supplementary Fig. 5c).
Together, our modelling data strongly suggest that native Ca2+-pumps transport their substrate with rates in the kHz-range, very similar to what was previously reported for native and heterologously expressed NCX-type Ca2+-transport proteins.
Comparison of Ca2+-transport by PMCA-NPTN and NCX
We, therefore, thought to probe this prediction by direct comparison between both types of transporters in an identical experimental setting. We recapitulated the experiments in Fig. 1b, c with NCX2, the most abundant NCX isoform of the rodent brain (Fig. 2b), replacing PMCA2-NPTN complexes. With NCX2 present in the plasma membrane, the steady-state activation curve of BKCa channels measured with a [Ca2+]pip of 10 µM was shifted to the right indicating that NCX2 decreased [Ca2+]i underneath the plasma membrane into the sub-micromolar range similar to the activity of PMCA2-NPTN, albeit somewhat less effective (Fig. 4a). Subsequent probing of the speed of Ca2+ extrusion by NCX2 with short Ca2+ influx pulses as in Fig. 1c showed that the exchanger promoted a rapid decay of the BKCa -currents with values for τ decay of ∼26 ms (mean ± SEM: 26.2 ± 2.3 ms, n = 19). This two-fold slowing of the Ca2+-clearing compared to that by PMCA2-NPTN is in line with the about two-fold lower density of the NCX2 protein found by immuno-EM in freeze-fractures of the plasma membrane of the respective CHO cells (Fig. 4b). And, as a consequence of this slower Ca2+-clearing, high-frequency application of several voltage-commanded Ca2+ influx pulses led to a more prominent increase in the amplitude and the time-to-peak interval of the BKCa-currents, as well as in the time constants of their decay (τ decay increased from 26.1 to 48.2 ms) compared to PMCA2-NPTN-mediated Ca2+ removal in our test system (Fig. 4c, d). These results provided independent evidence that under cellular conditions PMCA2-NPTN complexes are able to transport Ca2+ with turnover rates at least in the range of 5000/s, a value previously determined for NCX in giant cell-attached patches from cardiomyocytes.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The calcium (Ca2+) transporting ATPases of the plasma membrane (PMCAs) are P-type ATPases or pumps that are expressed in virtually any type of cell where they extrude Ca2+ from the cytosol to the extracellular space using ATP as an energy source. This extrusion is crucial for the termination of Ca2+-signals, transient increases in intracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]i) that are used to precisely control a variety of fundamental cellular processes, including vesicle release, enzymatic activity, excitability, contraction, and motility.
Molecularly, native PMCAs have recently been identified as heteromeric complexes of the ATPase subunits PMCAs1–4 and the single-span membrane proteins Neuroplastin (NPTN) or Basigin (BASI) that co-assemble with the PMCA subunits in the ER and are required for stability and proper trafficking of the Ca2+-pump complexes.
In neurons, genetic or pharmacological ablation of the PMCA-mediated transport demonstrated that Ca2+ extrusion occurs within tens of milliseconds or faster suggesting that individual Ca2+-pumps operate with rapid transport rates in the cellular context. As yet, however, determination of these transport rates has been hampered by technical limitations precluding accurate assessment of both transport activity and number of active Ca2+-pumps involved.
Here, we use time-resolved monitoring of Ca2+-transport and changes in [Ca2+]i in intact cells together with EM-based protein counting in the plasma membrane to show that individual PMCA2-NPTN complexes operate at cycle-rates in the kHz-range and thus enable Ca2+-signaling with millisecond precision.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary information
Source data
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
These authors contributed equally: Cristina E. Constantin, Barbara Schmidt.
Supplementary information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41467-025-62735-5.
Data availability
The mass spectrometry data (Fig. 2) have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD060109 [10.6019/PXD060109]. Source data are provided with this paper.