PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
diseases: Lung adenocarcinoma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Anticancer; Temporal proteomics; Therapeutic targets; Bhallataka taila; Lung cancer

ABSTRACT:
Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide due to its poor prognosis.  Despite significant advancements in the understanding of cancer development, improvements in diagnostic methods, and multimodal therapeutic regimens, the prognosis of lung cancer has still not improved. Therefore, it is reasonable to look for newer and alternative medicines for treatment. Bhallataka nut extract, derived from the seeds of Semecarpus anacardium, was known to exhibit anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties, suggesting potential as a treatment for cancer. In this study, we investigated the molecular networks associated with Bhallataka taila-mediated inhibition of lung adenocarcinoma. Treating lung cancer cell lines with Bhallataka taila resulted in decreased colony formation, proliferation, and migration, and increased apoptosis. A TMT based quantitative approach was used to identify the significantly altered proteins upon Bhallataka taila treatment at various timepoints. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and pathway analysis was done for the significantly altered proteins and was later validated by immunoblotting.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Deciphering Bhallataka Taila's Anticancer Potential in Lung Cancer Cells: Insights from a Proteomic Analysis

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
After Bhallataka taila treatment, A549 cells were washed with ice-cold PBS before harvesting. The cells were lysed in lysis buffer (1mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM Sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM beta glycerol phosphate in 50mM of Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) and 2% SDS). Protein concentration was determined using the BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). Equal amounts of protein (100 µg) were used for digestion. The protein sample was reduced and alkylated using 5 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA). Before trypsin digestion, acetone precipitation was carried out to remove SDS present in the sample Trypsin digestion was carried using modified sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI).

DATA PROCESSING:
The raw files obtained after data acquisition were searched using Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the Human RefSeq 110 database along with known mass spectrometry contaminants by using SEQUEST and Mascot algorithms. Search parameters included a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, with trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, and one missed cleavage. Precursor and fragment level mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine, TMT at peptide N‐terminal as a static modification. Oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal acetylation, was set as a dynamic modification.