PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Tbc1d22b; Rab1b; Apex

ABSTRACT:
The anterograde secretory pathway shapes the extracellular environment and the ability of cells to communicate, through the release of cytokines, growth factors, enzymes and extracellular matrix components, and through the regulation of the composition of the plasma membrane (PM). The underlying molecular machinery operates in a concerted and highly regulated manner and is frequently altered in cancer. The Golgi RabGAP protein TBC1D22B is overexpressed in breast cancer and predicts prognosis. Herein, deconvolution of the proximity-labeling and physical interactomes of TBC1D22B, reveals its role in the regulation of anterograde trafficking with liaisons with networks of proteins involved in cell adhesion, and in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. The function of TBC1D22B in the anterograde pathway was formally demonstrated using the Retention Using Selective Hooks system which synchronizes transport of cargoes from the ER to the Golgi and the PM. TBC1D22B inhibits ER to Golgi transport in a GAP-dependent manner. RAB1B, a key RAB in the early secretory pathway, was found to be a substrate of the TBC1D22B GAP activity, and its silencing phenocopied TBC1D22B overexpression. Thus, TBC1D22B regulates ER to Golgi trafficking through its ability to work as a GAP for RAB1B.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
TBC1D22B Regulates ER-to-Golgi Trafficking via RAB1B Inactivation and Promotes Oncogenic Programs in Breast Cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry was done as follows: samples were resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3, 3M Urea. A reducing step was performed by adding 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and incubating the samples with orbital shaking for 1 h at 37°C. Samples were then alkylated by adding 10 mM 2-iodoacetamide in the dark with 20 min of orbital shaking at RT. Next, samples were supplemented with 20 mM DTT. Finally, buffer was exchanged to 300 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 2M urea. Each sample was digested with 1 μg of trypsin (V5280, Promega resuspended 1 μg/μl in 50 mM acetic acid) for 16 h at 37°C. Supernatant was collected and beads were washed twice with 60 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3, 2M urea, pooling the washes with the supernatants. Acidification was done by adding 1% formic acid and samples we stored at -20°C. Tryptic peptides were suspended with 5 μl of 1% TFA and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (EASY-SPRAY, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The nano-LC system was operated in one column set-up with an EasySpray PEPMAP RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) kept at 45°C constant. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and solvent B was 0.1% Formic Acid in 80% Acetonitrile. Samples were injected in aqueous 1% (Trifluoroacetic acid, TFA) at a constant pressure of 980 Bar. Peptides were separated with a gradient of 3–35% solvent B over 49 min followed by a gradient of 30–60% for 5 min and 60–95% over 5 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) to automatically switch between full scan MS and MSMS acquisition. MS spectra (from m/z 375-1650) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution R=70 000 at m/z 400. The 12 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 3E6 and fragmented with a normalized collision energy setting of 28% in to the HCD cell. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 ms for full scans and 80 ms for MSMS.

DATA PROCESSING:
Acquired raw data obtained by mass spectrometry analysis were analyzed using the MaxQuant (MQ) version 1.6.10.43, and peptide lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (74470 Entries) with the Andromeda search engine. False discovery rate (FDR) for both protein and peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1% with enzyme specificity set to Trypsin/P. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Peptides were identified with an initial precursor mass deviation of 7 ppm and a fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. For label-free protein quantitation (LFQ), we required a minimum ratio count of 2. All proteins and peptides matching to the reversed database were filtered out. ProteinGroups.txt table from MQ output was analyzed using a homemade R Studio pipeline and a moderated t-test statistics from an empirical Bayes method was used. In particular, to identify significantly regulated proteins between sample groups a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction corresponding to 5% together with a minimal fold change equal to 1 was imposed.