PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Breast lobe
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; hydroxylated proline
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Peptide counting
keywords: Prevention; Breast cancer; Laser capture proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Breast cancer (BC) is the leading cause of women's cancer death worldwide. Here, in the BC – Anti Progestin Prevention Study 1 (BC-APPS1; NCT02408770), we assess whether progesterone receptor antagonism with ulipristal acetate (UA) for 12 weeks reduces surrogate markers of BC risk in 24 premenopausal women. We employ a multi-layered OMICs and live-cell approach as readouts for molecular features alongside clinical imaging and tissue micro-mechanics correlates. UA reduced epithelial proliferation (Ki67) and the proportion, proliferation, and colony formation capacity of luminal progenitor (LP) cells, the precursors of aggressive BCs. MRI scans showed reduction in fibroglandular volume with treatment, while single-cell RNAseq, proteomics, histology and atomic force microscopy identified extracellular matrix remodelling with reduced collagen organisation and tissue stiffness. Laser capture targeted mass spectrometry revealed Ccollagen VI as the most significantly down-regulated protein after UA treatment and we uncovered an unanticipated spatial association between Collagen VI and Sox9hi LP cell localization, establishing a link between collagen organization and LP activity. This study offers a template for molecularly informed early phase prevention trials and demonstrates the potential for premenopausal BC prevention with progesterone receptor antagonists through stromal remodelling and LP suppression.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
BC-APPS1: Anti-progestin therapy targets hallmarks of breast cancer risk through epithelial-stromal remodelling

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Five μm-thick FFPE sections were mounted onto either glass slides or ‘MMI MembraneSlides’ (Molecular Machines & Industries), then stained with H&E using a Leica ST5010 autostainer XL. From tissue sections mounted on MMI slides, regions of ‘lobular epithelium & peri-lobular stroma’ were dissected using a MMI CellCut Laser Microdissection system across multiple sections. 10 mm2 of tissue was collected using MMI transparent isolation caps and pooled to a final volume of 0.05 mm3. Formalin-mediated protein cross-linking was reversed by resuspending the dissected tissue in 50mM TEAB (triethyl ammonium bicarbonate) containing 5% SDS (w/v) and heating at 95°C for 20mins, then 60°C for 2 hours. To assist the solubilisation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, urea and DTT (dithiothreitol) was added to the samples to a final concentration of 8M and 5mM, respectively. Samples were then sonicated in a LE220-Plus focused ultrasonicator (Covaris) for 10 mins. Samples were reduced and alkylated, then proteins were isolated and digested with trypsin using S-Trap™ spin columns (Protifi) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides were desalted using POROS Oligo R3 beads (Thermo fisher) and analysed by LC-MS/MS (liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry) using an UltiMate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system (RSLC, Dionex Corporation) coupled to a Q Exactive HF™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) for 90min.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw mass spectra were processed in MaxQuant (v1.6.14.0, available from Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). Features were identified using default parameters, then searched against the human proteome reference database (obtained from Uniprot). Oxidation of methionine (M), Hydroxylation of proline (P) and Acetylation (protein N-terminus) were set as variable peptide modification for protein identification, whereas carbamidomethylation of cystine (C) was set as a fixed modification. Peptide quantitation was performed using label-free quantification (LFQ), using only unmodified, unique peptides and with ‘match between runs’ enabled. Statistical analysis of quantitative proteomics data was performed using MSqRob. LFQ intensities were normalised between samples by means of the median of peptide intensities. Timepoint (pre- or post-treatment) was treated as a fixed effect, while peptide sequence and patient (biological replicate) were treated as random effects. Peptides belonging to contaminant protein lists (as annotated by MaxQuant/Andromeda), or proteins with fewer than 2 peptides were excluded from the analysis.