PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Malignant neoplasm of ovary
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
quantification: TIC
keywords: Ovarian cancer; Cell lines; Phosphoproteomics

ABSTRACT:
Nine ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed using phosphoproteomics and proteomics. The KURAMOCHI cell line was further subjected to treatment with the drug C26A6 and transfection with siRNA towards MTDH and SND1.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Ovarian cancer cell line landscape

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cells were lysed using boling lysis buffer (5% SDS, 0.1M TRIS ph8.5, 10 mM 2-CAA) and transferred to low binding tubes before 2 min sonication. Protein Aggregation Capture was performed in a KingFisher Flex system with MagResyn hydroxyl beads, with disgestion using LysC 1:500 and trypsin 1:250 (w/w). Peptides were desalted using SepPak tC18 cartridge columns. For phosphoenrichment Ti-IMAC HP beads (Resyn Biosciences) were used in the KingFisher Flex system. Peptides were loaded on Evotips before analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
DIA raw files were converted to mzML using msconvert of Proteowizard with vendor peakpicking and demultiplexing (when staggered DIA windows had been used). DIA-NN in library free mode was used for identification and quantification. 1 missed cleavage was used and human UniProtKB as of May 2022. For full proteome samples no variable modifications were used. For the phosphoenriched samples one variable Phospo (STY) was set for the cell line landscape data nad two variable modifications for the treatment and transfection data.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Cell lines and cell culture
Human ovarian cancer cell lines CAOV3, NIHOVCAR3, ES2, SKOV3, A2780, IGROV1, OVSAHO, KURAMOCHI and JHOC5, were cultured under conditions designed to mimic their physiological environment. CAOV3 cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with GlutaMAX™, 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S). NIHOVCAR3 required RPMI medium enriched with GlutaMAX™, a higher concentration of FBS (20%), 1% P/S, and 0.01 mg/mL sterile-filtered bovine insulin to support its insulin-responsive growth traits. ES2 and SKOV3 lines were both cultured in McCoy’s 5 A medium with GlutaMAX™, 10% FBS, and 1% P/S. A2780 and IGROV1 cells were grown in DMEM with GlutaMAX™, 10% FBS, 1% P/S, supplemented with 1x non-essential amino acids (NEAA) and 1x MEM vitamin solution to support their comprehensive metabolic needs. OVSAHO, and KURAMOCHI cell lines were cultured in RPMI medium with GlutaMAX™, supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% P/S. JHOC5 cells were grown in DMEM/F12 medium with GlutaMAX™, 10% FBS, 1% P/S, and 1x NEAA to cater to their specific growth requirements. All cell lines were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. Regular mycoplasma testing was conducted to ensure the absence of contamination. Cell cultures were passaged upon reaching approximately 80–90% confluency, ensuring continuous growth and viability for experimental use. Mouse ovarian cancer cell lines PPNM and BPPNM cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with GlutaMAXTM, with 1% Insulin-Transferrin-Selenium (Gibco ITS-G, 41400045), 100 µl EGF (10ug/ml), 4% FBS, and 1% P/S.
The cell lines CAOV3, NIHOVCAR3, ES2, OVSAHO, KURAMOCHI, and JHOC5 were obtained from the laboratory of Dr. Ingrid Hedenfalk (Lund University, Sweden). SKOV3, A2780, and IGROV1 were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All cell lines were tested for mycoplasma contamination before use and maintained under standard culture conditions.
Cell viability assays
To assess cell viability using the PrestoBlue assay (Fisher Scientific GTF, A13261), Cells were seeded in 96-well plates (Corning) at densities optimized for each cell line: KURAMOCHI, 1,500 cells/well; Caov-3, 2,000 cells/well; and IGROV-1, 1,500 cells/well. Plates were incubated overnight to allow cell attachment before treatment.After treatment with drug, the cells were incubated for 3–5 days. At the end of the incubation, 10 ul PrestoBlue reagent was added directly to the cells without a medium change, and the plates were incubated for 30 min, typically 10 min to 2 h depending on the cell type, to allow viable cells to reduce the PrestoBlue reagent, resulting in a fluorescent signal. The fluorescence intensity, proportional to the number of living cells, was measured using a fluorescence microplate reader at an excitation and emission wavelength, of around 560/590 nm. This method offers a quick and sensitive measure of cell viability and cytotoxicity. Other assays for measuring cell viability were the ATPlite luminescence assay (PerkinElmer, 6016943) and CellTiter-Glo (Promega Biotech, G9242). Briefly, 30 µL of cell lysis solution was added to each well and incubated for 5 min to lyse the cells and release intracellular ATP. Subsequently, 30 µL of the substrate solution containing luciferase and luciferin was added to each well, and the plate was gently shaken for 5 min to ensure thorough mixing. The luminescence, which is proportional to the amount of ATP present, was measured using a microplate reader. All experiments were performed in triplicate, and the data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Drugs used were Erastin (Fisher Scientific GTFHY-15763), ML-162 (Nordic Biosite − 20455), and C26A6 (Biotechne − 7692).
Colony formation assay
Cells were seeded in 12-well plates at the following densities: KURAMOCHI, 500 cells/well (single-agent) or 2,000 cells/well (combination), IGROV-1, 2,000 cells/well, and Caov-3, 5,000 cells/well. After overnight attachment, cells were treated for 3 days, then cultured in drug-free medium for 10 days. Colonies were fixed and stained with 2–3 mL of 6.0% glutaraldehyde/0.5% crystal violet for 30 min, rinsed with water, and air-dried before imaging.
Synergy calculations
To evaluate the synergistic effects of drug combinations, we tested eight doses of each drug individually and in combination, with each condition performed in triplicate. We utilized DECREASE, (a machine learning-based method) for predicting drug combination dose-response landscapes with minimal experimental data. Experimental validation was conducted using the CellTiter-Glo (Promega Biotech AB- G9242). Synergy scores were calculated using the Bliss independence model via SynergyFinder, a web application for analyzing drug combination dose-response matrix data. Synergistic interactions were quantified, with Bliss synergy scores greater than zero indicating synergy.
Transfection
Cells were seeded at a density of 100,000 cells per well in a 6-well plate and allowed to reach 60–80% confluency. Before transfection, the media was refreshed. Transfection reagent Lipofectamine (13778150, Thermo fisher Lipofectamine™ RNAiMAX) was diluted in 150 µl of medium (9 µl per sample) to prepare a master mix. Each sample, including siRNA targeting specific genes and negative controls, was prepared by adding 30 pmol of siRNA (Sigma- EHU024601 MISSION esiRNA targeting human MTDH, EHU054581 MISSION esiRNA targeting human SND1and SIC001 MISSION siRNA Universal NegativeControl1), to 150 µl of fresh media. A 1:1 ratio of the master mix was added to each corresponding tube containing siRNA. The mixture was incubated for 5 min at room temperature to allow complex formation. Subsequently, 250 µl of the siRNA-Lipofectamine complex was added to each well. The media was replaced between 6- and 24 h post-transfection, and cells were harvested 72 h after transfection for further analysis.
Immunocytochemistry
Cells were seeded overnight in cell culture slides (Falcon Chambered Cell Culture Slides), fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100, and blocked in 5% BSA. They were incubated with primary antibodies against MTDH (Abcam, ab227981) and SND1(Proteintech, CL594-60265) proteins overnight at 4 °C, followed by incubation with fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody (Abcam-Goat Anti-Rabbit, ab150083) for 1 h at room temperature. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (Thermo Fisher, D1306). Images were captured using Confocal fluorescence microscope (Zeiss 710).
Western blot
Protein extracts from transfected and control cells were quantified using the BCA assay (ThermoFisher). Equal amounts of protein were separated on SDS-PAGE (ThermoFisher) and then transferred to PVDF membranes (Sigma). The membranes were blocked with 5% BSA in TBST for 1 h at room temperature, followed by incubation with primary antibodies MTDH, and SND1 overnight at 4 °C. After washing, membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. Protein bands were visualized using an enhanced chemiluminescence (Merck). β-Actin (AH diagnostic, sc-47778) was used as the loading control. Band intensities were analyzed using ImageJ.
Protein extraction and digestion
Cells at 70–80% confluency were lysed using boiling lysing buffer (5% SDS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vilnius, Lithuania), 0.1 M TRIS pH 8.5 (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL), 10 mM 2-CAA (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) and 5 mM TCEP (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) dissolved in LC/MS grade dH2O (Fischer chemical, Ottawa) and transferred into low protein binding tubes. The lysates were then sonicated with a microtip for 2 min (1 s on/1 s off pulses, 50% amplitude) on ice. Protein concentrations were estimated using BCA assay. PAC digestion (protein aggregation capture) of the lysates was performed with a mixture of LysC (1:500) and trypsin (1:250). This was automated on a KingFisher™ Flex Robot (Thermo Fisher Scientific), utilizing MagResyn® hydroxyl beads (Resyn Biosciences) in 96-well plates for bead-based digestion. Digestion was quenched by adding TFA to a final concentration of 1% post-completion of the process. Following digestion, peptides were desalted using 50 mg SepPak tC18 Vac Cartridge columns (Waters, Milford, MA).
Phosphopeptide enrichment
Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using the KingFisher Flex Robot along with MagResyn® Ti-IMAC HP beads (Resyn Biosciences). This automated process was executed in 96-well plates following a specific 8-step protocol designed for phosphoproteomic analysis. Briefly, the beads were equilibrated in a binding solvent composed of 80% MeCN, 5% TFA, and 0.1 M glycolic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Peptides, initially dissolved in 0.1% TFA at 4 µg/µL and then diluted in the same binding solvent, were bound to these equilibrated beads. Post-binding, the beads were washed sequentially with more of the binding solvent, followed by 80% MeCN + 1% TFA, and then 10% MeCN + 0.2% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 1% ammonia (pH 10) and immediately acidified using TFA to a final concentration of 1%.
LC-MS
Peptides and phosphopeptides were analyzed using an Evosep One (Evosep) Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap (Thermo Scientific) LC-MS system. Specifically, 600 ng of peptides or all enriched phosphopeptides, redissolved in 20 µL of 0.1% formic acid, were loaded onto conditioned Evotips (Evosep) for desalting, and initial offset before column injection. The chromatographic separation in the initial cell line landscape analysis was performed on a C18 Evo column (EV1109, Evosep) using a 21-minute gradient, allowing for 60 samples per day (SPD). For cell treatment and transfection experiments, an in-house packed PicoFrit column was used with the 58 min whisper 20 SPD method for full proteomes samples, and 31 min 40 SPD whisper for phosphopeptide samples. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using data-independent acquisition (DIA). For 21 min runs the DIA method used an MS1 scan range from 350 to 1400 m/z, 120,000 resolution, maximum 25 ms injection time with 3E6 target, MS/MS used default charge 2, loop count 49, 15,000 resolution, 13.7 m/z isolation windows, NCE 27, 22 ms maximum injection time with 3E6 target, with DIA window centers from 471.5 to 1129.1 m/z. Profile mode was used for both for MS1 and MS2. For 58 min runs MS1 scans were from 395 to 1005 m/z, 60,000 resolution, 55 ms maximum injection time with 3E6 target, with centroid acquisition. For MS/MS default charge 3, resolution 15,000, Auto maximum injection time with 1E6 target, NCE27, loop count 75, 8 m/z windows, with a total of 151 staggered windows with centers between 400.4 and 1000.7 m/z. For 31 min runs MS1 scans were from 350 to 1400 m/z at 120,000 resolution, 25 ms maximum injection time with 3E6 target. For MS/MS default charge 2, 15,000 resolution, auto maximum injection time with 3E6 target, loop count 50, 100 staggered 13.7 m/z windows between 471.5 and 1149.65 m/z. All spectra for the 31 min and 58 min methods were collected in centroid mode.
Data processing
MS raw data files were converted to mzML using msconvert of Proteowizard with vendor peak picking for profile mode files and demultiplexing for files with staggered DIA windows. DIA-NN 1.8.1 in library-free mode was used for processing of the data into quantitative peptide and protein tables. The data were searched with the reviewed part of the human proteome UniProtKB database as of May 2022 with max 1 missed cleavage and fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Full proteome data were searched with no variable modification. Phosphoenriched data were searched with max one variable phospho (STY) for the cell line landscape data and max two phospho (STY) for the treatment data. The data were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein level within DIA-NN.
Data analysis
Normalization of the protein and phosphopeptides abundance data and differential expression analysis using LIMMA ebayes statistics were conducted using NormalyzerDE v1.20. Benjamini Hochberg correction of p-values was used for filtering of group-wise differential expression comparisons at different FDRs. OmicLoupe was used for the generation of Principal Component Analysis (PCA), volcano and box plots. Enrichment analyses were performed using STRING, Metascape and Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) with ClusterProfiler to identify enriched pathways and biological processes, providing insights into the functional significance of the data.
Functional scores for phosphosites were calculated using the funscoR R package(version 0.1.0), Briefly, phosphosites were annotated using annotate_sites(), and separate functional models were trained for serine/threonine (ST) and tyrosine (Y) residues using a gold-standard dataset derived from PhosphoSitePlus (psp). Features were preprocessed, and scores were predicted using predict_funscore(). The resulting functional scores were log-transformed and used to prioritize biologically relevant phosphorylation sites. This approach is conceptually based on the framework described by Ochoa et al, but scores were computed specifically for our dataset using custom-trained models. PTM signature enrichment analysis (PTM-SEA) was performed using PTMSigDB human flanking sequence signatures v2.0.

RESULTS:
Results
Mapping the proteomic and phosphoproteomic landscape to identify therapeutic targets in ovarian cancer
To characterize the proteomic and phosphoproteomic landscapes of ovarian cancers, we performed a comprehensive analysis using LC-MS DIA across a selection of ovarian cancer cell lines, each representing distinct subtypes and genetic alterations (Fig. 1A). The panel of cell lines used in this study includes well-established ovarian cancer models with diverse genetic backgrounds. It encompassed four major ovarian cancer subtypes: HGSOC—KURAMOCHI, NIHOVCAR3, OVSAHO, and CAOV3 cell lines; clear cell carcinoma—SKOV3, IGROV1, and JHOC5 cell lines; endometrioid carcinoma—A2780 cell line; and low-grade serous ovarian cancer—ES2 cell line.
We quantified 7153 protein groups and 28,475 phosphopeptides in the proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses, respectively, and subsequently applied principal component analysis (PCA) on the six replicates of all cell lines to reduce dimensionality. All replicates within each cell line formed distinct clusters, regardless of whether proteomic (Fig. 1B) or phosphoproteomic (Fig. 1C) data were analyzed. This clustering highlights the high reproducibility of the experimental procedures but also the complexity of ovarian cancer biology with large differences between the cell lines. Moreover, distinct separation was observed at both proteome and phosphoproteome levels between the cell lines. Furthermore, groups of cell lines representing the same subtypes could be distinguished in the PCA plots, aligning with their identified subtypes (Supplementary Fig. 1). We have deposited the proteomic data in a publicly available repository to allow for further investigation of cell line-specific proteome and phosphoproteome attributes.
Enriched proteomic features of aggressiveness in KURAMOCHI
Given the apparent variation in proteomes between the cell lines, with many proteins differing between individual and groups of cell lines, we set out to explore those differences further, knowing that the large heterogeneity of ovarian cancers sets a need for precision treatment. The KURAMOCHI cell line has been shown to have strong genomic resemblance to patient-derived HGSOC tumors, based on profiling of gene expression, mutations, and copy-number alterations. KURAMOCHI obtained the highest suitability score as cell line model for HGSOC in the study of Domcke et al. 11 as it is closely resembling patient-derived HGSOC tumors in terms of copy-number alterations, mutation frequency and mutation status in key genes. It has mutations in TP53 and BRCA2, amplifications in MYC and KRAS, and exhibits functional homologous recombination deficiency, making it highly suitable as an HGSOC model. We therefore initially compared the proteome and phosphoproteome of this cell line to those of the other eight ovarian cancer cell lines. The protein expression profile displayed 842 proteins with significant differences (FDR < 0.05 and log2 fold change > 1) when comparing it to the other cell lines (Fig. 2A, Supplementary Data S1). Among those 576 proteins were detected at significantly higher abundance in KURAMOCHI, while 266 proteins were found at lower levels. We subjected the proteins detected at higher levels to enrichment analyses in Metascape (Fig. 2B). Several gene ontologies and pathways were found to be enriched, with actin filament-based processes, small molecule catabolic processes, and smooth muscle contraction being the most significant. These enriched functions and processes are consistent with features often associated with enhanced motility and aggressiveness in cancer cells, suggesting that the proteomic profile of KURAMOCHI may reflect a more mobile phenotype with metastatic potential.
High level of phosphorylated MTDH in KURAMOCHI
Protein phosphorylation is a critical regulatory mechanism, and analysis of the phosphorylation status highlights how proteins interact with and activate various signaling pathways, thereby offering a more nuanced understanding of cellular function and the molecular underpinnings of cancer. We, therefore, analyzed the differentially abundant phosphopeptides between the KURAMOCHI cell line and the other cell lines (FDR < 0.01 and log2 fold change > 1), revealing 1096 phosphopeptides with significantly higher abundance and 604 with significantly lower levels in KURAMOCHI cells (Fig. 2C, Supplementary Data S2). To prioritize phosphosites with potential biological relevance, we applied a functional score analysis as described by Ochoa et al.. This scoring system integrates evolutionary conservation, structural context, and functional annotation to predict the likelihood that a given phosphosite is functionally important. We focused this analysis on the differentially expressed phosphosites, particularly those with increased abundance in KURAMOCHI cells. Through this method, we could identify the phosphosites with the highest functional scores (Fig. 2D), including Metadherin (MTDH at S568), Histone Deacetylase 7 (HDAC7 at S155), and Eukaryotic Elongation Factor 2 (EEF2 at T57). MTDH is involved in various cellular processes, including oncogenesis, metastasis, and chemotherapy response; HDAC7 plays a role in transcriptional regulation, development, and cell cycle progression through histone deacetylation; EEF2 is crucial for protein synthesis, facilitating the translocation of ribosomes along mRNA. Abundance of the MTDH S568 peptide varied across the cell lines, with KURAMOCHI showing the highest levels (Fig. 2E). To explore the levels of this phosphorylation in tumors and adjacent tissue, we explored clinical phosphoproteomics data from the Clinical Cancer Proteomics Consortium (CPTAC) using cProSite. MTDH S568 phosphorylation showed a significant increase in tumor samples compared to adjacent normal tissues ( p-value < 0.0001, Fig. 2F), with a large spread across the analyzed tumors. Furthermore, the phosphorylation-to-protein ratio at this site was significantly higher in tumors, suggesting a tumor-specific enhancement of this post-translational modification (p-value < 0.0001, Fig. 2G).
MTDH overexpression and its functional link to SND1 in ovarian cancer
Following our phosphoproteomic analysis, MTDH emerged as an interesting candidate based on its high functional score and elevated phosphorylation at S568 in KURAMOCHI cells. Notably, the MTDH protein itself was also found at high levels in KURAMOCHI, showing a similar pattern to the S568 phosphosite across the panel of ovarian cancer cell lines, though with slightly less variation between the highest and lowest levels (Fig. 3A). Furthermore, proteomic data from cProSite, showed significantly higher MTDH expression in ovarian tumors compared to adjacent normal tissues (p-value < 0.008, Fig. 3B).
These findings prompted us to explore MTDH in greater depth as a potential oncogenic driver in HGSOC. Previous studies have implicated MTDH in tumor progression, metastasis, and poor clinical outcomes across various cancer types. Among its known interaction partners, SND1 has been described as a key effector of MTDH-mediated oncogenic signaling, particularly in the context of metastasis and chemoresistance. The protein levels of SND1 across the cell lines in this study were highest in OVSAHO and KURAMOCHI (Fig. 3C). Similarly to MTDH, analysis of cProSite data indicated significantly higher levels of SND1 expression in ovarian tumor tissues relative to adjacent normal tissues (p-value < 0.0001, Fig. 3D). Together, these observations highlighted the MTDH–SND1 axis as a potentially important mechanism in ovarian cancer, emerging from our integrated proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis. This led us to experimentally investigate the localization and functional roles of both proteins in relevant cell models.
To characterize the cellular localization of MTDH and SND1 we performed immunocytochemical analyses of both KURAMOCHI and OVSAHO cells. MTDH was predominantly localized to the perinuclear region of the nucleus and was also detected within the cytoplasm (Fig. 3E, Supplementary Fig. 2). Similarly, protein SND1 was observed primarily at the nuclear periphery, with substantial distribution throughout the cytoplasm, indicating a dual compartmental role for these proteins. The cytoplasmic distribution of MTDH in endometrial and ovarian cancer has also been observed by Meng et al. 26. In the cytoplasm, MTDH associates with RNA and RNA-binding proteins, including SND1 26. This interaction is crucial for MTDH’s role in promoting cell survival and drug resistance, positioning it as a potential therapeutic target. This observation is in line with our experimental findings in ovarian cancer cell lines, further supporting the oncogenic role of SND1.
Dose-dependent response to drug targeting of the MTDH-SND1 interaction
The compound C26A6 has been reported as a potent inhibitor of metastasis, and enhanced chemotherapy sensitivity by disrupting the interaction between MTDH and SND1 proteins in breast cancer. We treated KURAMOCHI with C26A6 and assessed cell viability using the ATP and PrestoBlue assays. The results demonstrated a dose-dependent response to the compound, cell viability decreased with increasing drug concentration (Fig. 4A, B). There were differences between the two assays, although both are used to measure cell viability through different mechanisms. The ATP Lite assay quantifies cellular activity by measuring ATP levels, indicative of cell viability and energy production. Conversely, the PrestoBlue assay, a resazurin-based compound, measures metabolic activity, offering insights into cellular health but not necessarily aligning with viable cell counts. We also evaluated the colony-forming ability of the cells after treatment. The results demonstrated a dose-dependent response to C26A6, affecting the colony formation of the cells (Fig. 4C, D).
Proteome and phosphoproteome effects of targeting MTDH–SND1
While the disruption of the SND1–MTDH interaction has been previously characterized in breast cancer, its downstream effects in ovarian cancer remain largely unexplored. Here, we aimed to investigate proteome- and phosphoproteome-level changes following inhibition of this interaction in ovarian cancer cells to uncover potential mechanisms of action. Based on viability assays, we selected 50 µM C26A6 as a sub-cytotoxic concentration for treatment. At this dose, PrestoBlue results indicated approximately 50% viability, while ATP-Lite measurements showed ~ 90% viability, suggesting that the compound induces early metabolic effects before overt cell death. This concentration was therefore chosen to capture molecular alterations associated with MTDH–SND1 inhibition, minimizing confounding effects from widespread cytotoxicity. Following this treatment, a total of 6,026 proteins were quantified, of which 13 were significantly differentially abundant at FDR < 0.05 (Fig. 5A). Significantly downregulated genes upon treatment were LYPD1, ALPL, IREB2, CD109, and TFRC which each has shown effect in metastasis and tumorigenesis. The treatment of cancer cells with C26A6 led to significant changes in the protein abundance across various key biological pathways. To detect pathway level differences after C26A6 treatment, also among proteins that showed less pronounced differences, differentially abundant proteins (371 proteins, p-value < 0.05, Supplementary Data S3) were subjected to functional enrichment analysis in STRING and demonstrated distinct pathway enrichments across multiple databases. Specifically, ferroptosis pathways were found to be significantly enriched in both the KEGG and WikiPathways databases. Collagen formation pathways were notably highlighted within the Reactome database, while amino acid metabolism showed enrichment in WikiPathways (Fig. 5B). The enrichment of ferroptosis pathways suggests that the drug may induce cell death through iron-dependent oxidative stress, a mechanism that is increasingly recognized for its potential in cancer therapy. Additionally, the alteration of collagen formation pathways could imply impacts on the extracellular matrix and tumor microenvironment, potentially affecting tumor stiffness and metastatic potential. The observed changes in amino acid metabolism and general metabolic pathways indicate a broad alteration in cellular metabolism, which may reflect the cells’ adaptive responses to the drug or a direct effect of the drug itself on metabolic processes. These insights collectively suggest that blocking MTDH-SND1 using C26A6 exerts multifaceted effects on cancer cells, disrupting primary metabolic functions and specific pathways critical to cancer cell survival and proliferation.
In the phosphoproteomic analysis of the cells, 14,793 phosphopeptides were identified, of which 845 were found to be differentially abundant (p-value < 0.05) when treated with C26A6 (Supplementary Data S4). Phosphosite signature enrichment analysis (PTM-SEA) was performed to identify differentially phosphorylated kinase substrates. The analysis revealed a downregulation in phosphorylation levels of kinase substrates, indicating reduced kinase activity of CDK1-CCNB1, AURKA, PRKD3, and NEK9 with FDR < 0.05 (Fig. 5C). Four phosphopeptides showed significantly lower abundance after treatment (FDR < 0.05, Fig. 5D). The findings demonstrate the drug’s precise targeting of cell proliferation and invasion in cancer cells. The downregulated kinases are intricately linked to crucial cellular processes such as survival, progression, and proliferation.
Silencing of MTDH and SND1 shows distinct and common effects
To unveil the intrinsic molecular mechanisms and cellular processes involving MTDH and SND1, and excluding potential off-target effects of C26A6, we transfected KURAMOCHI cells with siRNA targeting each protein separately and examined the resulting proteome and phosphoproteome profiles (Supplementary Fig. 3). The proteins with increased or decreased abundance (FDR < 0.01, Supplementary Data S5, S6) were analyzed for molecular function and pathway overlaps. The silencing of MTDH significantly lowered proteins found in gene sets involved in cancer-related pathways such as VEGFA-VEGFR2 and EGF-EGFR signaling (Table 1), which are crucial for angiogenesis and cell proliferation. Additionally, observed reductions in protein levels in pathways essential for actin cytoskeleton regulation and integrin-mediated cell adhesion suggest a role for MTDH in enhancing cancer cell motility and invasion. Decreased levels of proteins involved in molecular functions such as cadherin-, cytoskeletal protein-cell adhesion molecule- and purine nucleotide-binding were observed in both MTDH and SND1 silencing. The silencing of SND1 led to a marked downregulation of proteins in both the VEGFA-VEGFR2 and EGF-EGFR signaling pathways, similar to the effects observed with MTDH. Additionally, lowered levels of proteins involved in the pleural mesothelioma pathway were found, highlighting this protein’s potential role in mesothelial cell tumorigenesis (Table 1). Moreover, the molecular function and pathway overlap analysis of upregulated proteins showed several shared entities in invasion and cell proliferation upon silencing of the two proteins separately (Supplementary Table 1). The observed mix of upregulation and downregulation among cancer-related functions underscores the nuanced compensatory mechanisms initiated by cells in response to gene silencing and may reflect a concerted effort to restore internal equilibrium. Collectively, these findings emphasize the shared role of MTDH and SND1 in promoting cancer progression and highlight their potential as therapeutic targets.
We further conducted PTM-SEA using phosphoproteomics data from the siRNA transfections (Supplementary Table 2). Notably, the silencing of both genes led to significant decreases in phosphosite signatures of CK2A2 and CK2A1 inhibition. Both are catalytic subunits of the protein kinase CK2 (casein kinase 2), a serine/threonine-protein kinase. CK2 is implicated in various cellular functions and tumorigenesis, with elevated activity linked to malignant tissue transformation and aggressive tumor behavior.
C26A6 enhances susceptibility to ferroptosis inducers and inhibits ovarian cancer cell proliferation
To identify overlapping biological pathways affected by C26A6 treatment and silencing of MTDH and/or SND1, we performed pathway enrichment analysis based on differentially expressed proteins. We then filtered the results to include only those pathways that were shared between C26A6 treatment and at least one of the silencing conditions (MTDH, SND1, or both). These shared pathways were visualized using a bubble plot (Fig. 6). Several key pathways were consistently enriched, including ferroptosis, proximal tubule transport, nuclear receptors metapathway, NRF2 pathway, focal adhesion–PI3K–AKT–mTOR signaling, complement system, cholesterol synthesis and metabolism, and amino acid metabolism. These overlaps suggest that targeting MTDH–SND1 affects broad cellular processes, with ferroptosis being one of the shared pathways. The enrichment of overlapping pathways across all three conditions suggests that these are not incidental findings. Rather, the overlap suggests that these pathways represent true downstream consequences of targeting the MTDH–SND1 axis, reinforcing the biological relevance of this interaction in ovarian cancer cell regulation.
Interestingly, pathway enrichment analysis in WikiPathways of 63 common proteins that were significantly differentially abundant upon C26A6-treatment and MTDH- and SND1-silencing (Fig. 7A, Supplementary Data S7) demonstrated enrichment in ferroptosis pathway and iron metabolism (Fig. 7B), consistent with previous GSEA results. Among the overlapping proteins were six key ferroptosis-related proteins: TFRC, FTH1, FTL, CP, AKR1C3, and SLC3A2, highlighting a potential regulatory link between MTDH–SND1 inhibition and ferroptotic vulnerability. Given that C26A6 exhibited dysregulation in the ferroptosis process, we investigated its interaction with two ferroptosis inducers, Erastin and ML-162, to evaluate their combined effects with C26A6 on HGSOC cell lines. Combination effects between the drugs were assessed using SynergyFinder, indicating a synergistic effect with a Bliss score of 6.9 in the combination with Erastin and a Bliss score of 6.3 in the combination with ML-162 in the KURAMOCHI cell line (Fig. 7C, D). Notably, SynergyFinder also reported “most synergistic area” scores of ~ 21 for both combinations, indicating strong synergy at specific dose ranges. Next, we applied the same combined treatments to evaluate their impact on the colony-forming ability and observed a synergistic decrease in colony formation (Fig. 7E, F). To explore the broader applicability of our findings, we also tested CAOV3, which lacks a BRCA mutation but harbors a TP53 alteration with moderate HGSOC resemblance, and IGROV1, which carries a BRCA1 mutation but exhibits a hypermutated, non-HGSOC molecular profile (Supplementary Figs. 4, 5). The results in both showed Bliss scores > 0, indicating synergy, although at varying levels. Based on these observations, our data suggest that C26A6 reduces cell proliferation and may increase cellular susceptibility to ferroptosis inducers, resulting in enhanced inhibitory effects on ovarian cancer cells.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Ovarian cancer stands as the most lethal form of gynecologic malignancy affecting women worldwide. This disease exhibits remarkable heterogeneity, characterized by various types and subtypes. Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), which represents approximately 90% of all ovarian cancer cases, is categorized into five distinct histological subtypes. Among these, high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) is predominant, accounting for 70% of EOC cases. It is typically diagnosed at an advanced stage, leading to the majority of ovarian cancer-related deaths. HGSOC is notable for its high fatality rate, highlighting the critical need for improved treatment strategies.
Ovarian cancer is commonly diagnosed after it has already metastasized to the abdominal cavity, a stage at which the disease becomes particularly challenging to treat. Despite initial responsiveness to standard treatments, which include surgery and platinum-based chemotherapy, there is an alarming 80% relapse rate due to chemoresistance. The absence of effective therapies for metastatic stages and chemoresistance represents the primary obstacles to decreasing the mortality rate associated with metastatic ovarian cancer. Addressing this gap calls for the adoption of high-throughput technologies, such as omics, to explore new biomarkers and decode the complex mechanisms of drug resistance.
Among omics technologies for biomarker discovery, proteomics offers distinct advantages over genomics and transcriptomics in cancer research due to its direct assessment of proteins and their posttranslational modifications (PTMs). PTMs are the ultimate effectors of cellular function and are not detectable by genomics-based approaches. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics stands out for its high analytical depth and quantitative ability to identify protein biomarkers. Additionally, phosphoproteomics, achieved through the enrichment of phosphopeptides and measurements using the same technology, plays a pivotal role in monitoring the regulation of essential cancer hallmarks such as cell migration, invasion, and metastasis. Abnormalities in phosphorylation of key proteins within these processes can pinpoint vulnerabilities in cancer cells that, when targeted, could offer promising new treatment avenues.
The primary goal of this study was to identify dysregulated mechanisms within ovarian cancer cells to discover new therapeutic entry points that can lead to more efficient and personalized treatment options. As fundament, we first created a comprehensive atlas of protein and phosphoprotein profiles from nine ovarian cancer cell lines from different subtypes, using liquid-chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Exploration of these datasets facilitates not only discovery of regulation differences in proteins and phosphopeptides between cell lines representing different subtypes, but also showcases the diversity across different cell lines, even from the same subtype.
We then performed comparative proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses between the KURAMOCHI cell line, noted for its genetic similarity to tumor tissue, and other ovarian cancer cell lines. This approach was used to identify dysregulated pathways and prioritize candidate proteins for further investigation, ultimately leading us to focus on MTDH and SND1, two proteins known for their roles in metastasis and drug resistance in breast cancer, which we investigated in the context of ovarian cancer. Our analysis indicates that the interaction of these two proteins is likely to be relevant to ovarian cancer progression and merits further investigation as a possible therapeutic target.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Data availability
The raw data mass spectrometry data and the DIA-NN search results have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059892, available at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD059892.
Declarations