PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Astral
modifications: monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Faims; Dia; Astral; Ihcf; Tmtpro

ABSTRACT:
Comprehensive global proteome profiling that is amenable to high throughput processing will broaden our understanding of complex biological systems. Here, we evaluated two leading mass spectrometry techniques—Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) and Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT)—for extensive protein abundance profiling. DIA provides label-free quantification with a broad dynamic range, while TMT enables multiplexed analysis using isobaric tags for efficient cross-sample comparisons. We analyzed 18 samples, including four cell lines (IHCF, HCT116, HeLa, MCF7) under standard growth conditions, in addition to IHCF treated with two H₂O₂ concentrations, all in triplicate. Experiments were conducted on an Orbitrap Astral mass spectrometer, employing Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS). Despite utilizing different acquisition strategies, both the DIA and TMT approaches achieved comparable proteome depth and quantitative consistency, with each method quantifying over 10,000 proteins across all samples, with slightly more protein-level precision for the TMT strategy. Relative abundance correlation analysis showed strong agreement at both peptide and protein levels. Our findings highlight the complementary strengths of DIA and TMT for high-coverage proteomic studies, providing flexibility in method selection based on specific experimental needs.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Isobaric Tagging and Data Independent Acquisition as Complementary Strategies for Proteome Profiling on an Orbitrap Astral Mass Spectrometry

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell lysis and protein digestion. Three hundred microliters of native lysis buffer (PBS with 0.1% NP-40, pH 7.4) were added directly to each pellet for lysis. Cells were homogenized by 12 passes through a 21-gauge (1.25 inches long) needle. The homogenate was sedimented by centrifugation at 21,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher Scientific). Proteins were subjected to disulfide bond reduction with 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (room temperature, 15 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 20 min in the dark). Excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 10 mM dithiothreitol (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Methanol-chloroform precipitation was performed prior to protease digestion. Samples were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5 and digested at room temperature for 14 h with LysC protease at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin was then added at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio and the reaction was incubated for 6 h at 37 °C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometric data analysis (for TMT-based data acquisition). Mass spectra were processed using a Comet-based in-house software pipeline. Database searching included all entries from the human UniProt database, which were concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level profiling. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were selected to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis (LDA). TMTpro labels on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+304.207 Da), as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da), were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using LDA and then assembled further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs, also as described previously. Reporter ion intensities were adjusted to correct for the isotopic impurities of the different TMTpro reagents according to manufacturer specifications. The signal-to-noise (S/N) measurements of peptides assigned to each protein were summed and these values were normalized so that the sum of the signal for all proteins in each channel was equivalent to adjust for unequal protein loading. Finally, each protein abundance measurement was scaled such that the summed signal-to-noise for that protein across all channels equaled 100, thereby generating a relative abundance (RA) measurement.   Mass spectrometric data analysis (for DIA-based data acquisition). Raw files were analyzed with Spectronaut 19.1.240806.62635 using the directDIA analysis type. The settings for Pulsar and the directDIA+ workflow were as follows: Trypsin/P and LysC as specific enzymes; peptide length from 7 to 52; max missed cleavages 2; Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation on methionine as a variable modification; FDRs at PSM, peptide and protein level all set to 0.01; minimum fragment relative intensity 1%; 3–6 fragments kept for each precursor. Data analysis and visualization were performed in Microsoft Excel or R.