PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Ependymal cell
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Cytoskeleton; Ciliogenesis; Differentiation; Mtor; Cell cycle

ABSTRACT:
Ependymal cells are multiciliated cells lining the brain ventricles, which arise from the differentiation of progenitor cells through the phases of centriole amplification, growth and disengagement phases. Since these commitment phases are accompanied by the sharp up-regulation of mTOR complex 1 activity (mTORC1), a master regulator of macromolecule biosynthesis and cell growth, we address its functional role. We show that mTORC1 inhibition by rapamycin maintains the progenitor pool by reinforcing a quiescent state and blocking the alternative cell cycle progression for centriole amplification. Overexpression of E2F4 and Mcidas bypasses the mTORC1-regulated events and rescues centriole amplification even in the presence of rapamycin, while promoting mTORC1 activity in a positive feed-forward mechanism. Acute rapamycin treatment in multicentriolar cells during the late phases of differentiation causes centriole regrouping, indicating a direct role of mTORC1 on centriole dynamics. By phosphoproteomic and phospho-mutant analysis, we reveal that the mTORC1-mediated phosphorylation of Gas2L1, a centrosomal protein linking actin and microtubule cytoskeletons, participates in the centriole disengagement. This multi-layered and sequential control of ependymal development by mTORC1, from the progenitor pool to the centriolar function, has implications for pathophysiological conditions, such as aging and hydrocephalus-prone genetic diseases.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
mTOR orchestrates sequential phases of ependymal cell differentiation by acting on their alternative cell cycle and centrosomal proteins

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell lysates were prepared according to specifications from Cell Signaling Technology for phosphoproteomic analysis. Briefly, 2 x 108 cells of each condition were starved for 2 hours in Earl’s Balanced Salt Solution (EBSS; #24010043; Gibco) and then rinsed with ice-cold PBS. After carefully removing all PBS, cells were serially lysed in 10 ml of fresh urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 9 M urea, 1mM activated sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM β-glycerol-phosphate) and passed through 21G sting ten times, to produce ~20-40mg of protein per condition. Lysates were frozen at -80 °C until processed for PTMScan analysis as previously described (Stokes et al., 2015) (Cell Signaling Technology). Cellular extracts were sonicated, centrifuged, reduced with DTT, and alkylated with iodoacetamide. 500g total protein for each sample was digested with trypsin and purified over C18 columns for enrichment with the Fe-IMAC (#20432) column. Enriched peptides were purified over C18 STAGE tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003).  Enriched peptides were subjected to secondary digest with trypsin and a second STAGE tip before LC-MS/MS analysis. Replicate injections of each sample were run non-sequentially for each enrichment. Peptides were eluted using a 90-minute or 150-minute linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid delivered at 280 nL/min.  Tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner with a Thermo Orbitrap QExactive or Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer using a top-twenty MS/MS method, a dynamic repeat count of one, and a repeat duration of 30 sec.  Real-time recalibration of mass error was performed using lock mass (Olsen et al., 2005) with a singly charged polysiloxane ion m/z = 371.101237.   MS/MS spectra were evaluated using SEQUEST and the Core platform from Harvard University (Eng et al., 1994; Huttlin et al., 2010; Villen et al., 2007). Files were searched against the most recent update of the UniProt mus musculus FASTA database.  A mass accuracy of +/-5 ppm was used for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for product ions.  Enzyme specificity was limited to trypsin, with at least one tryptic (K- or R-containing) terminus required per peptide and up to four mis-cleavages allowed.  Cysteine carboxamidomethylation was specified as a static modification, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues were allowed as variable modifications.  Reverse decoy databases were included for all searches to estimate false discovery rates, and filtered using a 2.5% FDR in the Linear Discriminant module of Core. Peptides were also manually filtered using a -/+ 5ppm mass error range and the presence of a phosphorylated residue.  All quantitative results were generated using Skyline (MacLean) to extract the integrated peak area of the corresponding peptide assignments in the MS1 channel.  The accuracy of quantitative data was ensured by manual review in Skyline or in the ion chromatogram files.

DATA PROCESSING:
All raw data files from Xcalibur software were directly analyzed by GFY-Core (version 3.0) using the Sequest search engine Swissprot_Mouse_ISO4prot