PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Tetrandrine; limp-2; sphingosine-mediated mechanism; proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Tetrandrine (Tet) is a highly potent inhibitor of Ebola virus replication by blocking NAADP-dependent calcium release through endolysosomal two-pore channels (TPCs) and is a moderately potent anti-tumor agent. Using a clickable, photoaffinity probe of Tet, we identified lysosomal integral membrane protein-2 (LIMP-2) as the genuine molecular target of Tet and a novel regulator for NAADP-dependent calcium release. Tet binds to the ectodomain of LIMP-2 and inhibits its cholesterol and sphingosine transport function, resulting in the alteration of lipid profiles and metabolic pathways in cells and development of acute hypercholesterolemia and hepatosteatosis in mice. Cells treated with Tet or depleted for LIMP-2 similarly inhibits NAADP-dependent calcium release, which can be restored by eliminating lysosomal cholesterol and sphingosines. Importantly, addition of sphingosine dose-dependently triggers lysosomal calcium release through TPCs, and restores NAADP-dependent calcium release in Tet-treated or LIMP-2-depleted cells. At higher concentrations, Tet induced apoptosis associated with unfolded protein response activation in a LIMP-2-independent manner.  We identified Tet as the first known inhibitor of LIMP-2, discerned its pharmacological principle in regulating calcium signalling and cell death, and discovered a novel LIMP-2-regulated, sphingosine-dependent lysosomal calcium signalling pathway. Our findings have profound implications in the understanding of lysosomal calcium signalling mechanisms and development of Tet and LIMP-2 inhibitors into clinical therapeutics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Tetrandrine regulates NAADP-mediated calcium signalling by a novel LIMP-2-dependent, sphingosine-mediated mechanism

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) containing either “light” isotope amino acids, L-arginine monohydrochloride and L-lysine hydrate, or “heavy” isotope amino acids, 15N213C6-lysine (Lys8) and 15N413C6-arginine (Arg10), for 6 doublings time to let the cells reach complete incorporation. For SILAC, both forward and reverse screening were conducted. In the forward screen, the “heavy” isotope labelled cells were treated with 5 μM AD-Tet, whereas the “light” isotope labelled cells were treated with 5 μM AD-Tet and 20 μM Tet for 2 hour. In the reverse screen, the “heavy” isotope labelled cells were treated with 5 μM AD-Tet and 20 μM Tet, whereas the “light” isotope labelled cells were treated with 5 μM AD-Tet for 2 hour. Cells were lysed with 1% NP-40 in 50 mM HEPES after photo-crosslinking. Biotinylation of AD-Tet/protein complexes was carried out by pooling of 100 μg of each “heavy” and “light” isotope labelled cell lysate, followed by click chemistry using 5 μM biotin azide and click chemistry reagents. Excess biotin azide was removed by addition of four volume of ice-cold acetone and overnight incubation at -20 oC. After incubation, the mixture was centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4 oC for 15 min. The pellet was washed with ice-cold methanol twice, air dry and re-dissolved in 1 % SDS. For affinity pull-down, the biotinylated cell lysates were mixed with streptavidin magnetic beads, and incubated for 2 hour at 4 oC. After incubation, streptavidin magnetic beads were washed using washing buffer (4 M urea, 250 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5) for 15 min. The pulldown proteins were subjected to on-beads tryptic digestion. The streptavidin magnetic beads were resuspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). Freshly prepared 10 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM NH4HCO3 were added to beads and incubated at 56oC for 45 min, followed by the addition of 10 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3. The reaction was carried out in dark for 30 mins. Supernatant was removed and precipitate was washed twice using 25 mM NH4HCO3. 200 ng of trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the beads and incubated at 37oC overnight. Digestion was stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to pH<4. Digested peptides were purified by PierceTM C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
All resulted spectra were searched against UniProt homo sapiens database (20,330 canonical entries, accessed 09/2019) using MaxQuant 1.5.8.2. Proteins were quantified with the intensities of the heavy (Arg10) and light (Lys8) isotopes. The parameters for searching are as follow: a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions; ± 0.1 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The enzyme was specified as trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. False discovery rate for peptide spectral matches and proteins were set as 1%. The maximum number of modifications per peptide was three. Only proteins identified with at least four unique peptides and with SILAC ratio larger than three, in both forward and reverse SILAC experiments were considered for the interpretation of results.