PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Platelet; Blood platelet
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: Ammonia-loss; Acetyl; Gln->pyro-Glu; Oxidation; Carbamidomethyl; Glu->pyro-Glu
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Phosphoproteome; Human platelets; N-terminal chafradic; Lc-ms; Proteome

ABSTRACT:
The Scott syndrome is a rare bleeding disorder associated with a mutation in the gene encoding anoctamin-6 (TMEM16F). After stimulation of Ca2+-mobilizing agonists, syndromatic platelets show a reduced phosphatidylserine exposure and do not form membrane blebs. Given the central role of anoctamin-6 in the platelet procoagulant response, we used quantitative proteomics to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms and the complex phenotypic changes in Scott platelets compared to control platelets. Therefore, we applied an iTRAQ-based multi-pronged strategy to quantify changes in (i) the global proteome, (ii) the phosphoproteome and (iii) proteolytic events between resting and stimulated Scott and control platelets.  Our data indicate a limited number of proteins with decreased (70) or increased (64) expression in Scott platelets, among those we observed the absence of anoctamin-6 and the strong up-regulation of aquaporin-1. Furthermore, the quantification of 1,566 phosphopeptides revealed major differences between Scott and control platelets after stimulation with thrombin/convulxin or ionomycin. Finally, we quantified 1,596 N-terminal peptides in activated Scott and control platelets, 180 of which we identified as calpain-regulated, whereas a distinct set of 23 neo-N-termini was caspase-regulated. In Scott platelets, calpain-induced cleavage of cytoskeleton-linked and signaling proteins was down-regulated, in accordance with an increased phosphorylation state. Thus, multi-pronged proteomic profiling of Scott platelets provides detailed insight into their protection against detrimental Ca2+-dependent changes that are normally associated with phosphatidylserine exposure.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Combined assessment of global proteome, phosphoproteome and N-terminal protein cleavage to characterize altered platelet functions in human Scott syndrome

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein concentrations of well purified platelets were determined using a bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce, Thermo-Fisher). Afterwards, samples were reduced and alkylated. Next, for filter-aided sample preparation, 150 µg of protein per sample were loaded onto a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin filter, as described elsewhere before. Thus, proteins were digested in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer pH 8.0, consisting of 50 mM TEAB, 200 mM guanidinium hydrochloride and 2 mM CaCl2, in the presence of trypsin (1:20 w/w, Sigma, T-1426) at 37 °C. After incubation for 7 hours, digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 13,800 g for 25 minutes. Filters were additionally washed with 50 µl of 50 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) and 50 µl of LC-MS grade water to increase peptide yield. Then, equal peptide amounts (~100 µg) were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in iTRAQ 8-plex solution buffer (AB Sciex, Dreieich, Germany) to label them according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The eight differently labelled activation states from the control subject and Scott patient (unstimulated and stimulated with thrombin, convulxin/thrombin and ionomycin) were pooled in a 1:1 ratio and the volume was reduced under vacuum. Subsequently, 10% of the pooled sample was used to analyse the global proteome. For this analysis, 50 µg were separated into a high-pH Reversed phase chromatographic system (pH6) thus 20 concatenated fractions were collected and individually analysed by LC-MS. However, to account for potential isolation interference in reporter ion-based quantification methods which can lead to ratio compression, we conducted an additional label-free quantification workflow. Therefore, 2 µg of untreated healthy and Scott platelets were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS in DDA mode, using a U3000 nano-RSLC system online-coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. The remaining 90% of the sample was used to perform a phosphopeptide analysis. Thus, a TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment protocol was conducted as previously described by Larsen and co-workers (Engholm-Keller K, et al. , 2012). Afterwards, enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated with a U3000 RSLC system running in hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) mode and 9 fractions were collected. All fractions were individually analyzed by LC-MS.  Sample digestion and preparation for determination of neo N-terminal cleavage sites was performed in triplicate for  sample set 1: platelets from healthy donor and the Scott patient, either (i) unstimulated or stimulated with (ii) thrombin (4 nM), (iii) convulxin/thrombin (100 ng/ml, 4 nM) or (iv) ionomycin (10 µM) and in duplicate for sample set 2: platelets from healthy donors either (i) unstimulated for 30 min, or 30 min stimulated with (ii) ionomycin (10 µM), (iii) ionomycin (10 µM) + calpain inhibitor calpeptin (200 µM), (iv) ionomycin (10 µM) + caspase inhibitor QVD-OPh (20 µM); as well as platelets from healthy donors either (v) unstimulated for 60 min, or 60 min stimulated with (vi) pro-apoptotic agent ABT-7373 (10 µM), (vii) pro-apoptotic agent ABT-7373 (10 µM) + calpain inhibitor calpeptin (200 µM), (viii) pro-apoptotic agent ABT-7373 (10 µM) + caspase inhibitor QVD-OPh (20 µM).  Thus, proteins were precipitated using ice-cold ethanol to further be resuspended in 10 µl 10% SDS. These samples were then diluted to 1% SDS with 0.5 M TEAB containing 20% isopropanol (v/v). iTRAQ 8-plex reagents in isopropanol (40 µl) were added and allowed to react for 2 hours at 25 °C. Subsequently, all 8 samples were pooled and the reaction was quenched with 60 mM glycine (10 minutes at room temperature), followed by incubation with 130 mM hydroxylamine to reverse side reactions of hydroxyl groups (10 minutes at room temperature). For proteolytic digestion, the multiplex samples were subjected to ethanol precipitation and resuspended in 0.2 M guanidine HCl, 50 mM TEAB buffer and 2 mM CaCl2 (final concentrations). Trypsin (Sigma, T1426) was added at enzyme/protein ratio of 1:20. After 14 hours trypsination at 37 °C, reactions were stopped with 1% TFA, and the proteolytic digest was controlled using monolithic reversed phase chromatography. Afterwards, Charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) for determination of neo-N-terminal cleavage sites was essentially conducted as previously described (Venne AS, et a.l, 2013). Finally enriched fractions in N-terminal peptides were analysed by LC-MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
iTRAQ global proteome and phosphoproteome data were interpreted as follows. Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and 1.3 respectively (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Thus, data were searched against the Uniprot human database, Mascot and Sequest were used as search algorithms with the following settings: (i) trypsin as enzyme allowing two missed cleavages, (ii) iTRAQ 8-plex at N-termini and lysines and carbamidomethylation of Cys residues as fixed modifications, (iii) oxidation of methionine as variable modification, (iv) mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation on the level of peptide spectrum matches was performed using the peptide validator node with filtering for 1% FDR (high confidence filter). The reporter ion quantifier node was used for iTRAQ reporter quantification. For the phosphoproteome analysis, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr (+79.9663 Da) was set as variable modification furthermore, for localization of phosphorylated sites phospho-RS was used.For the global proteome only unique proteins quantified with at least 2 unique peptides were considered. Next, normalization factors were determinate and used to compensate for individual systematic errors (i.e. unequal sample amounts derived from pipetting errors or inaccurate BCA results) and to obtain normalized ratios. In addition, all data was scaled to obtain normalized abundance per iTRAQ channel. For the phosphoproteome, the obtained normalization factors from the global proteome were used to normalize the data and it was as well scaled to obtain normalized abundances. Furthermore, only phosphopeptides with phospho-RS probabilities >90% were considered as confident. Thus, for determination of confident phosphorylation sites at the peptide and protein level a ready-to-use Excel macro provided by Mechtler lab (http://ms.imp.ac.at/?goto=phosphors) was used. Additionally, label free quantification was performed using the Progenesis LC-MS software version 4.1 from Nonlinear Dynamics in combination with SearchGUI 2.8.1 and PeptideShaker 1.19.2.The following search parameters were used: (i) trypsin as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages, (ii) carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed, and (iii) oxidation of Met as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. For all proteins, ratios between Scott and control platelets were calculated based on normalized areas obtained from Progenesis and log2-transformed. Regulations factors in both cases were as 2x SD of the normal distributed data. Finally, generated raw data from ChaFRADIC were searched against the human Uniprot database using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 and Mascot 2.4 as search engine, reporter ion quantifier and percolator nodes. Enzyme specificities were set to semi-Arg-C, as Lys residues were blocked by iTRAQ labeling. To enable the quantification of two classes of N-terminal peptides, i.e. those with N-terminal iTRAQ label and those with endogenous N-acetylation, a two-step search strategy was performed. First, data were searched with iTRAQ-8plex (+304.2053 Da) as fixed modification at Lys and peptide N-termini; second, iTRAQ 8plex of Lys and N-terminal acetylation (+ 42.0105 Da) of N-termini were set as fixed modifications. In both cases, carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0214 Da) was selected as fixed and oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine as variable modification. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS and 0.02 Da for MS/MS. Identified peptides were filtered for high confidence corresponding to an FDR <1% at the PSM level, and a search engine rank of 1. The reporter ion quantifier node was adjusted according to the search settings. Quantification of N-terminal peptides across samples and conditions were essentially done as described for the phosphoproteome data. Sample set 2 was used to validate potential Calpain substrates. Therefore, the following ratios were determined: (i) ionomycin / unstimulated (ion effect); (ii) ionomycin+calpeptin / unstimulated (effect calpain inhibition); (iii) ionomycin+QVD-OPh / unstimulated (effect caspase inhibition)., (iv) ABT737 / unstimulated (ABT effect), (v)  ABT737+QVD-OPh / unstimulated (effect caspase inhibition), (vi) ABT737+calpeptin/ unstimulated (effect calpain inhibition). Sample set 1 was used to identify differential proteolytic cleavage between Scott and healthy platelets which we hypothesized to partially derive from Calpain activity. Therefore, for Set 1 only N-terminal peptides which were in agreement with the consensus motif (previously defined by an in vitro digestion of purified platelets platelets with recombinant calpain) showing a fold change between conditions were considered as regulated.

METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Materials
Convulxin was purified to homogeneity from crude snake venom. Proteinase-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) agonist peptide SFLLRN was from Bachem (Bubendorf, Switzerland), human α-thrombin and ionomycin were from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled anti-CD62P mAb against P-selectin was from Beckman Coulter (Marseille, France); FITC-annexin A5 from PharmaTarget (Maastricht, The Netherlands); Alexa Fluor (AF)647-labeled fibrinogen from Invitrogen Life Technologies (Bleiswijk, The Netherlands); ABT-737 from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA); QVD-Oph and calpeptin from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Other chemicals, (ant)agonists and antibodies were obtained from sources described before.
Patient and Control Subjects
Blood was obtained from four healthy volunteers and a diagnosed patient with Scott syndrome (ScottUK, the only one available worldwide for blood donations) after full informed consent (Helsinki declaration). The ScottUK patient has been characterized as heterozygous for two mutations in the ANO6 alleles: a transition at the first nucleotide of intron 6 (IVS6 + 1G→A), disrupting the splice site consensus sequence of intron 6, and a single-nucleotide insertion in exon 11 (c.1219insT), predicting a frameshift at codon 411. Both mutations are not compatible with normal translation. Not available to this study were the two other described Scott patients. However, mutations in ANO6 have also been identified in these patients from the United States and France (F. Toti, personal communication). Protocols were approved by the local Medical Ethics Committees.
Blood Collection and Platelet Isolation
Blood samples were collected into 1/6 volume of acid-citrate glucose solution (ACD, 80 mm trisodium citrate, 52 mm citric acid, and 180 mm glucose). Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was obtained by centrifuging at 260 × g for 15 min. After addition of 1/15 volume of ACD, platelets were pelleted by centrifugation at 870 × g for 15 min. To obtain highly purified platelets, pellets were resuspended in Hepes buffer pH 6.6 (10 mm Hepes, 136 mm NaCl, 2.7 mm KCl, 2 mm MgCl2, and 0.1% glucose) by carefully excluding the bottom layer of red blood cells. After addition of ACD (1/15 volume) and apyrase (1 U/ml), the cells were centrifuged again at 2000 × g for 5 min in an Eppendorf centrifuge, and resuspended in Hepes buffer pH 7.45 (10 mm Hepes, 136 mm NaCl, 2.7 mm KCl, 2 mm MgCl2, 0.1% glucose), again by excluding the bottom layer of erythrocytes. Purity of the final platelet suspensions was checked with a Thrombocounter and from microscopic preparations. Contamination with red blood cells was <1:15,000, contamination with leukocytes was <1:20,000. Blood samples were used for measurements of platelet phenotype and for platelet proteomic analysis in parallel.
Platelet Stimulation and Thrombus Formation
Purified, washed platelets (controls and Scott patient) in Hepes buffer pH 7.45 (10 mm Hepes, 136 mm NaCl, 2.7 mm KCl, 2 mm MgCl2, 0.1% glucose) containing 2 mm CaCl2 were left untreated or were activated with thrombin, thrombin/convulxin, or ionomycin for 30 min at 37 °C under nonstirring conditions. This time point was chosen, based on earlier findings that 30 min of activation with agonists was required for near maximal PS exposure and integrin closure/cleavage in control platelets.
For obtaining reference values for apoptosis-induced caspase protein substrates, platelets were treated for 1 h with the BH3 mimetic ABT-737, an agent that is in study for the therapeutic targeting of the Bcl-2 family of prosurvival proteins in antitumor treatment. This compound provides a standard way to induce apoptotic PS exposure in platelets.
For proteomics (global, phospho, N termini) analysis, platelet samples (5.0 × 108/ml) were collected into 1 volume of lysis buffer (50 mm Tris, 1% SDS, 150 mm NaCl, 1 tablet PhosStop/7 ml, pH 7.8). Lysed samples were immediately frozen and stored at −80 °C until usage. Parallel samples (1.5 × 108/ml) were analyzed by flow cytometry for PS exposure using FITC-labeled annexin A5, as described before.
Collagen-induced thrombus formation was assayed using PPACK/fragmin-anticoagulated human blood (controls and Scott patient), as described. Blood samples were perfused over a collagen surface at shear rate of 1000/s for 4 min. Thrombi formed were poststained with AF647-annexin A5 and FITC-anti-CD62P mAb. Phase-contrast and fluorescence images were recorded to determine platelet deposition, P-selectin expression, and PS exposure.
Western Blot Analysis
Washed platelets (5 × 108/ml) were left untreated or activated by convulxin (200 ng/ml) plus thrombin (8 nm) or ionomycin (20 μm) in the presence of 2 mm CaCl2 for 30 min at 37 °C under nonstirring conditions. Samples of resting and activated platelets were lysed with ice-cold 4× lysis buffer (600 mm NaCl, 10 mm Tris, 4 mm EGTA, 4 mm EDTA, 4% Nonidet P-40). Samples (10 μg proteins) were separated on 8% SDS-PAGE gels, and transferred to PVDF blotting membranes. Immunoblotting was with the following antibodies: Ab762 against the full length β3-chain (1:10000), Ab754 against the intracellular amino acid 754 neo-N terminus of the cleaved β3-chain (1:1000), or α-tubulin (1:1000). Incubation with secondary horse radish peroxidase-coupled antibody (1:1000) was overnight at 4 °C. Blots stained with an ECL system were quantified by densitometric analysis.
Sample Digestion and Preparation for Quantitative (Phospho)Proteomics
Platelet proteomics analyses were performed, based on procedures reported earlier, with modifications. Well purified platelet samples (5 × 108 platelets) were prepared in SDS lysis buffer, and protein concentrations were determined using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Pierce, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Cysteines were reduced by 30 min incubation at 56 °C with 10 mm dithiothreitol; free sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with 30 mm iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Samples of 150 μg protein were then processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin filter.
Proteins were digested in 50 mm triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 200 mm guanidinium hydrochloride, and 2 mm CaCl2, pH 8.0 in the presence of trypsin (1:20 w/w, T-1426, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at 37 °C. After incubation for 7 h, digested peptides were collected by centrifugation at 13,800 × g for 25 min. Filters were washed with 50 μl of 50 mm TEAB and 50 μl of LC-MS grade water to increase peptide yield. Trypsin digestion was monitored by monolithic RP HPLC as described. After lysis and digestion with trypsin, samples were used for either label-free proteome analysis, or iTRAQ-based (phospho)proteome analysis.
iTRAQ Labeling and Pooling
The workflow for assessment of the global platelet proteome and platelet phosphoproteome is schematized in Figure 1. Samples were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in iTRAQ 8-plex dissolution buffer (AB Sciex, Dreieich, Germany), followed by individual labeling with iTRAQ 8-plex labels (113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, and 121) according to the manufacturer's protocol, and pooling. The pooled peptide sample was desalted by C18 solid phase extraction (SPEC C18 AR, 4 mg bed; Agilent Technologies, Brussels, Belgium), dried under vacuum, and ∼6% was reconstituted into 10 mm ammonium acetate pH 6.0 (solvent A) for high pH reversed phase (RP) fractionation and subsequent quantification of the global proteome. The remaining ∼94% of the sample was used for phoshopeptide enrichment (see below).
Platelet Global Proteome Analysis Using iTRAQ Labels
Fifty micrograms of the iTRAQ-labeled pooled peptide sample were separated by RP at pH 6.0. Therefore, the sample was loaded on a C18 column (BioBasic-18, 5 μm particle size; 300 Å pore size, 150 × 0.5 mm), using a binary gradient at flow rate of 12.5 μl/min ranging from 3–60% of 10 mm ammonium acetate and 84% acetonitrile, pH 6.0, in 70 min. A total of twenty concatenated fractions were collected, and analyzed by nano LC-MS/MS in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a U3000 nano-RSLC system online-coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Half of each fraction was loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18; 100 μm × 2 cm) with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were separated on the main column (PepMap100 C18; 75 μm × 50 cm), using a binary gradient ranging from 3–42% solvent B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 100 min at 60 °C and a flow rate of 270 nL/min. In the Q-Exactive, survey scans were acquired at resolution of 70,000, using the polysiloxane m/z 371.1012 as lock mass, with an automatic gain control target value of 3 × 106. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra of the 15 most intense ions were acquired with (1) a resolution of 17,500, (2) an isolation width of 2.0 m/z; (3) a normalized collision energy of 35; (4) an AGC target value of 1 × 106 ions; (5) a maximum injection time of 250 ms; (6) a dynamic exclusion of 12 s and an underfill ratio of 10%. The first fixed mass was set to 105 m/z. Reaction tubes containing 10% ammonium water were placed in front of the ion source, in order to compensate for the iTRAQ-induced increase of peptide charge states.
Raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) using the Uniprot human database (August 2012; 20,232 target sequences). Mascot and Sequest were applied as search algorithms with the following settings: (1) trypsin as enzyme allowing two missed cleavages, (2) iTRAQ 8-plex at N termini and lysine (+304.2053 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214 Da) residues as fixed modifications, (3) oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) as variable modification, (4) mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation on the level of peptide spectrum matches (PSM) was performed using the peptide validator node with filtering for 1% FDR (high confidence filter). The reporter ion quantifier node was used for iTRAQ reporter quantification. Only proteins quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered. Details for the data analysis are given in the supplemental methods.
Label-free Analysis of Global Platelet Proteome
In addition we conducted a label-free quantification workflow using the unstimulated Scott and healthy platelet samples. An advantage of this strategy is that it is not affected by potential co-isolation interference frequently observed in reporter ion-based quantification methods. Therefore, 500 ng of untreated healthy and Scott platelets were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS in DDA mode, using a U3000 nano-RSLC system online-coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer, with LC parameters as above. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000, using the polysiloxane m/z 445.1200 as lock mass, an automatic gain control target value of 4 × 105, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 20 precursor ions were selected for fragmentation by HCD with a collision energy of 27 and MS/MS were acquired in the Orbitrap using a target value of 5 × 104 ions, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.
Data analysis for label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis LC-MS software version 4.1 from Nonlinear Dynamics (Newcastle upon Tyne, UK), in combination with PeptideShaker 1.9.2. After alignment peak lists were exported and searched against a concatenated target/decoy version of the human Uniprot database (December 2013; 20,274 target sequences), using X! TANDEM Vengeance (version 2015.12.15.2), Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science), MS-GF+ Beta (v10282) (12/19/2014), OMSSA and SearchGUI 2.8.1. The following search parameters were used: (1) trypsin as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages, (2) carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.0214 Da) as fixed, and (3) oxidation of Met (+15.9949 Da) as variable modification. MS and MS/MS tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da. Search results were combined using PeptideShaker 0.29.1, filtered at an FDR of 1% and reimported into Progenesis. Peptide sequences containing oxidized Met and pyro-Glu obtained from the second pass X!Tandem search were omitted from further data analysis, and only proteins quantified with at least two unique peptides were considered for quantification. For all proteins, ratios between platelet samples were calculated based on normalized areas obtained from Progenesis. Next, after log 2 transformation mean and standard deviations were calculated and regulation factors were defined as described in the Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale section (± 2 × S.D. (2 × 0.535)).
Platelet Phosphoproteome Analysis
For phosphopeptide analysis of the pooled iTRAQ samples, a TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment protocol was conducted, as reported by Larsen and co-workers. Samples were dried under vacuum and resuspended in TiO2 loading buffer (80% acetonitrile, 5% TFA, and 1 m glycolic acid). TiO2 beads were added in a bead-to-peptide ratio of 6:1. The suspension was incubated for 10 min at RT, and centrifuged to pellet the beads containing the phosphopeptides. This step was repeated twice using 1/2 and 1/4 of the amount of beads. Beads were pooled and washed with 80% acetonitrile, 1% TFA, followed by a second washing step with 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 1% ammonium hydroxide, pH 11.3. The eluted phosphopeptides were recovered and dried under vacuum, followed by a second enrichment step using loading buffer 2 (70% acetonitrile, 2% TFA). The eluates were acidified using TFA (pH <2) and desalted using Oligo R3 microcolumns. Enriched phosphopeptides were fractionated with a U3000 nano-RSLC system in hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) mode. Peptides were loaded on a self-packed HILIC column (Polar phase TSKgel Amide-80; 150 μm ID × 15 cm length; 5 μm particle size; 80 Å pore size, Tosoh Bioscience, Stuttgart, Germany), and separated using a binary gradient ranging from 5–40% solvent B (solvent A: 98% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA; solvent B: 0.1% TFA) within 40 min at a flow rate of 4 μl/min. Eluting peptides were collected in nine fractions.
All HILIC fractions were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS in DDA mode using an U3000 nano system, online coupled to an Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were preconcentrated on a self-packed precolumn (Kinetex; 2.6 μm particle size; 100 Å pore size) and further separated on a self-packed main column (Kinetex, 75 μm ID × 30 cm length; 2.6 μm particle size; 100 Å pore size) using a binary gradient as above, however ranging from 3–45% B in 75 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min and 60 °C. Survey scans were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 using the polysiloxane m/z 371.1012 as lock mass. Subsequently, HCD MS/MS spectra of the five most intense ions were acquired in the Orbitrap with (1) a resolution of 7500 (2) an isolation width of 2.0 m/z; (3) a normalized collision energy of 50; (4) an AGC target value of 1 × 105 ions; (5) a maximum injection time of 200 ms; (6) and a dynamic exclusion of 12 s. Reaction tubes containing 10% ammonium water were placed in front of the ion source.
Data Analysis for Quantitative Phosphoproteomics
Phosphoproteomic raw data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific), using Sequest and Mascot as search algorithms and the same parameters as used for the global iTRAQ proteome. Additionally, phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr (+79.9663 Da) was selected as a variable modification and probabilities for phosphorylation site localizations were determined using phosphoRS. PSMs were filtered for 1% FDR (high confidence filter), and only phosphopeptides with phospho-RS probabilities ≥90% were considered as confident.
iTRAQ ratios obtained from Proteome Discoverer were processed as described for the global iTRAQ data and normalized using the iTRAQ global proteome normalization factors in order to compensate for systematic errors (see supplemental Methods).
For determination of confident phosphorylation sites, a ready-to-use Excel macro provided by Mechtler lab (http://ms.imp.ac.at) was used. Peptides were grouped based on their sequences, protein accessions, and phosphorylation sites. Next, for each PSM, normalized abundance values were calculated as for the global proteome. For grouped PSMs representing the same protein, phosphopeptide sequence or phosphorylation site, average normalized abundance values were calculated per iTRAQ channel. Ratios were then obtained for unstimulated and stimulated platelets per protein and subject. Then, the ratio cohorts were compared between subjects.
Targeted Protein Quantification by Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM)
To validate differential proteins obtained from global quantitative proteomics we used targeted PRM to quantify selected proteins in unstimulated platelets from three healthy controls and the Scott patient. Therefore, we used a U3000 nano-RSLC system online-coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer, with LC parameters as above. The polysiloxane m/z 445.1200 was used for lock mass calibration. Target peptides were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 0.4 m/z and fragmented using HCD with a collision energy of 30. The AGC target value was set up to 1 × 105 ions, the maximum injection time to 200. MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. For data analysis we used MS/MS spectra from the label-free quantification data (see above) as well as in-house spectral libraries and Skyline.
Charge-based Fractional Diagonal Chromatography (ChaFRADIC)for Determination of N-terminal Cleavage Sites
Scott and healthy platelet lysates were diluted 10-fold with ice cold ethanol and stored at −40 °C for 1 h. Afterward, samples were centrifuged at 18,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. Protein pellets were resuspended into 10 μl 10% SDS under ultrasonication, and diluted to 1% SDS with 0.5 m TEAB containing 20% (v/v) isopropanol. After addition of iTRAQ 8-plex reagents in isopropanol (40 μl), labeling was performed on the protein level for 2 h at 25 °C, in order to block free protein N termini and Lys residues. The eight samples were pooled, and reactions were quenched by addition of 60 mm glycine (10 min), followed by 130 mm hydroxylamine to reverse side reactions of hydroxyl groups (10 min).
For proteolytic digestion, the multiplexed sample was divided into three aliquots of ∼160 μg protein, which were individually subjected to ethanol precipitation as described above. Proteolytic digestion was performed and controlled, as described above. Digestion was stopped with 1% TFA. The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 solid phase tips (SPEC C18 AR, 4 mg bed, Agilent Technologies). ChaFRADIC was conducted as previously described. Dried pellets were resuspended in 52 μl of SCX solvent A (10 mm KH2PO4 in 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7). Peptide samples were separated at a flow rate of 80 μl/min using a U3000 HPLC system with a polysulfoethyl A column (150 × 1 mm; 5 μm particle size; 200 Å pore size; PolyLC), and a tertiary buffer system, i.e. solvent A (see above), solvent B (10 mm KH2PO4, 250 mm KCl in 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7), and solvent C (10 mm KH2PO4, 600 mm NaCl in 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.7). The following gradient steps were performed: 100% solvent A for 10 min; followed by a linear ramp from 0–15% solvent B in 9 min; 9 min of 15% B; increase to 30% B over 8 min; 11 min at 30% B; increase to 100% B in 5 min. Five min later, solvent C was increased to 100% in 1 min; 5 min later, solvent A was increased to 100% in 1 min; and the column was equilibrated for 20 min. Five fractions were collected, corresponding to charge states +1, +2, +3, +4 and >+4. These were dried under vacuum and resuspended into 50 mm Na2HPO4 (pH 7.8). Free N termini of internal peptides, derived from trypsin digestion, were blocked by trideutero (d3)-acetylation to reduce their charge states at pH 2.7. Therefore, trideutero N-hydroxysuccinimide acetate (d3-NHS acetate) was added to a final concentration of 20 mm and, after 1 h at 37 °C, to 30 mm. After 2 h, the reaction was quenched by treatment with 60 mm glycine (10 min), followed by 130 mm hydroxylamine (10 min). Fractions were dried under vacuum and desalted using Poros Oligo R3 reversed-phase material. Desalted fractions were solubilized in 52 μl buffer A, and were individually subjected to rechromatography using the same conditions as above. Because of the acetylation between the first and second dimension SCX fractionations, internal peptides shifted to earlier charge state windows, whereas iTRAQ-labeled and endogenously acetylated N-terminal peptides retained their charge state window and could be enriched.
Fractions were desalted, resuspended in 15 μl of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive Plus online-coupled to a U3000 nano-RSLC system in DDA mode. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000, and the top 15 ions were selected for MS/MS at a resolution of 17,500. AGC values were set to 1 × 106 for MS and 2 × 105 for MS/MS scans. A normalized collision energy of 30 was used, and the first fixed mass was set to 100 m/z. For the +3, +4, and +5 fractions, 10% ammonia solution was placed in front of the ion source. For analysis of the +1 fraction, fragmentation of singly charged peptides was allowed, excluding m/z values of singly charged ions occurring in previous blank runs. Generated raw data were searched against the human Uniprot database (as above), using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 and Mascot as search engine, reporter ion quantifier and percolator nodes. Enzyme specificities were set to semi-ArgC, as lysine residues were blocked by iTRAQ labeling on the protein level.
To separate peptides with N-terminal iTRAQ label from those with endogenous N-acetylation, a two-step search strategy was performed. First, data were searched with iTRAQ-8plex (+304.2053 Da) as fixed modification at lysine and peptide N terminus. Second, iTRAQ-8plex of lysine and acetylation of N termini (+42.0105 Da) were set as fixed modifications. In both cases, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214 Da) was selected as fixed, whereas oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da) was used as variable modification. Mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm for MS and to 0.02 Da for MS/MS. Identified peptides were filtered for high confidence corresponding to an FDR <1% at the PSM level, and a search engine rank of 1. The reporter ion quantifier node was adjusted according to the search settings. Quantification of N-terminal peptides across samples and conditions was performed as described for the phosphoproteome analysis, including grouping, normalization, and rationing.
Identification of Calpain Substrates and Cleavage Sites
Hypothesizing that calpain-induced cleavage in activated Scott platelets is altered, we aimed to identify potential calpain substrates. Thus, for the identification of calpain cleavage sites and substrates in control and Scott platelets we pursued a two-step strategy.
First, to define a putative calpain consensus motif but not identify substrates, we digested platelet lysates in vitro with calpain, at a protein/enzyme ratio of 1:10 (w/w) using FASP to remove undigested protein. Calpain treatment was performed in 50 mm Tris-HCl, 100 mm NaCl, and 3 mm CaCl2 pH 7.45 (30 min at 30 °C). Vehicle controls were run in the absence of calpain. Generation of proteolytic peptides was confirmed by monolithic HPLC, showing an extensive peptide pattern for the calpain-treated platelets, whereas the control showed no peptide signals. Thus, the calpain samples were analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS, and data were processed as above, but with enzyme specificity set to “none” to identify peptide sequences that were generated upon calpain cleavage of denatured proteins. Icelogo (http://iomics.ugent.be/icelogoserver/main.html) was used to visualize potential consensus cleavage patterns considering four amino acids N-terminal and C-terminal of cleavage sites, i.e. positions P4-P4′ according to Schechter and Berger.
Second, control platelets from healthy donor (1.5 × 108/ml) were activated with ionomycin (10 μm) in the presence or absence of calpain inhibitor, calpeptin (200 μm) for 30 min, or with the proapoptotic agent, ABT-737 (10 μm) in the presence or absence of caspase inhibitor QVD-OPh (20 μm) 60 min at 37 °C, and lysed as above. These samples were used for N-terminal quantitative ChaFRADIC as described above, in duplicate.
Deposition of Raw Data
Raw data and Proteome Discoverer search results are deposited in the ProteomeXchange repository dataset identifiers PXD002883 and 10.6019/PXD002883.
Experimental Design and Statistical Rationale
Sample Sets
Purified washed platelets from a healthy control donor (5 × 108/ml) and Scott patient (5 × 108/ml), left untreated or activated with thrombin, thrombin/convulxin or ionomycin were used for (1) global label free quantification (only untreated conditions), (2) combined iTRAQ global proteome and phosphoproteome quantification (all samples), and (3) iTRAQ-based quantification of N-terminal peptides. Owing to the limited amount of available sample, (1) and (2) were performed using one technical replicate, each. Notably, the four different conditions in the global iTRAQ proteome data plus the label free analysis can be considered as five technical replicates. For (3) we conducted three technical replicates of the entire workflow following protein labeling and precipitation as we expected higher variations of the complex ChaFRADIC procedure for which we only required 20 μg of protein per replicate and condition (i.e. iTRAQ channel).
Furthermore, the same samples were used for Western blot and flow cytometry (1.5 × 108/ml). Additionally, for flow cytometry experiments platelets from two independent healthy control donors were used. For whole blood flow experiments, blood from the only Scott patient and from four healthy control donors was used.
For the identification of potential calpain substrates, platelets from a healthy control donor (1.5 × 108/ml) were treated with ionomycin in the presence or absence of calpain inhibitor, calpeptin for 30 min or for 1 h with ABT-737, as well in presence or absence of calpain inhibitor, calpeptin. These samples were used for quantitative N-terminal peptide analysis with ChaFRADIC, using 2 technical replicates as above.
For validation of differential proteins using PRM, platelets from three healthy control donors (two from a completely different set of samples) and platelets from the only Scott patient were used.
Analysis and Statistics
For the global proteome, interindividual variation over all proteins was estimated by separate analysis of samples (unstimulated platelets) from pairs of healthy subjects; after log2 transformation this gave a mean S.D. of 0.158 (range 0.107–0.200, n = 4). Boundaries for relevant changes in patient samples were set at 2 × S.D. (2 × 0.158) in comparison to median abundance ratios, to determine up- or downregulation per protein. For interpretation of iTRAQ phosphopeptide ratios, interindividual variation over all phosphopeptides was estimated from separate analysis of resting platelets from pairs of subjects; after log2 transformation, this gave a mean S.D. of 0.385 (range 0.337–0.420, n = 4). Boundaries for relevant changes were again set at 2 × S.D. (2 × 0.385) in comparison to median abundance ratios, for up- or downregulation per phosphopeptide. For comparison of iTRAQ ratios of N-terminal peptides, mean S.D. (log2 transformed) of four sample sets was 0.515; again cut-off values for up- and downregulation were set at 2 × S.D. (2 × 0.515) in comparison to median abundance ratios.
Data from functional tests were expressed as means ± S.E. Statistical significance of differences between groups was determined using a 2-way ANOVA. p values <0.05 considered significant. Lists of ratios were compared by the Dunnett's test for multiple groups.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Phenotypic Analysis of Scott Syndrome Platelets
To confirm the complex altered phenotype of Scott platelets, we analyzed whole blood and isolated platelets from a Scott syndrome patient with two likely disruptive mutations in the anoctamin-6 alleles. In comparison to blood from healthy control subjects, perfusion of the patient's blood over collagen resulted in normal formation of thrombi and normal P-selectin expression (Fig. 2A, 2B), indicating that platelet integrin activation and α-granule secretion were unchanged. However, with the patient's blood PS exposure was greatly reduced, leaving only small patches of exposed PS on some platelets. Earlier, we have established that this near complete failure of PS exposure is accompanied by an inability of the platelets to swell and form a balloon-like morphology. Similarly, isolated platelets from the Scott patient were greatly impaired in PS exposure in response to strong Ca2+-mobilizing agonists, such as thrombin/convulxin (stimulating thrombin and collagen receptors) and to the Ca2+-ionophore ionomycin (Fig. 2C). With platelets from control subjects, PS exposure with these agonists was high, i.e. in 41 ± 5% and 94 ± 1% of the platelets, respectively (means ± S.E., n = 3). As reported before, thrombin alone induced only 7 ± 2% PS exposure in control platelets, whereas this fraction was reduced to 2 ± 1% in Scott platelets. Additional evidence for decreased calpain activity in thrombin/convulxin-stimulated Scott platelets came from Western blotting of platelet samples. Using an antibody recognizing the intact cytosolic N-terminal site of the integrin β3-chain (Ab762) and an antibody recognizing a calpain-cleaved N-terminal site in the β3-chain (Ab754), it appeared that Scott platelets showed a relatively high staining with Ab762 and a weaker staining with Ab754 (Fig. 2D). The Ab754 staining was completely antagonized with two calpain antagonists, calpeptin and MDL-28170, thus demonstrating calpain-mediated protein cleavage of the integrin.
Quantitative Assessment of the Global Proteome of Scott Platelets
To assess the platelet protein composition and phosphorylation state, we compared well-purified washed Scott and control platelets (contamination with erythrocytes <1:15,000, with leukocytes <1:20,000). Freshly isolated platelets stayed unstimulated or were stimulated with high concentrations of thrombin, thrombin/convulxin, or ionomycin for a prolonged time of 30 min, i.e. at conditions comparable to those of the measurements of PS exposure. Samples were lysed, digested with trypsin, and labeled with 8-plex iTRAQ reagents for global and phospho-proteome analysis (Fig. 1), whereas for N-terminal ChaFRADIC samples were iTRAQ labeled on the protein level, multiplexed and digested.
Using iTRAQ we quantified 2278 unique proteins with at least two unique peptides (supplemental Data S1). This corresponded to ∼50% of the estimated platelet proteome. Considering a minimum deviation of 2 × S.D. (log2 transformed) for relevant changes 58 (2.5%) and 46 (2.0%) of proteins were potentially down- or up-regulated in Scott platelets, respectively (Fig. 3A). Owing to potential issue of ratio compression in iTRAQ, we also performed label-free proteome analysis of the unstimulated Scott and control platelets. This label-free analysis resulted in the quantification of 1435 unique proteins with at least two unique peptides (supplemental Data S1). This data also pointed to a high similarity of the protein distribution pattern in the Scott and control platelets (Fig. 3B). Overall, the relative abundance of individual proteins was comparable to earlier findings. Importantly, the label-free analysis confirmed most changes in abundance of the patient platelets obtained from iTRAQ ratios (supplemental Table S1).
The protein with the strongest downregulation in Scott platelets was anoctamin 6 (gene ANO6) (supplemental Table S1). The proteins with the strongest decrease in Scott platelets further include signaling and adapter proteins (genes S100A8, S100A9) implicated in Ca2+ regulation, and several uncommon secretory proteins (genes PZP, MPO, AGT, PON1). On the other hand, the most increased proteins in Scott platelets (supplemental Table S1) surprisingly comprised the membrane channel protein aquaporin-1 (gene AQP1). Most likely because of its apparent absence in control platelets, aquaporin-1 could only be quantified in the iTRAQ proteome with one regulated peptide, but it was highly up-regulated in the label-free proteome with two peptides. The list of up-regulated proteins also comprises proteins involved in transcription and translation (RPLP2, RPLP0); and proteins implicated in platelet activation (CD36, PRKAR2B) and PS binding (ANXA5).
As independent validation of the ANO6 and AQP1 quantification, we also followed a more sensitive targeted approach. Using parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) as a high resolution MS/MS technique, we quantified peptides/proteins of interest directly in whole platelet digests. Thus, in platelets from three healthy controls and the Scott patient, we quantified six peptides for ANO6, two peptides from AQP1 and, as indifferent control proteins, ≥two peptides from hypoxia up-regulated protein 1 (HYOU1) and LIM and SH3 domain protein 1 (LASP1). We selected aquaporin-1 as its up-regulation might be compensatory for the anoctamin-6 ion channel deficiency, which would be in agreement with the recently established role of aquaporin water channels in platelet morphological changes such as ballooning. For anoctamin-6, PRM indicated that the residual signal in the Scott samples could be attributed to noise, because of clear deviations in mass and peak pattern (Fig. 4A). Hence, the abundance level of anoctamin-6 in Scott platelets was below the detection limit, i.e. at least 50–100 times lower than in control platelets (Fig. 4B). Aquaporin-1 could not be detected in any of the three control samples, whereas it was clearly present in the Scott patient platelets (Fig. 4C). As expected, abundance levels of the HYOU1 and LASP1 proteins were highly similar in all platelet preparations. To confirm, that the increased aquaporin-1 levels in Scott platelets do not derive from potential erythrocyte contaminations, we compared our proteomic data with the erythrocyte proteome from Wiśniewski et al. and thus can exclude that the presence of aquaporin-1 in Scott platelets may be explained by erythrocyte contamination. Altogether, these data pointed to mostly moderate changes in the global proteome of Scott platelets with exception of ANO6 and AQP1 proteins.
Changes in Phosphorylation Profile of Activated Scott Platelets
After iTRAQ labeling and TiO2 enrichment of the pooled Scott and control platelets, we quantified 1566 phosphopeptides, corresponding to 709 unique proteins (supplemental Data S2). Per identified phosphopeptide, again we considered iTRAQ ratios as relevant changes, when deviant outside the range of 2 × S.D. (log2 transformed) in distribution curves from control platelets. Long-term (30 min) stimulation of control or patient platelets with thrombin resulted in no more than small changes in phosphorylation pattern (Fig. 5A). This is in agreement with earlier work showing that protein (tyrosine) phosphorylation in thrombin-stimulated platelets peaks within 1 min, and is mostly returned to resting levels after 10 min.
In contrast, platelet stimulation with thrombin/convulxin or ionomycin dramatically increased the overall phosphorylation state. Comparing ratio values of Scott to control platelets, these agonists evoked an increased phosphorylation in 404 and 206 peptides, respectively (Fig. 5B). Conversely, the same agonists evoked a decreased phosphorylation in 25 and 105 peptides, respectively. On the other hand, we assessed that 90% of the phosphopeptides that were up-regulated in activated control platelets were also increased in the patient's platelets (Fig. 5C). For the downregulated phosphopeptides, lower percentages were obtained (Fig. 5D). Comparative analysis for the up-regulated phosphopeptides indicated a significant overall increase in the patient's platelets after stimulation with thrombin/convulxin or ionomycin (Fig. 5E) as compared with the control. Also for the downregulated phosphopeptides, relative abundance levels in the Scott platelets were significantly increased after thrombin/convulxin (Fig. 5F). Jointly, these data pointed to an overall increased phosphorylation state of the activated Scott platelets, especially after stimulation with thrombin/convulxin.
Assignment tabling indicated that mostly Scott proteins of the following functional classes were increased in phosphorylation: cytoskeleton-linked; signaling and adapter proteins; small GTPases and regulators; protein kinases and phosphatases; and membrane receptors and channels (Table I). Zooming in to proteins with the strongest changes (supplemental Table S2) revealed decreased phosphorylation in Scott platelets of several signaling and adaptor proteins (genes PDE3A, ENSA, NCK2, STIM1), proteins implicated in PS exposure, i.e. BLC2 (BNIP2). The highest increases in phosphorylation of Scott platelets were seen for several cytoskeletal-linked proteins (SEP6, DBNL, PLEK, TNS1, PDLIM7, MYH9, TNL1), and the small GTPase activator ARHGAP6. These lists contain considerable overlap with the phosphoproteome changes reported for human platelets activated with thrombin or oxidized phospholipids. Together, these data suggested that the altered phosphorylation pattern of Scott platelets upon strong stimulation involves multiple cytoskeletal-linked proteins and modulators of PS exposure.
Identification of Platelet Proteins Cleaved by Calpains or Caspases
Platelet PS exposure is accompanied by activation of intracellular proteases, such as calpain isoforms in platelets that are stimulated with strong Ca2+-elevating agents or with Ca2+-independent caspases in apoptotic platelets. As Western blots indicated that calpain-mediated integrin cleavage is impaired in Scott platelets, we set to determine the substrates of this protease in platelets.
To identify calpain substrates in platelets we combined two different approaches. First, as reports on calpain cleavage specificity were controversial, we aimed at defining a consensus motif. Therefore, we digested lysates from control platelets in vitro with purified calpain to first obtain insights into the general cleavage pattern, rather than to identify in vivo substrates. The digested sample was analyzed by LC-MS, followed by database searches without enzyme specificity. This resulted in a list of 2224 unique peptides at 1% FDR corresponding to 375 proteins. These peptides were used to determine a cleavage pattern with IceLogo, identifying amino acids overrepresented in the proximity of the cleavage site (Fig. 6).
Second, we used our recently developed ChaFRADIC workflow for determination of neo-N-terminal peptides formed in vivo upon proteolytic cleavage. Thus, intact control platelets were stimulated with Ca2+-mobilizing ionomycin or the proapoptotic agent ABT-737 in the presence or absence of calpain inhibitor calpeptin or caspase inhibitor QVD-Oph. Quantitative analysis of the platelet lysates by ChaFRADIC revealed 227 neo-N-terminal peptides with a >3-fold increased levels in ionomycin-stimulated platelets, 180 of which were inhibited by calpeptin, but not by QVD-Oph (supplemental Table. S3A). These 180 calpeptin-sensitive neo-N-terminal peptides corresponded to 106 proteins. The in vivo list includes proteins previously found to be cleaved in PS-exposing platelets, namely Src kinase (SRC) and talin-1 (TLN1). Interestingly, many of the proteins seemed to be cleaved by calpain on multiple sites, e.g. caldesmon (CALD1), a calpain-1 subunit (CAPNS1), kindlin-3 (FERMT3), filamin-A (FLNA), myosin-9 (MYH9), talin-1 (TLN), vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), and zyxin (ZYX) that are cleaved at four or more positions. The majority of the 106 proteins could be assigned to the following functional classes: cytoskeleton-linked, membrane and protein trafficking, or signaling and adapter proteins (Fig. 7A).
In the apoptotic ABT-737-treated platelets, we identified 45 neo-N-terminal peptides with a >3-fold increase, 23 of which were inhibited by QVD-Oph, but not calpeptin (supplemental Table S3B). The corresponding 23 proteins, in part overlapped with the calpain-cleaved proteins—e.g. α-actinin-1 (ACTN1), FERMT3, glycoprotein Ibα (GPIBA), FLNA, leucine-rich repeat flightless-interacting protein 1 (LRRFIP1), MYH9, nexilin (NEXN), and Pyk2 (SKAP2)—but were caspase-cleaved at a different position. The 23 identified caspase substrates mostly categorized as cytoskeletal-linked or signaling and adaptor proteins (Fig. 7B). Together, these results revealed a pattern of distinct cleavage sites by calpains and caspases in platelets, in particular of cytoskeletal-associated and signaling proteins.
Changes in N-terminal Proteome of Activated Scott Platelets
Next, we conducted quantitative N-terminal ChaFRADICto follow aberrant calpain activity in Scott platelets. Thus, also platelets from the Scott patient and control subject were analyzed by quantitative N-terminal ChaFRADIC. We quantified 1596 N-terminal peptides between Scott and control platelets that were either unstimulated, or stimulated with thrombin, thrombin/convulxin or ionomycin (supplemental Data S3). Considering again a deviation of 2 × S.D. (log2 transformed) in distribution curves from control platelets as relevant changes, we found that only thrombin/convulxin and ionomycin caused major changes in abundance of N-terminal peptides, both in control and Scott platelets (Fig. 8A). The same agonists also induced major changes in the ratios of N termini in Scott versus control platelets (Fig. 8B). In control platelets stimulation induced up-regulation of 2 (thrombin), 223 (thrombin/convulxin), and 318 (ionomycin) N-terminal peptides, respectively, the majority of which was also increased in the Scott platelets (Fig. 8C). Markedly, taken together all 318 up-regulated N termini, the extent of up-regulation was significantly decreased in thrombin/convulxin stimulated Scott platelets (Fig. 8E). When reducing this list from 318 to 37 up-regulated N-terminal peptides with confirmed cleavage by calpain, as derived from our consensus sequence and inhibitor data, we found that calpain cleavage-mediated up-regulation was significantly reduced in Scott platelets after stimulation with thrombin/convulxin, whereas it was more pronounced after stimulation with ionomycin (Fig. 8F). Plotting of the altered N-terminal peptides in Scott versus control platelets indicated that more were decreased in the patient, such in contrast to the higher numbers with increased phosphorylation of many phosphopeptides (Fig. 9A–9B). Concerning the calpain-cleaved N termini, thrombin/convulxin stimulation led to an overall decrease, whereas ionomycin stimulation led to an increase (Fig. 9C). Overall, these data pointed to a reduced calpain activity in the Scott platelets when stimulated with thrombin/convulxin, and an increased activity after ionomycin stimulation. The latter difference was surprising, but can be explained by the protection of Scott platelets to membrane dysregulation during swelling and PS exposure at the high intracellular Ca2+ concentration reached with ionomycin, which may prolong the calpain activity before the cells die.
Interestingly, the top-15 of decreased N-terminal peptides in the Scott patients (arranged according to ratios obtained with thrombin/convulxin) showed in majority (1) a cleavage pattern with two or more of our consensus amino acids for calpain cleavage and (2) a complete inhibitory effect of calpeptin, as established for control platelets (supplemental Table S4A). This confirmed that these N-terminal peptides were generated upon calpain cleavage. The top-15 of decreased neo-N-terminal peptides in the Scott patient included cytoskeleton-linked proteins (genes DBLN, DNM1L, MAPRE1, NEXN, SMIM1, TLN1, and ZYX) and key regulatory signaling proteins (DOK3, FYB, GSK3B, PDE3A, VASP). In contrast, the top-15 of increased N termini concerned a variety of proteins with cleavage sites which were not inhibited by calpeptin (supplemental Table S4B). Hence, these cleavage sites are unlikely to be calpain-mediated. Collectively, also this analysis showed a decreased calpain-dependent formation of N termini in convulxin/thrombin-stimulated Scott platelets. Interestingly, the majority of the identified calpain cleavage sites differ from those in previous lists of N termini in human platelets, likely because these were obtained from unstimulated, stored platelets rather than from activated platelets, as in the present article.

INTRODUCTION:
The Scott syndrome is a very rare, moderately mild bleeding disorder, clinically identified by a reduced prothrombin consumption of the blood serum. Platelets and other blood cells from Scott patients show a deficiency in Ca2+-dependent membrane phospholipid scrambling. As a result, Scott platelets are greatly impaired in externalization of the aminophospholipids, phosphatidylserine (PS)1, and phosphatidylethanolamine in response to strong, Ca2+-mobilizing agents like collagen/thrombin or ionomycin. This leads to a severe reduction in the binding of several coagulation factors in Scott syndrome platelets, which explains the bleeding phenotype in these rare patients. So far, one family and two independent patients with Scott syndrome have been described in the literature. In addition, a breeding of dogs with impaired hemostasis is known with the same platelet phenotype. On the other hand, the Scott syndrome as a moderately mild bleeding disorder likely is underdiagnosed, because the indicative lab diagnostics (prothrombin consumption test or PS exposure) are not regularly performed.
In 2010, a critical role was reported for the transmembrane protein anoctamin-6 (gene ANO6, alias TMEM16F), in the Ca2+-dependent PS exposure of platelets. A role of anoctamin-6 in Scott syndrome was postulated by the discovery of dysfunctional mutations in the ANO6 gene of two unrelated patients. This anoctamin is also known as a Ca2+-dependent ion channel with permeability to both chloride ions and cations, which activity appeared to be defective in Scott cells. A dysfunctional mutation in ANO6 (TMEM16F) has also been identified in a breeding of dogs with impaired hemostasis.
Recent findings however question if a deficiency of anoctamin-6 alone can account for the complex phenotype of Scott syndrome platelets. The platelets from a patient with ANO6 mutations and from anoctamin-6 deficient mice show a complex phenotype: along with agonist-induced PS exposure, closure of activated integrins appears to be affected, as well as calpain-dependent cleavage of intracellular proteins and cytoskeletal-dependent swelling of the platelets. Given this, we expected that extended proteomics analysis will provide important novel information on the possible roles of other proteins than anoctamin-6 in the altered properties of Scott platelets.
For the present work, we hypothesized that the complex phenotypical changes in Scott platelets are a consequence of multiple alterations in the platelet signaling machinery, directly or indirectly related to the absent anoctamin-6 expression, and that these alterations may provide insights into the mechanisms underlying the important procoagulant response. Thus, we compared platelets isolated from healthy controls and a diagnosed Scott patient in terms of functional (procoagulant) activity in relation to changes in protein levels, phosphorylation patterns, and proteolytic cleavage. Control and Scott platelets were therefore activated with (1) thrombin, (2) convulxin/thrombin, and (3) ionomycin, representing different levels of procoagulant activity. Given major differences in protein expression levels between human and mouse platelets, we confined this work to the human system.
For the complex proteome analysis, we applied iTRAQ stable isotope labeling in conjunction with TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment and high pH reversed phase fractionation, allowing simultaneous quantitative analysis of the global proteome and phosphoproteome of (activated) Scott and control platelets (figure 1). Such mass spectrometry-based techniques have previously been used for a separate quantification of the majority of proteins and regulated protein phosphorylation sites in platelets isolated from healthy subjects. We also applied our recently developed charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography (ChaFRADIC) approach to identify neo-N-terminal peptides, produced upon proteolytic activity. This allowed us to distinguish between calpain- and caspase-mediated protein cleavage patterns in Scott and control platelets. To our knowledge, this is the first time that such a broad combination of proteomics technologies has been used to assess the (post-translational) protein changes in a human blood cell, here platelets, isolated from, to our knowledge, the only available Scott patient worldwide.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Author contributions: JWMH and RPZ were the principal investigators and take primary responsibility for the paper; FAS, NJAM, JMB and FS performed analytical work; PWC recruited the patients; FAS, NJAM and RPZ performed statistical analysis; AS, JMEMC, JWMH and RPZ coordinated the research; NJAM, FAS, JWMH and RPZ wrote the paper.
* This research was supported by the Centre for Translational Molecular Medicine (INCOAG), The Cardiovascular Centre Maastricht, the Ministerium für Innovation, Wissenschaft und Forschung des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen, the Senatsverwaltung für Wirtschaft, Technologie und Forschung des Landes Berlin, and the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung.
 This article contains supplemental material.
We declare no conflicts of interest.
1 The abbreviations used are:
PS
phosphatidylserine
ACD
acid-citrate glucose solution
AGC
automatic gain control
AF
Alexa Fluor
ChaFRADIC
Charge-based fractional diagonal chromatography
FDR
false discovery rate
FITC
Fluorescein isothiocyanate
PPACK
D-Phenylalanyl-prolyl-arginyl chloromethyl ketone
PRM
parallel reaction monitoring
PRP
platelet-rich plasma
PSMs
Peptide spectrum matches
SDS
sodium dodecyl sulphate
TEAB
triethylammonium bicarbonate.