PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Gastrocnemius
diseases: Duchenne muscular dystrophy
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification; TMT
keywords: Aav therapy; Split-intein; Duchenne muscular dystrophy; Skeletal muscle; Lcms

ABSTRACT:
Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a rare and lethal neuromuscular disease caused by loss-of-function mutations in the dystrophin protein that provides structural integrity to striated muscle fibers. Mice with loss-of-function mutations for the Dmd gene encoding dystrophin (mdx-4cv) were treated with microdystrophin or split-intein AAV constructs to restore various-length dystrophin isoforms to the skeletal muscle compartment. The aim of this study was to compare protein expression profiles between healthy (WT), mdx-4cv, and AAV-treated mdx-4cv gastrocnemius skeletal muscle. We employed an isobaric labeling TMT multiplex discovery proteomics approach to describe and compare proteomic profiles across experimental groups.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Split intein mdx skeletal muscle proteomics

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Frozen gastrocnemius muscle tissue pieces (20-25mg) were processed using a Percellys Cryolys Evolution bead beater (Bertin Technologies). Tissue samples were weighed in Percellys tissue homogenizing CKMix tubes (Bertin Technologies) and protein extraction buffer [7M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.4M Tris pH 8.0, 20% (v/v) acetonitrile, 10mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40mM chloroacetamide, and 1μl/100ul buffer Pierce Universal Nuclease (Thermo Fisher Scientific)] was added at a ratio of 9ul lysis buffer per 1mg tissue. A 150μl aliquot of each sample was transferred to a PCT tube with a 150μl cap for the Barocycler NEP2320 (Pressure Biosciences, Inc., South Easton, MA) and cycled between 35 kPSI for 20 sec and 0 kPSI for 10 sec. for 60 cycles at 37°C. After barocycling, the samples were centrifuged at 15,000xg for 10 min. The samples were transferred to new 1.5mL microfuge Eppendorf Protein LoBind tubes. Aliquots for each sample were taken for protein concentration determination by Bradford assay.  A bridged pooled normalizing sample was made for two TMTpro 16plex (Tandem Mass Tag, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) experiments. The pooled sample was composed of equal μg aliquots of each GAS sample. An 18μg aliquot of each sample and pooled sample was transferred to a new 1.5mL Eppendorf Protein LoBind tube and brought to the same volume with extraction buffer. The samples were diluted fivefold with LC-MS grade water. Next, trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added in a 1:40 ratio of trypsin to total protein. Samples were incubated at 37°C overnight, then were acidified with 0.3% (v/v) formic acid. Samples were cleaned using a MCX Stage tip and eluates were vacuum dried. Samples were resuspended with 0.1M triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5, to a final protein concentration of 1μg/μL.  For stable isotope labeling, a 14μg aliquot for each sample was made and assigned a channel within a TMTpro 16plex. The samples were labeled with TMTpro 16plex isobaric label reagent in a 1:10 ratio of μg protein to μg TMTpro 16plex label according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Isobaric tag-labeled samples within the same experimental screen were multiplexed together into a new 1.5mL Eppendorf tube, then vacuum dried and cleaned with a 1mL SepPak C18 solid phase extraction cartridge (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA). Each TMTpro 16plex sample was vacuum dried, resuspended in 20 mM ammonium formate, pH 10,  98% (v/v) water and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and fractionated offline by high pH C18 reversed-phase chromatography as previously described [1]. After fractionation, concatenated peptide fractions were C18 Stage tipped [2] and eluates were dried in vacuo.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data was collected on a Thermo Orbitrap EclipseTM mass spectrometer coupled to a DionexTM UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano LC pump. Peptides from 17% (2μL) of each concatenated set of fractions were separated using a 199-min gradient at 0.315-0.325μL/min with a 0-90% Buffer B gradient at a column temperature of 55°C on a C18-AQ ReproSil-Pur column measuring 400mm with an internal diameter of 100μm, 1.9μm resin size, and 120Å pore size (Dr. Maisch GmbH Ammerbuch, Germany). Buffer A consisted of water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and Buffer B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. High-field asymmetric-waveform ion mobility spectroscopy (FAIMS) was enabled during experimental acquisition with the following compensation voltage (CV) settings: -45 V, -60 V, and -75 V. Voltage was kept at 2.1 kV for positive ion mode and the ion transfer tube temperature was set to 275°C. At the MS1 stage, the mass spectrometer scanned masses in the range of 400-1400 m/z at a resolution of 120K with an AGC target of 4.0E5 over a 50ms maximal injection time. At the MS2 stage, ions were fragmented by high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a collision energy of 38% at a detector resolution of 50K with an AGC target of 1.25E+5 (250% relative to default) over a 150ms maximal injection time, and the Fourier transform first mass mode was fixed at 110 m/z.   Raw MS files were processed by CMSP in Proteome Discoverer v3.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Peptide identification was performed by searching HCD MS/MS files against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot mus musculus database (UP000000589; accessed August 18, 2023) appended with custom dystrophin sequences from AAV-Myo1 μDys5, midi-Dys, and flDys constructs. Database search files were merged with a common lab contaminant database (https://github.com/HaoGroup-ProtContLib) with the Sequest HT search engine and a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set for peptide-to-spectrum matches using the Percolator algorithm in Proteome Discoverer v3.1. The following parameters were used for spectral processing: MS1 tolerance of 20ppm, MS2 tolerance of 0.08 Da, trypsin (full) digestion with a maximum of two missed cleavage, minimum peptide length of 6 and maximum peptide length of 50, with 10 maximum peptides reported. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a static modification, while TMTpro lysine and N-terminal modifications, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, methionine oxidation, pyro-glutamic acid, N-terminal acetylation, methionine-loss, and methionine loss with acetylation were set as dynamic modifications in Sequest. Only protein identifications with high FDR confidence (FDR<1%) and containing 2 or more peptides were accepted. Reporter ion quantification was conducted using the TMTpro 16plex Lot-YD372049 quantification method with a peak integration tolerance of 20ppm and the most confident centroid method. Unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. All peptides were used for normalization and protein roll-up, and scaling was performed for inter-screen data normalization using a pooled average control sample. Hypothesis testing was performed using t-test (background based) for pairwise ratios.