PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Brown adipose tissue
instruments: Q Exactive Plus
modifications: monohydroxylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Nuclear softening; Brown adipose tissue; Mitochondria; 2-hydroxyglutarate

ABSTRACT:
Mitochondria play a crucial role in regulating cellular homeostasis in response to intrinsic and extrinsic cues by changing cellular metabolism to meet these challenges. However, the molecular underpinnings of this regulation and the complete spectrum of these physiological outcomes remain largely unexplored. In this study, we elucidate the mechanisms driving the whitening phenotype in brown adipose tissue (BAT) deficient in the mitochondrial matrix protease CLPP. We find that CLPP-deficient BAT shows aberrant accumulation of lipid droplets, which occurs independently of defects in oxygen consumption and fatty acid oxidation. Our results indicate that mitochondrial dysfunction due to CLPP deficiency leads to the build-up of the oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), which in turn promotes lipid droplet enlargement. We further demonstrate that 2-HG influences gene expression and decreases nuclear stiffness by modifying epigenetic signatures. We propose that lipid accumulation and altered nuclear stiffness regulated through 2-HG are novel stress responses to mitochondrial dysfunction.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
2-hydroxyglutarate mediates whitening of brown adipocytes coupled to nuclear softening upon mitochondrial dysfunction

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
2512 – Isolated Mitochondria proteomics The mitochondria were isolated from BAT tissue and equal quantities of the mitochondria from all samples were lysed directly in 8M urea/50mM TEAB buffer, followed by centrifugation to remove the debris. DTT was added and incubated at 25 degree for 1 hour, followed by CAA addition and incubation in dark for 30 minutes. Lys-C protease was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated for 4 hours. Finally, Trypsin was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated overnight. The following day, samples were acidified by formic acid to stop the enzymatic reaction and continued with SDB RP StageTip purification.   2680 – Tissue proteomics Brown adipose tissue from indicated genotypes was grinded in liquid nitrogen and the powder was stored at -80. The tissue powder was then homogenized in 8M urea/50mM TEAB buffer. Chromatin was degraded using biorupter and centrifuged to remove cell debris. DTT was added and incubated at 25 degree for 1 hour, followed by CAA addition and incubation in dark for 30 minutes. Lys-C protease was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated for 4 hours. Finally, Trypsin was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated overnight. The following day, samples were acidified by formic acid to stop the enzymatic reaction and continued with SDB RP StageTip purification.   3003 – Stromal Vascular Fraction proteomics The Stromal Vascular Fraction (SVF) from indicated genotypes was isolated using standard protocol. After the cells were obtained, they were lysed in 8M urea/50mM TEAB buffer. Chromatin was degraded using biorupter and centrifuged to remove cell debris. DTT was added and incubated at 25 degree for 1 hour, followed by CAA addition and incubation in dark for 30 minutes. Lys-C protease was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated for 4 hours. Finally, Trypsin was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated overnight. The following day, samples were acidified by formic acid to stop the enzymatic reaction and continued with SDB RP StageTip purification.   3177 – mBA cells proteomics Preadipocytes were isolated from brown adipose tissue of mice of indicated genotypes. The cells were propagated in culture and then differentiated using standard protocols. The differentiated cells were collected and lysed directly in 8M urea/50mM TEAB buffer. Chromatin was degraded using biorupter and centrifuged to remove cell debris. DTT was added and incubated at 25 degree for 1 hour, followed by CAA addition and incubation in dark for 30 minutes. Lys-C protease was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated for 4 hours. Finally, Trypsin was added at enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:75 and incubated overnight. The following day, samples were acidified by formic acid to stop the enzymatic reaction and continued with SDB RP StageTip purification.

DATA PROCESSING:
All samples were analyzed by the CECAD proteomics facility on a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC (both Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm, 75 μm inner diameter, filled with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300-1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 55 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500.   All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (Tyanova et al. NatProt) using default parameters against the Uniprot canonical Mouse database (UP000000589) with the match-between-runs option enabled between replicates. Followup analysis was done in Perseus 1.6.15 (Tyanova et al. NatMet). Hits from the decoy database, the contaminant list and those only identified by modified peptides were removed. Afterwards, results were filtered for data completeness in replicates groups and LFQ values imputed using sigma downshift with standard settings. Finally, FDR-controlled T-tests between sample groups were performed with s0 = 0.2.