PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: ubiquitinylated lysine
experiment types: SRM/MRM; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Protein Abundance Index - PAI
keywords: Small-molecule inhibitor; Hect e3; Mass spectrometry; Enzymology; Click chemistry; Non-protein ubiquitination

ABSTRACT:
The ubiquitin system regulates myriad pathways in eukaryotic physiology by modifying specific substrate proteins. The recognition of the substrates and the assembly of ubiquitin signals on them – key specificity determinants in ubiquitin signaling - are determined by the diversified class of ubiquitin ligases. It has recently emerged that certain ubiquitin ligases can modify non-protein substrates, such as sugars, lipids, and nucleotides. Here we expand this new realm of ubiquitin biology by revealing that the human cancer-associated HECT-type ubiquitin ligase HUWE1 can target drug-like small molecules. Our study focuses on a set of compounds identified as HUWE1 inhibitors, demonstrating that they act as selective substrates of their target ligase. The small-molecule ubiquitination is driven by the canonical catalytic ubiquitination cascade, linking the ubiquitin C-terminus to an essential primary amino group of the compounds. In vitro, the modification is selectively catalyzed by HUWE1 and allows the small molecules to compete with protein substrates for ubiquitination. We establish strategies to specifically detect small-molecule ubiquitination, unveiling that the inhibitors are targets of the ubiquitin system when supplied to human cells. While the cellular compound modification is promoted by HUWE1, it is not specific to it, highlighting that other ubiquitination enzymes can target exogenous small-molecule substrates. Our findings open the intriguing perspective of harnessing the ubiquitin system to transform exogenous small molecules into new chemical modalities in cells, as basic research tools or therapeutics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Selective ubiquitination of drug-like small molecules by the ubiquitin ligase HUWE1

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
LC-MS/MS of ubiquitinated inhibitors from reconstituted HUWE1HECT-driven reactions: Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie staining, and the protein band of interest was cut out. Gel slices were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56 °C for 55 min, alkylated with 55 mM chloroacetamide at 26 °C for 20 min, and digested with 0.2 g LysC   (Mass Spec Grade, Promega) at 37 °C overnight. The extracted peptides were dried in a speed-vac and then resuspended in 2% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA, and analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer, coupled to a Dionex U3000 nanoHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Samples  for LC/MS/MS analyses of the ubiquitinated inhibitors from reconstituted HUWE1FL-driven reactions were prepared by in-solution trypsin (Mass Spec Grade, Promega) digestion, instead of the gel-based LysC digestion procedure described above. This change was made, as it yielded superior signal and thus facilitated the detection of small-molecule ubiquitination from both in vitro reactions and cell lysates. In both cases, the samples were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM TCEP and 20 mM iodoacetamide at 37 °C in the dark for 60 min. An equal mixture of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads with hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces (GE Healthcare; 1:1 mix (v/v)) was washed twice with water and added to the sample at 50:1(w/w) resin-to-protein ratio. After  adding ACN to a final percentage of 70% (v/v) and removing the supernatant, the resin was washed 3 x with 90% (v/v) ACN, resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), containing sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:25 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio), and incubated at 37 °C, shaking at 1,000 rpm overnight. The resulting peptides were then dried, dissolved in 5% ACN/0.1% FA (both v/v), and measured on a hybrid quadruple-Obitrap Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Sample preparation for LC/MS/MS analyses of the ubiquitinated inhibitors from cell lysates was performed according to the following workflow: HEK293T cells at 70% confluency were treated with 15 M BI8626 or an equal volume of DMSO for 1 h. Cells were collected in ice-cold 1x DPBS (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and resuspended in sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) (Jena Bioscience), supplemented with 1% (v/v) NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich), 3 M urea (Merck KGaA), 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 M PR-619 (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 M MG-132 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and protease-phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). After 20 min incubation on a rotating wheel at 4 °C, the lysate was cleared by centrifugation, the total protein concentrations determined, and the sample (2.3 mg) diluted with 10 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl and 0.5 mM EDTA to a final volume of 1 ml. 25 l of Ubiquitin-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads (Proteintech) were added and the mixture was rotated at 4 °C for 80 min, before washing, once with 10 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% (v/v) NP-40, 0.5 mM EDTA and 3 M urea and twice with 10 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% (v/v) NP-40, 0.5 mM EDTA and elution in 40 L of 4% (w/v) SDS in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) at RT, followed by concentration determination with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Thereafter, the samples were treated and analyzed, as described above for the HUWE1FL-driven reconstituted ubiquitination reactions

DATA PROCESSING:
LC/MS/MS of ubiquitinated inhibitors from reconstituted HUWE1HECT-driven reactions: Raw files were processed using MaxQuant v.2.0.3.0 (MPI for Biochemistry).50 MS/MS spectra were searched against a UniProtKB human database containing 20422 protein entries (March 2023), supplemented with the human Ub sequence via the Andromeda search engine.51 Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. BI8622 (change: 408.2062448016; position: protein C-term; type: Standard; new terminus: none) and BI8626 (change: 422.2331282541; position: protein C-term; type: standard; new terminus: none) were added to the modifications database in MaxQuant. Protein C-terminal BI8622, BI8626, and methionine oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at both the peptide and the protein level, using a forward and reverse concatenated decoy database approach. LC/MS/MS analyses of the ubiquitinated inhibitors from reconstituted HUWE1FL-driven reactions and LC/MS/MS analyses of the ubiquitinated inhibitors from cell lysates: mannually annoated raw files in Xcalibur and Skyline.