PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: phosphorylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Brain; Insulin; Dep-1

ABSTRACT:
A healthy metabolism relies on the precise regulation of anabolic and catabolic pathways. Insulin and AMPK serve as key regulators of anabolism and catabolism, respectively. While insulin deficiency markedly impairs anabolism, insulin resistance in obesity leads to metabolic dysfunction especially via altered brain insulin receptor activity. Density-enhanced phosphatase-1 (DEP-1), a ubiquitously expressed receptor-like tyrosine phosphatase, has been described as an insulin receptor phosphatase in peripheral tissues. Strikingly, diet-induced obese mice exhibit elevated DEP-1 expression in the brain. This study uncovers DEP-1's role in brain insulin signaling and its impact on ana- and catabolic pathways. Neurons lacking DEP-1 exhibit heightened insulin receptor phosphorylation and downstream signaling upon acute insulin stimulation. Surprisingly, this is accompanied by simultaneous activation of the AMPK cascade due to increased phospholipase C gamma 1 signaling. These opposing pathways in male DEP-1 forebrain/hippocampus-specific knockout mice result in heightened lipolysis in white adipose tissue, and enhanced fat oxidation in brown adipose tissue due to elevated sympathetic activation and enhanced beta-adrenergic receptor expression.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
DEP-1 is a novel brain insulin receptor phosphatase and disallows the development of futile cycles

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Unstimulated control and DEP-1 KO cells were lysed with 4% SDS, heated to 95 °C for 10 min, and sonicated for 30 s. 500 µg of protein lysate was reduced and alkylated with a final concentration of 5 mM TCEP and 15 mM CAA. Proteins were acetone precipitated and sequentially digested with LysC (enzyme:substrate ratio 1:200) and trypsin (enzyme:substrate ratio 1:100) overnight at 27 °C. Peptides were acidified with TFA (pH < 2) and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartidge, 50 mg (Waters, Milford, US). Eluate was dried using a speed vac concentrator. 25 µg were resuspended in 25 µl 5 % formic acid, 2 % acetonitrile and measured by an easy nLC 1000 coupled to a QExactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, US). A top 10 method was applied with a resolution of 70,000 with a scan range of 300-1750 m/z over a 90-min gradient.  Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed by using High-Select™ TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, US) and measured with the same system using 120 min LC gradient and resolution of 70,000 and injection time 20 ms as described previously (Aravamudhan et al., 2021).

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0). Further analysis was performed with perseus (version 1.6.5.0).

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
A healthy metabolism relies on precise regulation of anabolic and catabolic pathways. While insulin deficiency impairs anabolism, insulin resistance in obesity causes metabolic dysfunction, especially via altered brain insulin receptor (IR) activity. Density-enhanced phosphatase 1 (DEP-1) negatively modulates the IR in peripheral tissues. Our study shows that DEP-1 is an insulin-regulated gene, dysregulated in obesity, and uncovers its role in brain insulin signaling, impacting both anabolic and catabolic pathways. Neuro-2a cells lacking DEP-1 demonstrated heightened IR phosphorylation upon acute insulin stimulation. This coincided with simultaneous AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) activation, which governs catabolic pathways, due to increased phospholipase C-gamma 1 signaling. These opposing pathways in male DEP-1 forebrain-specific knockout mice resulted in elevated lipolysis in white adipose tissue and fat oxidation in brown adipose tissue, with enhanced sympathetic activation and β-adrenergic receptor expression. In conclusion, DEP-1 deficiency causes the simultaneous activation of IR and AMPK signaling in the brain, with enhanced sympathetic activity in adipose tissues.