PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: iodoacetamide derivatized residue; ubiquitination signature dipeptidyl lysine
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TMT
keywords: Proteasome; Stress response; Ubiquitin; Proteome

ABSTRACT:
Here we have determined changes to the global proteome in response to heat stress. The abundance of individual proteins was compared between heat stressed and untreated control HEK293T cells in the presence of proteasome inhibition using quantitative proteomics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Profiling changes to the global proteome in HEK293T cells in response to heat stress. (PMID: 34739326)

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HEK293T cells were grown to ~80% confluency in 10 cm dishes and subject to the following treatments. For heat shock treatment, cell culture media was replaced with fresh media prewarmed to 42°C and placed at 42°C for the indicated time. For arsenite stress, media was replaced with fresh media containing 0.5 mM sodium arsenite. For matched control-treated cells, media was replaced with fresh media warmed to 37°C and maintained at 37°C for the indicated time before harvest. For proteasome inhibition, 0.5 µM bortezomib was added to the media during the 1 hour treatment time prior to lysis. HEK293T cells from one 10-cm dish per sample were harvested, washed with ice-cold PBS, and collected by centrifugation. About 100 μg of protein per sample of cell lysate was digested, followed by Cys reduction, alkylation, and quenching. The samples were further digested with trypsin and differentially labeled with 11-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

DATA PROCESSING:
Experiment type: Shotgun proteomics Species:  Tissue:  Modifications:  Instrument:  Cell type: HEK293T Disease: N/A Quantification method: TMT Software: Comet

METHODS:
Methods Summary
All experiments were performed in HEK293T and/or U2OS cells unless otherwise indicated. Primary cultures of cortical neurons were prepared from embryo day 15 ICR mice (Charles River Laboratories) as previously described. iPS neurons were differentiated with a two-step protocol (pre-differentiation and maturation) as previously described. For heat shock treatment, cell culture media was replaced with fresh media pre-warmed to 42°C and placed at 42°C for the indicated time. In recovery experiments, the cells were returned to the 37°C incubator for the indicated time. For matched control-treated cells, media was replaced with fresh media warmed to 37°C and maintained at 37°C for the indicated time prior to harvest. For other stresses, media was replaced with fresh media containing 0.5 mM sodium arsenite, 0.4 M sorbitol, or 1 μM bortezomib for the indicated time. For UV stress, media was removed and replaced with 2 ml PBS and 40 J/m2 UV radiation was delivered. When indicated, 1 μM TAK243 was added directly to cell culture media 30 min prior to stress treatment and maintained in the media until lysis.
Cell pellets were collected by centrifugation followed by removal of media by aspiration, and the cell pellet was washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were then lysed in the indicated buffers supplemented with deubiquitinase and protease inhibitors. Lysates were centrifuged and the supernatant fraction was collected as the “soluble fraction” for TUBE or IP lysis buffers or “whole cell lysate” for urea lysis buffer. To collect pellet fractions, the insoluble pellet from TUBE lysis buffer was washed and resolubilized in urea lysis buffer.
For TUBE pulldowns, soluble or pellet cell lysate fractions were incubated with His-Halo-TUBE beads overnight at 4°C. Beads with captured proteins were then washed and captured proteins were then released from the beads by denaturation in 1x Laemmli sample buffer with reducing agent and heating at 75°C for 5 min.
For immunoprecipitation and Oligo(dT) pulldown, cells were lysed in IP lysis buffer and lysates were incubated overnight at 4°C with Protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) conjugated to antibodies against endogenous proteins according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For Oligo(dT) pulldown, lysate was incubated with Oligo d(T)25 magnetic bead resin (New England Biolabs) overnight at 4°C. Following overnight incubation, beads were washed and proteins were eluted in 1x LDS sample buffer with reducing agent for analysis by immunoblot and MS.
Mass spectrometric (MS) analysis was performed according to an optimized platform as previously reported. Eluates from the TUBE pulldown or IP experiments were run on an SDS gel and visualized by Coomassie staining (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The whole gel lanes were excised into gel bands. The digested peptides were extracted from the gel bands, dried and reconstituted in loading buffer. Peptides were then fractionated by HPLC system (and detected by an in-line mass spectrometer. MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt human protein database and filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein false discovery rate (FDR) to about 1%.
Proteomic profiling of whole proteome was carried out with a previously reported protocol. Briefly, for each sample, HEK293T cells from one 10-cm dish were harvested, washed with ice-cold PBS and collected by centrifugation. Approximately 100 μg of protein per sample of cell lysate was digested, followed by Cys reduction, alkylation, and quenching. The samples were further digested with trypsin and differentially labeled with 11-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
The TMT-labeled samples were mixed equally, desalted, and fractionated on an offline HPLC (Agilent 1220) using basic pH reverse phase liquid chromatography. The fractions were dried, reconstituted and analyzed by acidic pH reverse phase LC-MS/MS on an Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted, ionized by electrospray ionization and detected by an in-line Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProt human protein database and filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein FDR to about 1%.
For di-GLY TMT ubiquitinome analysis, proteomic profiling of the ubiquitinome was performed with a previously reported protocol with modification. Briefly, for each sample, HEK293T cells from five 15-cm dish were harvested, washed with ice-cold PBS and collected by centrifugation. Cells were lysed, immediately digested with LysC (Wako), quenched with DTT (30 mM for 30 min) and subjected to trypsin digestion and desalting. The desalted peptides were resuspended, centrifuged, and incubated with di-GLY antibody beads (Cell Signaling Technology) for 2 h at 4°C. The di-GLY peptides were eluted at room temperature, dried, and resuspended for 11-plex TMT labeling. The TMT labeled peptides were combined equally among replicates, desalted, and analyzed by LC/LC-MS/MS using a similar protocol descried above.
For proteomics statistics, summed spectral counts of replicate experiments was compared among different treatments with missing values replaced by a constant low value to calculate fold change and P values. Stress-induced changes were considered statistically significant with P ≤ 0.02 and fold change ≥ 2, excluding proteins detected in only one of three replicates for experiments performed in triplicate. In TMT-based quantification experiments (total proteome and di-GLY profiling), stress-induced changes were considered statistically significant with P ≤ 0.05 and fold change ≥ 1.5. The heat shock ubiquitinome was defined from the TUBE experiment as proteins with statistically significant increase in the soluble fraction and proteins with statistically significant increase in the pellet fraction but not decreased in the soluble fraction (Fig. 2J), excluding 8 proteins for which peptides were measured to have decreased abundance in the di-GLY TMT experiment.

RESULTS:
Results
Different cellular stresses induce distinct patterns of ubiquitination
To investigate whether cells deploy different patterns of ubiquitination to cope with different types of stress, we performed proteomic analysis following tandem ubiquitin binding entity (TUBE)-based capture of the ubiquitinome in HEK293T cells exposed to heat stress (42°C), oxidative stress (sodium arsenite), osmotic stress (sorbitol), UV stress, or proteasomal inhibition (bortezomib) as well as unstressed cells (Fig. 1, A and B). Following exposure to each treatment, lysates were incubated with Halo-linked TUBE resin to capture ubiquitin conjugates, followed by label-free liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Fig. 1, A and B). Immunoblotting indicated that all stress types except UV led to an increase in total ubiquitin conjugates (input blot, Fig. 1C). While the TUBEs likely have higher baseline affinity for binding poly-ubiquitinated over mono-ubiquitinated proteins, conditions were optimized such that the TUBEs captured the vast majority of all ubiquitinated material (compare bound and unbound blots, Fig. 1C). We used stringent buffer conditions (1% NP-40) and a high salt wash to minimize capture of non-ubiquitinated proteins by the TUBEs. We detected ~200–300 ubiquitinated proteins per stress condition and 500 unique proteins across all five stress conditions (Fig. 1D, table S1).
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering revealed that each type of stress was associated with a distinct pattern of ubiquitination relative to control cells (Fig. 1E). Indeed, the majority of proteins with increased or decreased ubiquitination were associated with a single type of stress (Fig. 1F). Several patterns emerged from this analysis. Some proteins showed increased or decreased ubiquitination in response to all 5 stresses, suggesting that certain ubiquitination events were part of a non-specific, generalized stress response (e.g., Groups a and b, Fig. 1E). Other proteins showed altered ubiquitination in a stress-specific manner. For example, ubiquitination of some proteins was increased exclusively in response to heat shock (Group c, Fig. 1E) or UV exposure (Group d, Fig. 1E). The emergence of these distinct protein groups suggested stress-specific patterns of ubiquitination that represented distinct adaptive responses to stressors. To test this hypothesis, we investigated ubiquitination in response to heat and oxidative stress more deeply.
Heat stress leads to rapid increases in total ubiquitination and a time-dependent shift in solubility of ubiquitin conjugates
We first examined the kinetics of ubiquitin conjugate accumulation during heat shock and recovery. Heat stress-induced ubiquitination occurred rapidly, with increased ubiquitin conjugates apparent as early as 15 min and peaking within 30 min following heat shock (Fig. 2A). The accumulated ubiquitin conjugates remained at a constant elevated level during prolonged stress for at least 150 min (Fig. 2A). Immunoblotting using antibodies specific for poly-ubiquitin (FK2) and K48-linked or K63-linked poly-ubiquitin chains showed similar stress-dependent increases in signal as those observed using the P4D1 antibody, which recognizes unconjugated ubiquitin as well as mono-ubiquitinated and poly-ubiquitinated proteins (fig. S1A). Thus, the observed stress-dependent increase in ubiquitin conjugation consisted largely of poly-ubiquitination and was not highly chain type-specific.
Prolonged heat shock results in progressive loss of solubility in a fraction of the proteome, although the relationship to ubiquitination is not clear. Here we observed a time-dependent dynamic shift in the ubiquitinome between soluble and insoluble fractions. Accumulation of poly-ubiquitin conjugates in the soluble fraction peaked at about 30 min and then declined over the course of the experiment. Poly-ubiquitin conjugates accumulated more slowly in the insoluble fraction, plateauing after 60 min (Fig. 2A). The accumulation of poly-ubiquitin conjugates after heat stress was temporary, returning to baseline within 3 hours after a 30-min heat shock (Fig. 2B).
With this kinetic profile in mind, we next performed further proteomic analysis of the heat stress-associated ubiquitinome by TUBE-LC-MS/MS. We examined this ubiquitinome in the soluble fraction at an early time point (15 min) corresponding to the initial increase in ubiquitination, and at a later time point (60 min) (Fig. 2C). To recover ubiquitinated proteins accumulated in the pellet fraction at a later time point (Fig. 2A), we resolubilized the pellet fractions from samples at the 60-min time point in a urea buffer prior to incubation with TUBEs. Combined data from three replicates for both fractions yielded quantification of >1,000 ubiquitinated proteins in the TUBE-recovered samples, indicating good depth of coverage and reproducibility (fig. S1, B and C, table S2), indicating that our TUBE-based method can detect ubiquitin conjugates at least as efficiently other methods of ubiquitin capture. We also verified heat stress-induced increase in poly-ubiquitination of seven representative proteins by immunoblotting (fig. S1D). Replicating the 60-min time point experiment in U2OS cells gave results very similar to those in HEK293T cells (fig. S1E and table S3). Similarly, heat shock led to an accumulation of ubiquitin conjugation in both induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons and mouse cortical neurons (fig. S1F) and TUBE proteomic analysis revealed substantial overlap between the heat shock ubiquitinome of HEK293T cells and these neuronal cell types (fig. S1, G–I and table S3). Indeed, many of the proteins with the largest increase in abundance following heat stress were shared between these three cell types (fig. S1, G–I). Thus, stress-dependent changes to the ubiquitinome were not highly cell type-specific.
The temporal profile of changes in the ubiquitinome in the soluble fraction revealed only modest changes at 15 min but more substantial changes at 60 min following heat stress (Fig. 2, D–F). Thus, despite an increase in a poly-ubiquitin smear by immunoblotting at 15 min (Fig. 2A), the global shift in the ubiquitinated protein landscape was better reflected later in the stress response. We therefore directed the majority of our subsequent analyses to examining changes to the ubiquitinome after 60 min of heat shock.
We also detected significant changes to the ubiquitinome in the pellet fraction. Whereas there was no loss of ubiquitinated proteins in the pellet fraction, 172 ubiquitinated proteins were significantly increased after 60 min of heat stress (Fig. 2, G and H). Roughly 80% of these proteins had also been detected in the soluble fraction, where these proteins were enriched, depleted, or unchanged in response to heat stress (Fig. 2, I and J). While some ubiquitinated proteins did accumulate in the pellet fraction following heat shock, an individual protein’s ubiquitination status was not predictive of its solubility. Because detailed descriptions of heat-dependent changes in solubility have been published elsewhere, in subsequent analyses we assessed the significance of heat stress-induced ubiquitination of all proteins whether they appeared in the soluble fraction, pellet fraction, or both. Heat stress induced a global shift in the ubiquitin landscape, resulting in a “heat shock ubiquitinome” of 381 proteins, defined as all proteins showing a predicted net total increase in ubiquitination in response to heat stress (Fig. 2J and table S4).
Heat and arsenite stress induce different changes to the ubiquitinome
The pattern of ubiquitination following arsenite stress was most similar to that generated by heat stress (Fig. 1E). To examine this more deeply, we characterized arsenite stress-induced ubiquitination at 60 min following the same approach that we used to define heat stress-induced ubiquitination. After identifying proteins whose ubiquitination was significantly altered relative to control (tables S4 and S5), we compared the responses to arsenite stress versus heat stress. This analysis confirmed significant overlap in the arsenite stress- and heat stress-induced ubiquitinomes (fig. S1J). This overlap was evident for both proteins that showed increased ubiquitination and those that showed decreased ubiquitination (fig. S1K). Nevertheless, this analysis also confirmed stress-specific patterns in ubiquitination. Indeed, more than 400 significant changes in ubiquitination were unique to either arsenite or heat stress (fig. S1, J and K, tables S2 and S5).
Stress-dependent ubiquitination is not reflected by altered abundance
We next sought to determine the extent to which changes in the stress-induced ubiquitinomes reflected changes in total protein levels owing to altered rates of synthesis or ubiquitin-dependent degradation. To investigate changes in expression at the protein level, we performed multiplexed tandem mass tagging (TMT) MS quantification of the whole proteome from unstressed, heat-stressed, or arsenite-stressed cells in the presence or absence of proteasome inhibition (0.5 μM bortezomib) (Fig. 3A). Lysates were digested and labeled by TMT in 11-plex mode, followed by nanoscale LC-high resolution MS/MS. Of the 12,586 proteins quantified, the vast majority of proteins showed no significant stress-dependent change in total abundance using 1.5-fold and P ≤ 0.05 as a cut-off (Fig. 3B, fig. S2A, and table S6). Nevertheless, we detected several expected changes in response to both stress types, including the accumulation of stress response transcription factors ATF4 and XBP1, and depletion of BTG1, a regulator of ATF4 (fig. S2B and table S6). No proteins with a stress-dependent increase in ubiquitination showed a significant increase in total protein levels. Thus, increased capture in the TUBE experiments reflected increased ubiquitination rather than increased levels of total protein. Additionally, only eight proteins with heat shock-dependent increases in ubiquitination showed a significant decrease of ≥ 1.25-fold in total protein levels in response to stress, of which only three proteins (EPPK1, GCN1, CYP51A1) decreased ≥ 1.5-fold (Fig. 3B, left panel, blue dots, and fig. S2B). The levels of these three proteins were stabilized during heat shock by the addition of bortezomib, indicating that they were targets of heat stress-dependent proteasomal degradation (Fig. 3B, right panel, and fig. S2B). Nonetheless, for nearly all cases with heat shock (Fig. 3B) and all cases with arsenite (fig. S2A), a stress-dependent increase in ubiquitination did not result in an overall downregulation of total protein levels. Treatment with bortezomib during the 1-hour heat shock did not significantly alter ubiquitinated protein enrichment based on TUBE pulldown (fig. S2, C and D), indicating that proteasomal degradation did not significantly alter the composition of the heat shock ubiquitinome during this time frame. Thus, either the observed ubiquitination was partially non-degradative or, more likely, only a fraction of each protein was ubiquitinated in response to stress, such that ubiquitin-dependent degradation did not substantially reduce the overall abundance of most proteins. Similarly, RNA-seq analysis revealed that, although we observed many significant heat shock-dependent changes in transcription, including HSPs and other stress response genes, most heat shock ubiquitinome genes were not regulated at the level of transcription, with a few exceptions (Fig. 3C, fig. S2E, table S7). Furthermore, upregulation of heat shock response genes at the mRNA level (e.g., HSPA6, DNAJB1, table S7) was not yet apparent at the protein level at the 1-hour time point used here (table S6). This difference in protein level versus transcript level changes is consistent with the expected lag time between stress-dependent induction at the transcriptional and translational levels. Thus, while it is likely that the transcriptional response to heat shock has a significant contribution to recovery from stress over longer time scales, it does not appear to be directly involved in the short-term reversal of stress response activities investigated here.
Paired di-GLY and TMT quantitative proteomics indicate that heat stress-induced ubiquitination leads to degradation during the recovery phase
Di-GLY proteomics, which uses enrichment of the Lys-ϵ-Gly-Gly (di-GLY) remnant generated on ubiquitinated peptides following trypsin digestion, is an alternative approach to identify and quantify the ubiquitin-modified proteome. To complement and validate our TUBE proteomics, we paired di-GLY proteomics with TMT labeling in the presence or absence of proteasome inhibition to quantify changes in ubiquitination in response to a 60-min heat stress and following 2 hours of recovery. Across all samples, we quantified 16,525 unique ubiquitin-modified peptides, corresponding to 4,892 unique proteins (Fig. 3D and table S8). The heat stress-induced ubiquitinomes as determined by di-GLY/TMT proteomics were highly correlated with our TUBE-based proteomics, detecting at least one ubiquitin-modified peptide for most proteins identified by TUBE pulldown (Fig. 3, E and F, and tables S2, S8). Of the 381 proteins in the heat shock ubiquitinome by TUBE pulldown, 335 had at least one peptide increased by ≥ 1.5-fold in response to heat shock in the di-GLY analysis (Fig. 3G and tables S4 and S8). Of the 46 that did not, 35 were not detected in the di-GLY experiment, 8 had overall reduced ubiquitinated peptide levels in response to heat shock (HS/CTL = 0.53–0.95), and 3 had modestly increased levels (HS/CTL = 1.29–1.33) (Fig. 3G and tables S4 and S8). The amplitudes of the observed changes were often lower in the di-GLY profiling experiment, likely owing to ratio suppression commonly observed in TMT-based quantification (tables S2 and S8).The heat shock ubiquitinome had much higher numbers of ubiquitination sites per protein (8.6) than the global ubiquitinome (3.4) (Fig. 3, F and H), suggesting concerted ubiquitination of a subset of proteins that define the heat shock ubiquitinome. We also identified 3,722 proteins not detected in the TUBE spectral counting for which ubiquitin-modified peptide levels were increased by at least 1.5-fold in response to heat shock (Fig. 3G). Comparing these results with the total proteome (table S6), > 8,000 proteins had no detectable increase in heat shock-dependent ubiquitination, representing the majority of the expressed proteome in HEK293T cells. Thus, this ubiquitination does not represent a global increase in ubiquitination across the entire proteome. While the additional heat shock-dependent ubiquitination events detected only by di-GLY profiling represent interesting biology that warrants further investigation, the TUBE-based experiments identified a critical subset of the heat shock ubiquitinome that allowed for comparison between more sample conditions (e.g., soluble vs pellet, arsenite vs other stresses) owing to the reduced time and resources required. We thus adjusted the definition of the “heat shock ubiquitinome” as those proteins detected in the TUBE experiments but excluding the 8 proteins that showed a heat shock-dependent decrease in the di-GLY experiment (373 proteins, table S4).
Analysis of the di-GLY data and quantification of modification sites on the internal lysines of ubiquitin revealed a ~1.5–2-fold heat shock-dependent increase in all poly-ubiquitin linkage types except K6 (Fig. 3I). This finding was consistent with our immunoblotting results (fig. S1A) that suggested that the heat shock-dependent increase in poly-ubiquitination was not highly chain type-specific. K48 was the most abundant linkage type in control conditions and exhibited a further 2-fold increase following heat shock, suggesting a significant portion of the heat shock ubiquitinome is targeted for proteasomal degradation. We therefore analyzed the di-GLY data to determine the effect of proteasome inhibition on the levels of ubiquitin-modified peptides (Fig. 3J). In accordance with our TUBE experiments and whole-proteome analysis, treatment with bortezomib had a modest effect on peptide abundance in heat-shocked samples for most heat shock ubiquitinome proteins. While most heat shock-dependent ubiquitination recovered to baseline levels after 2 hours in the absence of proteasomal inhibition, the levels remained elevated during recovery in the presence of bortezomib. This result suggests that many proteins ubiquitinated during continued heat stress are ultimately targeted for proteasomal degradation upon recovery.
The heat shock ubiquitinome is not defined by the most abundant, highly translated, or thermo-labile proteins
We next examined general features of the heat shock ubiquitinome by analyzing whole-proteome TMT and RNA-seq datasets along with several proteome-wide datasets. We note that the label-free MS approach used in our TUBE experiments can be biased toward identifying abundant proteins. However, proteins detected in the TUBE pulldown experiment spanned five orders of magnitude in TMT intensity and included proteins represented in the bottom 5th percentile of abundance in the proteome (tables S2 and S6), indicating that the heat shock ubiquitinome included low abundance proteins. The heat shock ubiquitinome was not biased by protein or mRNA abundance, and low abundance proteins were well represented (Fig. 3, K and L). This observation, along with the high degree of correlation with the results of the di-GLY profiling, indicated that the quantification of TUBE pulldown samples reflected levels of ubiquitinated protein rather than total protein or transcript levels. Similarly, based on analysis of ribosome profiling data from unstressed cells, we found no correlation between the TUBE-based spectral counting quantification of heat shock ubiquitinome proteins and density of ribosome occupancy for the corresponding mRNA (Fig. 3M). Thus, the heat shock ubiquitinome was not composed of the most actively translated proteins. Finally, we compared the heat shock ubiquitinome to a previous proteome-wide investigation of protein thermostability. This published dataset included 139 proteins from the heat shock ubiquitinome, which showed a similar bimodal distribution of melting temperatures as compared to all 969 proteins analyzed in the study (Fig. 3N). Thus, it is unlikely that the heat shock ubiquitinome represents the proteins most likely to misfold as a result of temperature increase. Taken together it seemed that the heat shock ubiquitinome was not primarily defined by total protein abundance, translation activity, or thermostability.
The functional landscape of the heat shock ubiquitinome reflects cellular activities perturbed by stress
To investigate the functional significance of the heat shock ubiquitinome, we performed gene ontology (GO) analysis (DAVID and PANTHER) along with literature curation (Fig. 4, A–C). The heat shock ubiquitinome was highly enriched in biological pathways that were downregulated or shut down during cellular stress. Furthermore, we detected enrichment of proteins involved in stress granule formation, including translation initiation factors and other components of the translational machinery (Fig. 4C). The heat shock ubiquitinome also included nucleocytoplasmic transport proteins (e.g., 11 of the 18 importin α/β superfamily members, nuclear pore complex components, and RNA transporters). Indeed, stress disrupts nucleocytoplasmic transport through localization of transport factors into stress granules, further linking ubiquitination with downregulated cellular activities and stress granules (Fig. 4C).
Under non-stress conditions, PQC proteins, such as HSP chaperones and VCP, are engaged with misfolded proteins and nascent translation products that are targets for proteasomal degradation, and in some cases HSPs themselves can be directly ubiquitinated as a result. These PQC-related proteins were not over-represented in the GO analysis but were captured by TUBEs at high levels in both control and heat shock conditions in many cases (Fig. 2F, bottom row and table S2). Thus, heat shock-induced ubiquitination occurs both as a response to increased PQC demands and plays a role in regulating activities that comprise the cellular stress response, including stress granule assembly. Furthermore, ubiquitination may contribute to underexplored aspects of the heat stress response such as folate and cholesterol metabolism (Fig. 4C).
Comparisons of the GO analysis of the heat shock- and arsenite-induced ubiquitinomes showed overlap of many GO terms (e.g., splicing, nucleocytoplasmic transport) and others that were unique to heat shock (e.g., translation, metabolic process) (Fig. 4, A and B), suggesting that ubiquitination may play distinct roles in the response to each stress type. As expected, owing to the greater number of unique proteins identified in the heat shock ubiquitinome than for the arsenite ubiquitinome, the heat shock ubiquitinome generally included both a higher number of proteins and higher levels of enrichment over control samples within the GO categories shared by both ubiquitinomes (Fig. 4A and tables S2, S4 and S5). However, the stress-dependent increase in total ubiquitin conjugation was actually higher for arsenite than for heat shock (Fig. 1C and fig. S3A). Thus, the more prominent GO pattern observed for the heat shock ubiquitinome was not simply because of a stronger induction of stress responsive ubiquitination compared to arsenite stress. Rather, different stress types could lead to different patterns of ubiquitination.
mRNPs are ubiquitinated and undergo compositional remodeling upon heat shock
A large fraction of the heat shock ubiquitinome was mRNA-binding proteins (Fig. 4), suggesting that some heat shock-dependent ubiquitination might occur in the context of mRNP complexes. To examine this possibility, we first captured mRNPs using magnetic beads conjugated with oligo(dT)25, which binds to the poly(A) tail of mRNAs, and performed immunoblotting to assess the presence of mRNA bound to poly-ubiquitinated proteins (Fig. 5, A and B). Ubiquitin conjugates co-purified with polyadenylated mRNA to a much greater extent after heat stress. Poly(A) binding protein (PABP)-mediated 3’ end retrieval is an orthologous method for capturing polyadenylated mRNAs. When we isolated mRNPs by immunoprecipitation (IP) of endogenous PABPC1, we similarly observed heat stress-induced ubiquitin conjugates that co-purified with mRNPs (Fig. 5, A and B). Arsenite stress did not produce a similar level of increased ubiquitin conjugates associated with PABPC1, nor did treatment with the translation inhibitors cycloheximide, puromycin, or cephaeline in the absence of heat stress, indicating that this phenomenon was specific to heat stress (fig. S3A).
The observed heat shock-dependent increase in ubiquitination associated with captured mRNPs suggests that ubiquitination may occur on assembled complexes, rather than on individual RNA-binding proteins. To examine this possibility, we used proteomics to investigate the link between heat shock-dependent changes to the composition of mRNPs and the heat shock ubiquitinome. Direct analysis of the PABPC1 protein-protein interaction network from IP of the endogenous protein revealed substantial remodeling in response to heat stress. Indeed, 105 proteins showed increased interaction with PABPC1 after heat shock, whereas 18 proteins showed decreased interaction (P ≤ 0.02, fold enrichment/depletion ≥ 2, detected in both replicates) (Fig. 5C and table S9). More than half of the proteins that exhibited a heat stress-dependent increase in co-IP with PABPC1 (59 of 103) were also components of the heat shock ubiquitinome (Fig. 5C). Moreover, the relative amount of protein retrieved in PABPC1 IP after heat stress correlated with abundance in the TUBE pulldown experiment (Fig. 5, D and E, tables S2 and S9). Consistent results were obtained with 4 additional bait proteins and with oligo(dT) capture, substantiating the idea that heat shock-induced ubiquitination of mRNPs coincides with a remodeling of their composition (Fig. 5E and table S9). Some of the interactions in the co-IP experiments were observed at low levels in control samples but increased with heat shock (e.g., GCN1 with EIF4G), whereas others were only detected after heat shock (e.g., TTLL12 with PABP and EIF4G) (Fig. 5E and table S9). One interpretation of these experiments is that PABPC1 complexes were stabilized through direct, poly-ubiquitin-mediated interactions. However, when we repeated the PABPC1 IP with the addition of the nonspecific deubiquitinating enzyme USP2, which was sufficient to eliminate poly-ubiquitin, we saw no change in the PABPC1 interactome (fig. S3B). Thus, heat shock-induced ubiquitination correlated with a remodeling of the protein components of mRNPs, with some pre-existing interactions that became stabilized upon heat shock as well as some novel heat shock-dependent interactions.
Ubiquitination is required for the disassembly of heat shock-induced stress granules
We next pursued our observation that the heat shock ubiquitinome was strongly enriched for protein constituents of stress granules. We began by assembling a list of 726 protein constituents of stress granules as reported in three studies (table S10). Many more stress granule proteins were represented in the heat shock ubiquitinome than the arsenite ubiquitinome (Fig. 6, A and B). For a high-confidence stress granule proteome (those detected in at least 2 of the 3 studies mentioned above) (tables S2, S5, and S10), ubiquitination of stress granule proteins clearly increased in response to heat shock (Fig. 6C). As expected, this increase in ubiquitination was not apparent in response to arsenite stress (Fig. 6D). Indeed, poly-ubiquitin robustly co-localized with stress granule markers in nearly all cells exposed to heat shock, but not in those exposed to arsenite (Fig. 6, E–G). The group of stress granule proteins with increased ubiquitination in response specifically to heat stress included the key stress granule regulator G3BP1, the central node in the network of interactions that underlie stress granule assembly. In our companion study, we define the lysine residues in G3BP1 that are ubiquitinated in response to heat shock, and we define the mechanism whereby G3BP1 ubiquitination mediates stress granule disassembly during recovery from heat stress.
To further investigate the relationship between poly-ubiquitin conjugation and stress granule dynamics, we used the E1 ubiquitin activating enzyme (UBA1) inhibitor, TAK243. First, we verified that TAK243 treatment led to dose-dependent and time-dependent depletion of cellular ubiquitin conjugates (fig. S4A). Whereas high concentrations or prolonged exposure to TAK243 was toxic to cells (fig. S4B), incubation with 1 μM TAK243 was sufficient to block most cellular ubiquitination within 20 min while causing no detectable loss of viability for up to 4 hours (fig. S4, A and B). Furthermore, ubiquitination did not impact the dynamics of stress granules induced by arsenite (fig. S4C and movies S1, S2), as expected. However, given the differences between the ubiquitin response to heat shock and arsenite, we next assessed the role of ubiquitination in regulating the assembly and disassembly of stress granules induced by heat shock. To our surprise, elimination of ubiquitination with TAK243 did not prevent stress granule formation in response to heat shock, but impaired stress granule disassembly after the removal of stress (Fig. 6H and movies S3, S4). We confirmed this observation with imaging of 10 additional stress granule markers, which showed persistence in stress granules for up to two hours after restoration of normal growth temperature (fig. S4, D–F). We also observed a similar stress granule disassembly defect in cells genetically depleted for UBA1 (fig. S4, G–I). We next repeated the live cell imaging analysis of stress granule dynamics in iPSC-derived neurons. Here too we observed a significant delay in stress granule disassembly during recovery from heat shock in response to TAK243 treatment (Fig. 6I). Thus, across a wide variety of cell types, ubiquitination is essential for normal disassembly of stress granules during recovery from heat stress.
Given that VCP is involved in stress granule disassembly, we next sought to compare the effects of inhibition of UBA1 and VCP on stress granule disassembly kinetics. Treatment with the VCP inhibitor CB5083 prior to heat shock led to delayed stress granule disassembly with nearly identical kinetics as those observed for cells treated with TAK243 (fig. S4J). Thus, ubiquitination and VCP likely act on stress granule disassembly through the same pathway.
We also examined how mitigating stress granule assembly impacted the heat shock ubiquitinome. Blocking stress granule assembly either pharmacologically (using cycloheximide) or genetically (using G3BP1/2 double KO cells) had no detectable effect on the heat shock ubiquitinome, consistent with the idea that ubiquitination of mRNPs occurs upstream and independent from stress granule formation, (fig. S5, A–D and table S3). Thus, whereas stress-dependent ubiquitination can occur in the absence of heat shock-induced stress granules and is not required for their assembly, it is essential for their rapid disassembly during recovery.
Reversal of mRNP remodeling following heat shock requires ubiquitination
Given our finding that disassembly of heat shock-induced stress granules was dependent on ubiquitination, we next investigated the importance of ubiquitination in the reversibility of the heat shock-dependent interactions we observed in the remodeled mRNPs. We added 1 μM TAK243 to the media prior to and during heat shock and confirmed elimination of the poly-ubiquitin signal associated with either PABPC1 or oligo(dT) retrieval (Fig. 7A and fig. S6). TAK243 treatment did not block the heat shock-dependent remodeling of the mRNP interactome; however, similar to what we observed with stress granules, elimination of ubiquitination prevented the reversal of this stress-dependent remodeling during recovery (Fig. 7A and fig. S6). Thus, ubiquitination is required for disassembly of stress granules and for the reversibility of mRNP remodeling following restoration of normal growth conditions after heat shock.
Ubiquitination is required for recovery of heat shock-induced impairment of nucleocytoplasmic transport
To investigate the role of ubiquitination in stress-induced perturbation of nucleocytoplasmic transport, we used a Shuttle-tdTomato nucleocytoplasmic reporter assay in which tdTomato was conjugated to both a nuclear localization signal (NLS) and nuclear export signal (NES) that mediate its shuttling between the nucleus and cytoplasm. Upon heat shock, we observed a significant redistribution of the reporter from the nucleus (ratio of nuclear to total fluorescence (N/W) ~ 0.75 at steady state) to the cytoplasm (N/W ~0.5 following heat shock) (Fig. 7, B and C). This result is consistent with a previous report that stress-dependent re-localization of this reporter was due to a stress-induced defect in exportin-1-mediated nuclear export. Under normal growth conditions, inhibition of ubiquitination with TAK243 had no significant impact on the ratio of nuclear versus cytoplasmic reporter signal, indicating that ubiquitination was not a critical determinant of canonical nuclear import or export. Moreover, following elimination of ubiquitination with TAK243, cells exposed to heat shock still showed a defect in nuclear import activity, indicating that ubiquitination was not required for this inhibition. However, cells treated with TAK243 failed to recover from impaired nucleocytoplasmic shuttling even upon restoration of normal growth conditions for 2 hours. Thus, similar to disassembly of stress granules and reversal of mRNP remodeling, ubiquitination was essential for recovery of nucleocytoplasmic shuttling following heat stress (Fig. 7, B and C).
Ubiquitination is required for reinitiating translation following heat shock
Protein synthesis is also strongly perturbed by heat stress owing to broad shutdown of most translation, with the exception of heat shock proteins whose translation is preserved. To investigate the role of ubiquitination in stress-induced perturbation of translation, we used a metabolic labeling assay. As expected, upon heat shock, translation activity was dramatically decreased as measured by puromycin incorporation into nascent translation products, followed by a time-dependent recovery after restoration of normal growth conditions (Fig. 7, D and E). Whereas TAK243 treatment had no effect on basal translation levels, heat-shocked cells treated with TAK243 showed a profound failure to recover protein synthesis following restoration of normal growth conditions (Fig. 7, D and E). Thus, ubiquitination was essential for the recovery of translation during the recovery phrase from heat shock.
Together, our results demonstrate that heat stress induces the targeted ubiquitination of a specific set of proteins and that this ubiquitination is required for recovery from multiple heat stress-induced cellular perturbations, including reversal of mRNP remodeling, disassembly of stress granules, and resumption of nucleocytoplasmic transport and protein synthesis (Fig. 7, F and G). Furthermore, the role of stress-induced ubiquitination is context-dependent; indeed, several of these observations did not hold true for arsenite stress. Our extensive proteomics datasets describing the heat shock ubiquitinome also suggest that ubiquitination facilitates other aspects of the stress response that have yet to be elucidated. Indeed, in preliminary studies exploring the role of ubiquitination on sterol metabolism, we observed that TAK243 treatment had significant effects on the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway during both heat shock and recovery in a pattern entirely different than that observed for the other cellular activities investigated above (Fig. 7G and fig. S7).

INTRODUCTION:
Eukaryotic cells have a stereotypical response to a variety of stresses that aids in their survival until normal growth conditions are restored. This stress response includes the inhibition of global translation along with the upregulation of expression of select stress response factors. Other biological pathways are also shut down or perturbed, including nucleocytoplasmic transport, RNA splicing, and cell cycle activities. Inhibition of translation and subsequent polysome disassembly leads a rise in the cytoplasmic concentration of ribosome-free mRNA that culminates in the formation of cytoplasmic condensates known as stress granules. These stress-induced cellular changes are adaptive in the short term but require coordinated reversal after stress is removed in order to resume cellular activities and reestablish homeostasis. Accordingly, upon the removal of stress, stress granules disassemble while translation and other biological pathways return to normal activity on a time scale of minutes to a few hours. However, the mechanisms that facilitate this recovery are not well understood.
One hallmark of the cellular response to many types of stress is a global increase in poly-ubiquitin conjugation, which has largely been attributed to increased protein quality control (PQC) activity in response to stress-induced protein damage and translation arrest. This increased activity is required for the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of both defective ribosomal products (DRiPs), the primary source of misfolded proteins in cells under normal conditions, and proteins susceptible to stress-induced misfolding, such as thermolabile proteins or proteins with intrinsically disordered domains. Ubiquitin and some ubiquitin pathway proteins are found in stress granules, and several deubiquitinating enzymes can help to regulate stress granule dynamics. Furthermore, when PQC function is disrupted, ubiquitinated DRiPs can accumulate in stress granules and impair stress granule function.
The ubiquitin-selective segregase p97/valosin-containing protein (VCP) facilitates stress granule disassembly, which may suggest a role for ubiquitination in this process. However, recent studies investigating ubiquitin conjugation have produced conflicting results. Whereas one study found that nuclear SUMO-primed ubiquitination was important for stress granule disassembly, another group reported minimal ubiquitination of stress granule proteins and showed that ubiquitin conjugation was entirely dispensable for stress granule dynamics. Thus, the role of ubiquitination in regulating stress granule dynamics remains unresolved, as does any potential role of ubiquitination in regulating other cellular activities that are altered by stress.
Analysis of stress-dependent changes to the global protein ubiquitin modification landscape, or “ubiquitinome,” can provide unbiased insights into the stress response by connecting differentially ubiquitinated proteins with specific biological pathways. To this end, several proteomic techniques allow for quantitative comparisons of ubiquitinomes from differentially treated cell or tissue samples. Analysis of the ubiquitinome in yeast has suggested that heat shock-induced ubiquitination primarily targets cytosolic misfolded proteins, consistent with the presumption that ubiquitination in this setting relates mainly to PQC. However, comprehensive analyses in human cells or directly comparing changes in ubiquitination in response to various stresses have not been undertaken, and it remains unclear to what extent ubiquitination patterns may differ in these different contexts.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Competing interests: J.P.T. is a consultant for 5AM and Third Rock Ventures.
Data and materials availability: All data is available in the main text or the supplementary materials.