PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana (mouse-ear cress)
organism parts: Leaf
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; N-ethylmaleimide derivatized cysteine; hydrolyzed N-methylmaleimide cysteine adduct
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Arabidopsis; Photosynthesis induction; Redox proteomics; N-ethylmaleimide; Redox signaling; Nem; 2-cys peroxiredoxins

ABSTRACT:
Photosynthetic induction, characterized by the lag in CO2 assimilation rates during transition from darkness to light, has traditionally been attributed to Rubisco activase activity and stomatal opening. Yet, the faster induction of photosynthesis in the 2-Cys peroxiredoxins (Prxs) mutant (2cpab) suggested a role for oxidative signals in regulating photosynthetic rates, although the underlying molecular mechanism remains unclear. SPEAR, a redox proteomics approach, was used to systematically map redox changes occurring during photosynthesis induction and to unravel the role of 2-Cys Prxs in shaping these redox alterations. No significant difference was observed in protein expression levels between WT and 2cpab plants, suggesting that protein abundance does not account for the 2cpab phenotype. During the transition from dark to low light, 82 and 54 cysteine-containing peptides were reduced or oxidized, respectively, in WT plants. Most redox-regulated cysteines in photosynthetic proteins were found oxidized in the dark and became reduced in response to light. A reverse pattern was observed among redox-regulated cysteines in proteins involved in starch degradation and chloroplast glycolysis, which shifted from a reduced to an oxidized state in response to light. These findings demonstrate the initiation of two opposing redox responses, affecting distinct sets of metabolic proteins during the induction phase. Remarkably, a significantly lower number of cysteines were reduced or oxidized in 2cpab plants, highlighting the crucial role 2-Cys Prxs play in shaping both signals. Taken together, rotational shifts between metabolic pathways during the photosynthesis induction phase are regulated by two opposing redox signals mediated by 2-Cys Prx activity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Two opposing redox signals mediated by 2-Cys peroxiredoxin shape the redox proteome during photosynthetic induction

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Arabidopsis thaliana WT plants and and 2cpab mutant plants were grown in a greenhouse under a 16/8 h light/dark cycle. Thiol labeling experiments were performed on 3-week-old whole Arabidopsis plants. Protein extract was prepared in 2 ml tubes using a hand homogenizer, in the presence of 1 ml cold 20% TCA dissolved in water. Proteins were precipitated for 30 min on ice in the dark, and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 20 min, at 4°C. The pellet was washed once with 10% TCA and 2 times with 100% cold acetone. The residual acetone was removed by brief evaporation and the precipitate was resuspended (600 µl) in urea buffer containing 100 mM N-ethylmaleimide (d0-NEM) (E3876, Sigma), dissolved in ethanol, to label the reduced cysteines. Samples were incubated at 50°C for 30 min, with 1000 rpm shaking. The reaction was terminated, and proteins were precipitated by bringing the TCA content to 20% (30 min on ice in the dark), washed once with 10% TCA and twice with 100% acetone. Samples were then resuspended in urea buffer supplemented with 5.5 mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP, Sigma) but without NEM, and shaken (1200 rpm, 50°C, 30 min). Samples were further alkylated by adding 5 mM (final concentration) d5-NEM (DLM-6711, CIL) and incubated (50°C, 30 min, 1200 rpm shaking). TCA (33%) was added, samples were precipitated for 30 min on ice in the dark and then centrifuged (14,000 g, 4°C, 20 min). The pellet was then washed once with 10% TCA and twice with 100% acetone. The acetone was removed by 5 min evaporation and samples were stored at -80°C. Four biological replicates were performed for dark and low light (LL) treatments each, for WT and 2cpab. Two separate experiments were conducted to increase the number of identifications. An additional set of four samples for each experiment (eight samples in total for both experiments) were subjected to thiol labeling as described above, however, unlike the former labeling, the reduced and oxidized cysteines were all labeled with d5-NEM. Following precipitation with 20% TCA, the samples were resuspended (250 µl) in urea buffer, reduced with 5.5 mM TCEP and further alkylated by adding 100 mM d5-NEM (dissolved in ethanol) (final concentration). The samples were stored at -80°C. For the sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis, alkylated protein pellets were dissolved by addition of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4), heating for 15 min at 50°C, sonication, and incubation at room temp for 4 h.  Alkylated proteins were suspended in lysis buffer (5% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4). After determination of protein concentration using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA), 100 μg total protein of each sample was loaded onto S-Trap mini-columns (Protifi, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, after loading, samples were washed with 90:10% methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then digested (1.5 h, 47 °C) with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein). The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then incubated with trypsin overnight at 37°C. Two more elution rounds were performed using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three eluted fractions were pooled and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were stored at −80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography  Each sample was fractionated offline using high-pH reversed-phase separation, followed by online low-pH reversed-phase separation. Digested protein (100µg) was loaded using high-performance liquid chromatography (H-Class, Waters). Mobile phase was: A) 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10.0, B) acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on an C18 XBridge column (3.0x150mm, Waters). Column temperature was set to 45°C, flow rate of 0.3 mL/min and the following gradient was used: 3% B for 2 min, linear gradient to 40% B over 50min, maintained at 40% B for 5 min, 5 min to 95% B, and then back to the initial conditions. Peptides were fractionated into 14 fractions, each of 1.2 mL. The fractions were dried by speed-vac and reconstituted in 40 µl solution of 97% water, 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The following fractions were then pooled: Fr1: 1,2,3,8; Fr2: 4,9; Fr3: 5,10,11; Fr4: 6,12,13,14; Fr5:7. Each fraction was dried in a speedvac, then reconstituted in 40 µL solution of 97% water, 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Each pooled fraction was then loaded and analyzed using split-less nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Samples were desalted online using a Symmetry C18 reversed-phase trapping column (180µm internal diameter, 20mm length, 5µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75µm internal diameter, 250mm length, 1.8µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min using a gradient from 3% to 30% B over 73 min.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data was processed with the MetaMorpheus v1.0.2 informatics platform. The data were searched against the Arabidopsis proteome database as downloaded from Uniprot.org, and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Variable modifications were defined to include the light and heavy NEM modification on cysteines, as well as light and heavy NEM+H2O.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Plant material, growth conditions and treatment
Arabidopsis thaliana WT plants (ecotype Columbia, Col-0) were obtained from ABRC. WT and 2cpab mutant plants were grown in a greenhouse under a 16/8 h light/dark cycle. Immunoassay and thiol labeling experiments were performed on 3-week-old whole Arabidopsis plants.
Immunoassay
Protein extract was prepared in 2 ml tubes using a hand homogenizer in the presence of 1 ml cold 10 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) dissolved in water. Proteins were precipitated for 30 min on ice in the dark and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm, for 20 min, at 4 °C. The pellet was then washed 4 times with 100 % cold acetone. Residual acetone was removed and the pellet was resuspended in urea buffer comprised of 8 M urea, 100 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (pH 7.2), 1 mM EDTA, 2 % (w/v) SDS, protease inhibitors cocktail (PI) (Calbiochem) and 100 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) (E3876, Sigma) dissolved in ethanol. The samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature and then centrifuged (14,000 rpm, 20 min, 4 °C) and washed 4 times with 100 % cold acetone. The dry pellets were resuspended in urea buffer without NEM and then fractionated on a 4–15 % precast polyacrylamide gel without reducing agent. Sample buffer (x3) was comprised of 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 6 % (w/v) SDS, 30 % glycerol and 0.3 % pyronin Y. Fractionated proteins were transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (Bio-Rad), using a Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad) with Trans-Blot Turbo Midi Transfer Packs. The membrane was incubated with anti-Prx antibodies (1:1000) (was kindly provided by Prof. Avichai Danon), followed by secondary anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase (1:20,000) (Agrisera), and later developed using standard protocols.
Thiol-labeling assay
Protein extract was prepared in 2 ml tubes using a hand homogenizer, in the presence of 1 ml cold 20 % TCA dissolved in water. Proteins were precipitated for 30 min on ice in the dark, and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 20 min, at 4 °C. The pellet was washed once with 10 % TCA (dissolved in water) and 2 times with 100 % cold acetone. The residual acetone was removed by brief evaporation and the precipitate was resuspended (600 μl) in urea buffer containing 100 mM N-ethylmaleimide (d0-NEM) (E3876, Sigma), dissolved in ethanol, to label the reduced cysteines. Samples were incubated at 50 °C for 30 min, with 1000 rpm shaking. The reaction was terminated, and proteins were precipitated by bringing the TCA content to 20 % (30 min on ice in the dark), washed once with 10 % TCA and twice with 100 % acetone. Samples were then resuspended in urea buffer supplemented with 5.5 mM tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP, Sigma) but without NEM, and shaken (1200 rpm, 50 °C, 30 min). Samples were further alkylated by adding 5 mM (final concentration) d5-NEM (DLM-6711, CIL) and incubated (50 °C, 30 min, 1200 rpm shaking). TCA (33 %) was added, samples were precipitated for 30 min on ice in the dark and then centrifuged (14,000 g, 4 °C, 20 min). The pellet was then washed once with 10 % TCA and twice with 100 % acetone. The acetone was removed by 5 min evaporation and samples were stored at −80 °C.
Four biological replicates were performed for dark and low light (LL) treatments each, for WT and 2cpab, resulting in sixteen-core samples. Two separate experiments were conducted to increase the number of identifications, which amounts to 160 LC-MS/MS runs. The final peptide list included unique peptides from each experiment, and in cases where a peptide was identified in both experiments and quantification of the oxidation degree was available in at least two replicates per condition/plant line, the experiment exhibiting the smaller p-value in the ΔOxidation degree (LL-dark) of the WT plants was presented. The data of all replicates collected from the two experiments are available as Table S3.
An additional set of four samples for each experiment (eight samples in total for both experiments) were subjected to thiol labeling as described above, however, unlike the former labeling, the reduced and oxidized cysteines were all labeled with d5-NEM. Following precipitation with 20 % TCA, the samples were resuspended (250 μl) in urea buffer, reduced with 5.5 mM TCEP and further alkylated by adding 100 mM d5-NEM (dissolved in ethanol) (final concentration). The samples were stored at −80 °C. The addition of these eight samples, resulted in an additional 40 LC-MS/MS runs.
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, unless otherwise indicated. Alkylated protein pellets were dissolved by addition of lysis buffer (5 % SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4), heating for 15 min at 50 °C, sonication, and incubation at room temp for 4 h. Alkylated proteins were suspended in lysis buffer (5 % SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4). After determination of protein concentration using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, USA), 100 μg total protein of each sample was loaded onto S-Trap mini-columns (Protifi, USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. In brief, after loading, samples were washed with 90:10 % methanol/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then digested (1.5 h, 47 °C) with trypsin (1:50 trypsin/protein). The digested peptides were eluted using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then incubated with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Two more elution rounds were performed using 0.2 % formic acid and 0.2 % formic acid in 50 % acetonitrile. The three eluted fractions were pooled and vacuum-centrifuged to dryness. Samples were stored at −80 °C until analysis.
Liquid chromatography
ULC/MS-grade solvents were used for all chromatography steps. Each sample was fractionated offline using high-pH reversed-phase separation, followed by online low-pH reversed-phase separation. Digested protein (100 μg) was loaded using high-performance liquid chromatography (H-Class, Waters). Mobile phase was: A) 20 mM ammonium formate pH 10.0, B) acetonitrile. Peptides were separated on an C18 XBridge column (3.0 × 150 mm, Waters). Column temperature was set to 45 °C, flow rate of 0.3 mL/min and the following gradient was used: 3 % B for 2 min, linear gradient to 40 % B over 50 min, maintained at 40 % B for 5 min, 5 min to 95 % B, and then back to the initial conditions. Peptides were fractionated into 14 fractions, each of 1.2 mL. The fractions were dried by speed-vac and reconstituted in 40 μL solution of 97 % water, 3 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The following fractions were then pooled: Fr1: 1,2,3,8; Fr2: 4,9; Fr3: 5,10,11; Fr4: 6,12,13,14; Fr5:7. Each fraction was dried in a speedvac, then reconstituted in 40 μL solution of 97 % water, 3 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Each pooled fraction was then loaded and analyzed using split-less nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1 % formic acid and B) acetonitrile +0.1 % formic acid. Samples were desalted online using a Symmetry C18 reversed-phase trapping column (180 μm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 μm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 μm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 μm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 μL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer, using the following gradient: 4 %–27 % B over 105 min, 27 % to 90 %B over 5 min, maintenance at 90 % for 5 min and then back to the initial conditions.
Mass spectrometry
The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data were acquired in DDA mode, using a 2-sec cycle method. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with resolution set to 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and maximum injection time set to 246 msec. MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap after HCD fragmentation, with resolution set to 15,000 and maximum injection time set to 60 msec.
Data analysis - protein expression
Raw data was processed with the MetaMorpheus v1.0.2 informatics platform. The data were searched against the Arabidopsis proteome database as downloaded from Uniprot.org, and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Variable modifications were defined to include N-ethylmaleimide on C and Nem:2H(5) on C, as well as N-ethylmaleimide + water on C and Nem:2H(5) + H2O on C. Peptide intensities are reported by MetaMorpheus for each fraction separately. To generate the final peptide table, the intensities from all 5 fractions were summed up for each sample. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.15.0. Decoy hits were filtered out, and only proteins/peptides that were identified in at least 50 % of the replicates of at least one experimental group were kept.
Data analysis – Cys oxidation
Peptide identification and quantification were conducted using the MetaMorpheus software (v0.0.297 https://smith-chem-wisc.github.io/MetaMorpheus/or https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/MetaMorpheus). RAW MS files were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress) proteome downloaded from UniProt (UniProtKb Proteome ID UP000006548, as of June 13, 2023, in XML format). All MS files, including the sample in which reduced thiols were labeled with d0-NEM and those labeled with d5-NEM, were jointly processed. In short, the MetaMorpheus calibration task was performed using the default parameters. In the search task, we used N-ethylmaleimide on C and Nem:2H(5) on C, as well as N-ethylmaleimide + water on C and Nem:2H(5) + H2O on C as variable modifications. Moreover, the following options were checked in the search settings: apply protein parsimony and construct protein groups, treat modified peptides as different peptides, match between runs, and normalize quantification results. In the output options of the search parameters in the MetaMorpheus, the data was filtered at 1 % FDR at the peptide level.
The generated output files ‘AllQuantifiedPeptides.tsv’ were used for further analysis. First, files were trimmed, and only cysteine-containing peptides labeled with d0 or d5-NEM, as well as d0 or d5-NEM + water ( which belong to the core set in which reduced Cys were labeled with d0-NEM) were selected. Next, a list of peptides bearing both labels was extracted (pairs). A CysID was then assigned to each cysteine-containing peptide; the ID included the UniProt identifier name of the protein and the position of the NEM-labeled cysteine residue in the protein sequence. Next, the intensity of each peptide throughout the five fractions was summed. If a specific Cys was represented by more than one peptide, the overall intensity of peptides with identical CysIDs was examined and the peptide with the highest intensity was selected for further analysis. The oxidation degree (OxD) of a Cys was calculated using the following formula: OxD = d5/(d5+d0), where d5 represents the intensity of the d5-NEM labeled peptide and d0 the intensity of the d0-NEM labeled peptide. Only peptides identified in at least two out of four biological replicates were included. Delta oxidation (ΔOxD) was calculated by subtracting the OxD of LL-treated plants from the OxD of dark-treated plants. The p-value for each peptide was determined using student's t-test.
The OxD for peptides with 2 Cys was calculated using the formula:
, where 2d5 represents the intensity of the peptide with 2 Cys that both Cys were d5-NEM labeled, 2d0 the intensity of the peptide with 2 Cys that both Cys were d0-NEM labeled, and d0&d5 the intensity of the peptide with 2 Cys that one Cys was d0-NEM labeled and the other Cys was d5-NEM labeled. The two corresponding ΔOxD values were calculated and the p-value for each peptide was determined using student's t-test, accordingly.
Only peptides that passed the threshold of ΔOxD > |±5 %| and α < 0.05 were considered “redox-sensitive peptides”.
Functional annotation analysis
The DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery) Bioinformatics Resources tool v6.7 was used for mapping proteins into Gene Ontology terms (GO) and KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways and for enrichment analysis. The background population used for the enrichment analysis consisted of the proteins detected in MS data. Further mapping into metabolic pathways was carried out using the Arabidopsis chloroplast knowledge base (cloroKB,), the AraCyc database from the Plant Metabolic Network (PMN,), MapMan, and manual annotation. Subcellular protein localization was predicted using the SUBA tool (the central resource for Arabidopsis protein subcellular location data). Venn diagrams depicting the associations and distinctions of the reduced and oxidized unique cysteine-containing peptides during the transition from dark to LL in the WT vs 2cpab Arabidopsis mutant plants were generated using the Venny 2.1 tool (https://bioinfogp.cnb.csic.es/tools/venny/). ΔOxD of Cys belonging to a given cluster was presented using the PlotsOfData tool (https://huygens.science.uva.nl/PlotsOfData/). Oxidation degree of specific Cys of interest, and ΔOxD of Cys belonging to the same biochemical pathway were presented using the BoxPlotR: a web-tool for generation of box plots tool (http://shiny.chemgrid.org/boxplotr/). The Probability logo generator for biological sequence motifs (pLogo, https://plogo.uconn.edu/,) was used to estimate the probability of the occurrence of specific amino acid sequence motifs around the NEM labeled Cys. The Arabidopsis thaliana proteome was used as a background population for probability calculation. The functional annotation regarding the active and binding sites, metal binding and disulfide bonds, for all the quantified cysteines was retrieved from the UniProt Knowledgebase (https://www.uniprot.org/uploadlists/). Discovery Studio 4.5 Visualizer was used for structure visualization of Cys location in protein structures. All images were created with BioRender (https://biorender.com/).

RESULTS:
Results
Global quantification of redox-sensitive cysteines during the photosynthesis induction phase
The SPEAR labeling approach, which allows for simultaneous protein expression and redox analysis, was used to map proteome-level redox changes occurring during the photosynthesis induction phase and elucidate the role of 2-Cys Prx in shaping oxidation patterns during this phase (Fig. 1a). SPEAR is based on the rapid acidification of plant extracts with trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to preserve the redox status of thiol groups, followed by differential labeling of reduced and reversibly oxidized cysteines with isotopically light (d0) and heavy (d5) forms of N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), respectively. Quantification of the relative abundance of the reduced and oxidized forms is achieved by comparing the area under the curve of the light- and heavy-labeled peptides at the intact peptide level (MS1), enabling the calculation of the oxidation degree (OxD) for each identified cysteine site. As low-abundance oxidized peptides (d5-NEM) might limit the number of identified peptides, an additional set of samples in which the reduced Cys groups are labeled with d5-NEM is analyzed in parallel to the experimental samples, serving as markers to locate m/z and retention time (RT) values of low-abundant, reversibly oxidized peptides. As no enrichment of cysteine-containing peptides is included, data regarding protein expression levels can also be extracted from the MS spectra.
Samples were taken from WT and 2cpab plants, both kept in the dark and following a transition to LL conditions (22 μmol m−2 s−2), simulating the transition from night to the beginning of daylight. Furthermore, sampling under LL, when the redox carriers of photosynthetic reactions are not saturated, minimizes the influence of other potential limiting factors on CO2 assimilation rates. To verify the sensitivity of 2-Cys Prx to LL, its oxidation state was measured by calculating the relative amounts of the dimeric (oxidized) versus monomeric (reduced) forms on non-reducing SDS-PAGE using a 2-Cys Prx-specific antibody. As shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, 2-Cys Prx switched from its oxidized state to its reduced state after exposure to LL, verifying its responsiveness to relatively low electron flux.
To capture the early molecular events that might shape the gap between WT and 2cpab photosynthesis rates, samples were taken 50 s following the transition to LL, 20 s before the difference in CO2 assimilation rates between the two lines reached its maximum (Fig. 1a). In total, 9387 d0-NEM and 7143 d5-NEM-labeled peptides were identified, 6096 of which were labeled with both NEM isotopes, representing proteins from various subcellular localizations (Fig. 1b). Notably, most (∼96 %) of the identified Cys-containing peptides were found to be NEM-labeled, reflecting the high efficiency of the labeling procedure. In agreement with our previous observation, the NEM-labeled cysteine residues were found in close proximity to a consensus motif significantly enriched with glutamic acid and aspartic acid (Fig. 1c). This motif was absent in Cys-containing peptides that remained unlabeled by NEM (Supp. Fig. 1). These observations suggest that glutamic acid and aspartic acid residues enhance cysteine reactivity to NEM and align with their suggested role in enhancing Cys nucleophilicity by modulating its pKa.
Examination of the difference in protein expression in WT vs. 2cpab plants under either LL or dark conditions (Fig. 1d and e, respectively), identified altered expression levels of only a few proteins in the 2cpab compared to WT (|Log2 FC|>1.5, p-value <0.05, Table S1). Among the chloroplastic proteins, there was an upregulation of the atypical cysteine histidine-rich Trx 4 (ACHT4) protein in 2cpab. As ACHT4 oxidation is driven by 2-Cys Prx, upregulation of ACHT4 may represent a mechanism aimed at compensating for the absence of 2-Cys Prx. In addition, Arogenate dehydratase 5 (ADT5) and light-regulated protein 1 (LIR1) were upregulated in 2cpab plants (Fig. 1d and e). Overall, the slight difference in protein abundance between WT and 2capb suggests that variations in photosynthetic efficiency between the lines are not regulated at the transcriptional or translational level, but rather, through post-translational modifications. Moreover, these results indicate that the mutation in 2-Cys Prx does not lead to H2O2 overproduction, as ROS accumulation is typically associated with a distinct transcriptional signature that should be reflected in protein expression.
2-Cys Prxs shape the redox proteome during the photosynthesis induction phase
Only peptides detected in at least two out of four WT or 2cpab plants replicates per condition (dark and LL) were used for the redox analysis, resulting in 2295 peptides, representing 1571 distinct proteins. Subcellular localization of the proteins, predicted using the SUBA tool, was primarily in the chloroplast (33 %) and cytosol (26 %) (Fig. 1f). The mean oxidation degree (OxD) of cysteines in WT-dark, 2cpab-dark, WT- LL, and 2cpab-LL plants was 24 %, 25 %, 23 % and 23 %, respectively, demonstrating that the majority of the Cys residues remained highly reduced, irrespective of light conditions and genetic background (Fig. 1g–j).
Analysis of the oxidation degree difference (ΔOxD) between dark and LL conditions (OxD LL- OxD dark) in WT plants revealed 136 cysteine-containing peptides, representing 129 proteins that exhibited a significant change in their oxidation degree (|ΔOxD|>5 % and p-value <0.05) during the transition to LL in WT samples (Fig. 2a and Table S2). Functional annotations of the identified redox-regulated proteins indicated the enrichment of chloroplastic and stromal proteins (GO:0009507, GO:0009570), and those involved in photosynthesis (GO:0019253). Among the Cys sites that were redox modified in response to dark-LL transition, 18 were also found to undergo redox modifications in response to exogenous application of H2O2, reinforcing their sensitivity to redox signals (Table S2 and Supp. Fig. 2).
Among the redox-regulated Cys sites, 82, showed a significant reduction in response to LL, reflecting the transmission of reducing equivalents that activate proteins (Fig. 2a and c). Among them are Cys241 and Cys248 (ΔOxD = −13 %, −11 %, respectively) of both forms of 2-Cys Prx, A and B, and various Cys sites in photosynthetic proteins (Table S2, further details are provided below). Interestingly, redox modifications in response to LL were not restricted to reduction, as 54 cysteine-containing peptides exhibited oxidation upon exposure to LL (Fig. 2a and d). The identification of two distinct groups of cysteines with opposing responses suggests the concurrent transmission of both reducing and oxidative signals during the induction phase.
Significantly fewer redox modifications were observed during the induction phase in 2cpab plants, with only 52 cysteine-containing peptides, corresponding to 52 proteins, showing a significant change in their oxidation state (Fig. 2b–d and Table S2). Notably, a smaller number of redox-modified Cys sites were identified in 2cpab in both the reduced and oxidized groups, highlighting the crucial role of 2-Cys Prxs in mediating reductive and oxidative signals.
K-means clustering revealed two key patterns that demonstrated the role of 2-Cys Prxs in shaping the redox proteome during the induction phase (Fig. 2e). The first trend, reflected in the redox changes found in clusters 2 and 4, which were enriched with chloroplast stroma protein (GO:0009570), demonstrated reactive Cys sites that underwent oxidation in response to LL treatment in WT plants but remained reduced in 2cpab plants, similar to their state in darkness (Fig. 2f, h and Supp. Fig. 3). This suggests a crucial role for 2-Cys Prxs in facilitating oxidation under light conditions. The second trend, reflected in the redox changes found in clusters 5 and 6, which were also enriched with chloroplast stroma proteins (GO:0009570), demonstrated reactive Cys sites that underwent reduction in response to LL treatment in the WT. In the 2cpab, those reactive Cys were found to be already reduced in the dark and remained reduced in the light (Fig. 2g, h and Supp. Fig. 3). These data demonstrate that the lower number of Cys sites undergoing reduction in 2cpab plants results from their lack of oxidation in the dark, aligning with the role of 2-Cys Prxs in protein oxidation during darkness. Interestingly, clusters 8 and 10 comprised Cys sites that exhibited similar reduction and oxidation responses in both WT and 2cpab plants (Supp. Fig. 3). This suggests that their redox regulation is unaffected by 2-Cys Prx, implying the presence of an alternative pathway for protein oxidation that operates independently of 2-Cys Prxs.
Mapping redox-regulated proteins to metabolic pathways and analyzing pathway-specific ΔOxD values further highlighted the role of 2-Cys Prxs during the induction phase. For example, redox-regulated peptides associated with CBC, which underwent reduction in response to LL in WT plants, exhibited a weaker reduction response in 2cpab plants (Fig. 2i). Conversely, redox-regulated cysteines in proteins involved in protein degradation, which were oxidized in WT plants under LL, remained unoxidized in 2cpab plants (Fig. 2j). The findings quantitatively demonstrate the role of 2-Cys Prx in mediating both reductive and oxidative signals across distinct metabolic pathways.
Redox modifications in photosynthetic enzymes
Several cysteines in proteins involved in photosynthetic reactions were oxidized in the dark and became reduced in LL in WT plants, but were reduced in both the dark and LL conditions in 2cpab plants (Fig. 3, Fig. 4). This pattern indicates Cys oxidation in the dark, which is entirely dependent on 2-Cys Prx activity. Examples of cysteines that followed this trend in light reactions are Cys141 of Chlorophyll a-b binding protein CP26 (LHCB5), Cys48/51 of psaC unit of Photosystem I and Cys74 of NAD(P)H-quinone oxidoreductase subunit I (ndhI), which are part of the iron-sulfur cluster binding sites. Of note, the active site of TrxL2.2 or TrxL2.1, was reduced (Cys113/Cys133, ΔOxD = −30 %) during the transfer from dark to LL in WT plants. In 2cpab, compared to WT, this Cys was highly reduced in the dark and remained reduced when transferred to LL (Fig. 3). The lack of oxidation in 2cpab plants in the dark aligns with the recent finding that TrxL2 is involved in the oxidation of chloroplast proteins in the dark by transferring reducing equivalents from target proteins to H2O2 through the activity of 2-Cys Prxs. Moreover, considering the target proteins as the source of the reducing power for TrxL2, its reduction under LL suggests that, alongside electron transfer from the photosynthesis electron transport chain to target proteins via the reductive pathway, a counterbalancing oxidative pathway simultaneously directs reducing equivalents away from target proteins to H2O2.
Cysteines regulating the activity of CBC enzymes, including key regulatory sites in phosphoribulokinase (PRK) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase subunit B (GAPB), were also reduced under LL in WT and were consistently reduced in 2cpab (Fig. 4). PRK and GAPB are redox-regulated through the formation and dissociation of a ternary complex that includes both enzymes and a conditionally disordered protein, CP12. Specifically, Cys289 and Cys295 of PRK and Cys434 and Cys443 of GAPB, which participate in the formation of the GAPDH-CP12-PRK complex, were reduced in response to LL in WT, but were highly reduced in the dark in 2cpab plants and remained so in LL (Fig. 4). These results highlight the critical role of 2-Cys Prxs in regulating one of the key CBC regulation mechanisms under dark-light transition and in response to changes in light availability through the formation of GAPDH-CP12-PRK complex.
An additional trend exhibiting Cys sites that were oxidized in the dark and reduced in response to LL in WT and 2cpab, while exhibiting higher dark oxidation levels in WT compared to 2cpab was identified. This suggests that dark-induced oxidation of these Cys residues involves both a 2-Cys Prx-dependent pathway and an alternative pathway that operates independently of 2-Cys Prx. These results align with the suggestion of a 2-Cys Prx-independent protein oxidation pathway. Examples of cysteines in this group are Cys249/255 of ATP synthase gamma chain 1 (ATPC1), which are known to be redox-regulated and to form a reversible disulfide bridge as the one shown in Fig. 3. Another example is Cys183 of post-illumination chlorophyll fluorescence increase (PIFI) (Fig. 3).
Cysteines in two CBC-associated enzymes, ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase activase (RCA) and glucose-6-phosphate isomerase 1 (PGI1), also followed this trend. RCA is a key player in the modulation of the overall carbon fixation level and the rate of induction of photosynthesis under changing light conditions. Cys451 was reduced in response to LL in WT and 2cpab, with the dark oxidation state being higher in WT than in 2cpab (Fig. 4). The delayed oxidation of RCA in 2cpab aligns with the role of 2-Cys Prxs in catalyzing its oxidation in the dark. The OxD of Cys470, which forms the disulfide bond with Cys451, was found to be reduced in the transition to LL in WT. However, the effect of 2-Cys Prxs on its dark oxidation state was not statistically significant. PGI1 is a key player in the transitory starch biosynthesis in the leaf plastids. The dark oxidation state of the redox-regulated Cys548 was found to be higher in WT compared to 2cpab, with both plant lines exhibiting similar oxidation degrees under LL (Fig. 4).
An additional trend includes proteins that are oxidized in the dark and become reduced under LL in both WT and 2cpab plants, suggesting that the dark-induced oxidation of these cysteines occurs independently of 2-Cys Prx. For example, the oxidation degree of Cys73/78 in ferredoxin–NADP+ reductase 2 (FNR2) decreased by approximately 50 % and 40 % in WT and 2cpab plants, respectively, upon exposure to LL (Fig. 3). These cysteine residues are located near the FAD-binding region, and mutations at these sites were shown to reduce FNR activity in spinach. Light-dependent reduction of these sites was also reported in Synechocystis (Supp. Fig. 4). Given the central role of FNR2 in producing NADPH for carbon assimilation in the light, its redox regulation during the induction phase may be crucial for the timely activation of photosynthetic carbon fixation. However, the mechanism underlying its oxidation in 2cpab mutants remains unresolved.
Light-induced oxidation of Cys regulatory sites in starch degradation and chloroplast glycolysis proteins
During the night, starch is degraded to sustain plant maintenance and growth in the absence of light. Similarly, chloroplast glycolysis is required to maintain metabolic reactions when photosynthesis does not occur. Oxidation of several Cys sites in these pathways was observed in response to LL in WT plants. Cys73 in BAM1, a protein shown to be involved in starch degradation in guard and mesophyll cells, and whose activity is redox-regulated, reached ΔOxD = 50 % in WT plants transferred to LL (Fig. 4). This cysteine forms a disulfide bond with Cys511 (not identified in our data), and is inhibited under oxidizing conditions. Similar redox behavior was observed in Cys731 and Cys912 of α-glucan phosphorylase 1 (PHS1), a starch-degrading enzyme involved in the phosphorolytic pathway (Fig. 4). Light-induced oxidation of Cys116 of plastidial pyruvate kinase 2 (PKP2), which catalyzes the irreversible synthesis of pyruvate and ATP in plastidial glycolysis, was also detected. Similarly, Cys209 of putative phosphoglucomutase (PGM), which catalyzes the reversible conversion of glucose-1-phosphate (G1P) to glucose-6-phosphate (G6P), playing a role in metabolism of carbohydrates derived from starch degradation as well as in starch biosynthesis, underwent oxidation in WT under LL. No light-induced oxidation of these Cys sites was observed in 2cpab plants, with some sites, such as Cys209 in PGM and Cys731 in PHS1, remaining reduced in both dark and LL, while others exhibited a highly oxidized state under both conditions. Taken together, these data indicate light-induced oxidation of Cys sites in enzymes involved in carbohydrate catabolism and suggest that the redox regulation of these pathways is disrupted in 2cpab plants.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Converting light into chemical energy through the light and carbon reactions of photosynthesis is a highly intricate process, demanding the orchestration of numerous enzymatic reactions. This coordination is especially critical under the dynamic light conditions experienced by plants, which cycle between full sunlight, shade and complete darkness over the course of a day, driving continuous activation and deactivation of the photosynthetic process. The importance of coordinating reaction rates under dynamic light conditions arises from the high vulnerability of the photosynthetic electron transport chain to over-reduction and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production when the absorption of light energy, and the resulting production of NADPH and ATP, exceed the capacity of downstream reactions, necessitating the activation of energy dissipation mechanisms and antioxidant defenses.
Thiol-based redox modifications driving the reconfiguration of chloroplastic metabolic activities in response to changes in photosynthetic performance evolved in plants to maintain homeostasis and prevent the accumulation of harmful ROS. Specifically, redox regulation allows communication between the photosynthetic light reaction and downstream metabolic activity by transferring redox signals that fine-tune the activity of various enzymes. Activation of redox-regulated enzymes is dependent on reductive signals that drive disulfide bond reduction and are transmitted from ferredoxin to thioredoxins (Trxs) via ferredoxin-Trx reductase (FTR) and subsequently from Trxs to target proteins. Reductive signals are also transmitted through ferredoxin-NADP(+) reductase (FNR) and NADPH Trx reductase C (NTRC), broadening the range of redox-regulated proteins and the sources for reducing power. Counterbalanced to the reductive activity, disulfide bond formation depends on the transfer of reducing equivalents from target proteins to H2O2, catalyzed by high midpoint potential atypical Trxs and 2-CysPrxs. While the reductive activity catalyzing the reduction of disulfide bonds is typically associated with light, oxidative signals have mainly been studied in the context of light-to-dark transition, where they catalyze the formation of disulfide bonds, resulting in enzyme deactivation.
The induction phase of photosynthesis is characterized by a lag in the rise of photosynthesis to the maximum light-saturated rate, which typically occurs during dark-light or low-high light transitions. The relatively slow kinetics of photosynthetic activation, which requires several minutes for readjustment, has been suggested to cause a substantial loss of potential photosynthetic capacity in plants experiencing dynamic light conditions. Multiple factors influence the speed of induction, including activation of Rubisco through Rubisco activase, and stomatal opening, with the fast phase of the induction process controlled by the rate of enzyme activation by the Fd/Trx system and optimization of the electron transport chain. Characterization of the reductive activation of various chloroplast enzymes during dark-to-light transitions has highlighted the role of thiol-based regulation in shaping the kinetics of the photosynthetic induction process. Interestingly, significantly faster induction of photosynthesis during the transition of plants from dark to low light (LL) was measured in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) plants lacking 2-Cys Prxs A and B (2cpab) in comparison to wild type (WT), pointing to the inhibitory effect of these enzymes during the photosynthesis induction phase. However, the mechanism by which 2-Cys Prxs suppress photosynthetic activity remains unclear.
By characterizing redox changes occurring at the proteome level during the photosynthesis induction phase, this work identified 136 Cys sites that underwent rapid redox changes in response to a minute amount of light in WT plants. Many of the redox changes observed in WT plants were absent in 2cpab plants, marking 2-Cys Prx as a key regulator of protein dynamics during the initiation of photosynthesis. Notably, the transition from dark to light simultaneously triggered two opposing redox responses, with some target proteins undergoing reduction and others undergoing oxidation. While most Calvin–Benson cycle (CBC) and light reaction enzymes were reduced in response to light, downstream metabolic pathways, such as starch degradation, were oxidized. These results suggest that dark-to-light transitions involve dynamic shifts in metabolic pathways, governed by opposing redox signals.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD065702 and PXD065993.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2025.103810.