PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Lymph node
instruments: Orbitrap Eclipse
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics
keywords: Lymph node; Measles virus

ABSTRACT:
In humans, lymph nodes are the primary site of measles virus (MeV) replication. To understand the immunological events that occur at this site, we infected human lymphoid tissue explants using a pathogenic strain of MeV that expresses GFP. We found that MeV infected between 5-15% of cells across donors. Using single cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) and flow cytometry, we found that while most of the 29 cell populations identified in the lymphoid culture were susceptible to MeV, there was a broad preferential infection of B cells and reduced infection of T cells. Further subsetting of T cells revealed that this reduction may be driven by the decreased infection of naïve T cells. Transcriptional changes in infected B cells were dominated by an interferon stimulated gene (ISG) signature. To determine which of these ISGs were most substantial, we evaluated the proteome of MeV-infected Raji cells by mass spectrometry. We found that IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, ISG15, CXCL10, MX2, and XAF1 proteins were the most highly induced, and positively correlated with their expression in the transcriptome. These data provide insight into the immunological events that occur in lymph nodes during infection and may lead to the development of therapeutic interventions.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Immunological landscape of human lymphoid explants during measles virus infection

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Uninfected or MeV-infected Raji-DCSIGNR cells were lysed in an 8M urea lysis buffer (with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 150 mM NaCl, and 1x protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail HALT (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Lysates were sonicated, and protein concentrations were quantified by micro-BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 50g of protein for each sample were treated with Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a 4mM final concentration and incubated for 30 min at RT. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a 10mM final concentration and samples were incubated for 30 min at RT. Free IAA was quenched with the addition of Dithiothreitol (DTT) at a 10mM final concentration for 30min. Samples were diluted with 5 sample volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Lysates were next digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at a 1:100 (enzyme: protein) ratio and lysates were rotated for 16hrs at RT. Trypsin activity was quenched by adding 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.1%. Samples were desalted on BioPure™ SPN MIDI C18 Spin columns. Samples were eluted from these columns with 200µL 40% ACN/0.1% TFA, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -80°C.

DATA PROCESSING:
Peptides/Proteins were first identified with Spectronaut (81). False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated using a decoy database strategy. All data were filtered to achieve an FDR of 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches, peptide identifications, and protein identifications. Search parameters included a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications for N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation. All other search parameters were defaults for the respective algorithms. Analysis of protein expression utilized the MSstats statistical package in R. Output data from Spectronaut was annotated based on a publicly available Homo sapiens proteome (Proteome ID: UP000005640) and the reference sequence for IC323-eGFP (Genbank: MW401770.1). Technical and biological replicates were integrated to estimate log2 fold changes, p values, and adjusted p values. All data were normalized by equalizing median intensities, the summary method was Tukey’s median polish, and the maximum quantile for deciding censored missing values was 0.999. Significantly dysregulated proteins were defined as those that had a fold change value >2 or <-2, with a p-value of <0.05. The mass indices for the most significantly dysregulated proteins were transformed with the Quantile function in R and then visualized using the pheatmap package.