PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Velos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics
keywords: Innate immunity; Cytoskeleton; Sike; Tubulin; Alpha-actinin

ABSTRACT:
Suppressor of IKKepsilon (SIKE) is associated with the innate immune system’s type I interferon response through TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1).  Characterized as an endogenous inhibitor of TBK1 when overexpressed in viral infection and pathological cardiac hypertrophic models, mechanistic study revealed SIKE acted as a high affinity substrate of TBK1, but SIKE’s function remains unknown.  This study aimed to investigate the SIKE interaction network to identify by association a potential function for SIKE.  Our affinity purification/mass spectrometry results showed that SIKE formed interactions with cytoskeletal proteins, nucleic acid-associated proteins, enzymes, and chaperones.  In immunofluorescence assays, endogenous SIKE localized to cytosolic puncta in epithelial and myeloid cells whilst in epithelial cells additional staining occurred in stress fiber-like structures and adjacent to the plasma membrane, whereas myeloid cells revealed SIKE associated with nuclear puncta.  Using cellular markers, significant co-occurrence of SIKE fluorescence with actin, a-actinin, tubulin, ezrin, FAK and b-catenin was detected.  Reciprocal immunoprecipitation and in vitro precipitation assays confirmed a direct SIKE interaction with tubulin and a-actinin.  These results indicate that SIKE directly associates with the cytoskeleton thus demonstrating its potential role in mediating cytoskeletal rearrangement necessary in innate immunity but also its ability to link a key catalytic hub, TBK1, to the cytoskeleton to direct TBK1 activity.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Suppressor of IKKepsilon forms direct interactions with cytoskeletal proteins, tubulin and alpha-actinin, linking innate immunity to the cytoskeleton

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The solutions were diluted to 150 µL with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the concentration of salts prior to digestion. The samples were reduced with 5 µL of 10 mM dithiothreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h. Then they were alkylated with 5 µL 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h. The samples were digested with 1 g trypsin overnight and then quenched with 5% (v:v) glacial acetic acid.The LC-MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron LTQ-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer system with a nanospray ion source interfaced to a Waters SCX trap column and a Waters NanoAcquity C18 reversed-phase capillary column. 7 µL of the final solution was injected onto the trap column, and the peptides were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min over 60 minutes. The nanospray ion source was operated at 3.5 kV. The digests were analyzed using the double play capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans. This mode of analysis produces approximately 10000 CAD spectra of ions ranging in abundance over several orders of magnitude. Not all CAD spectra are derived from peptides.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data was analyzed by database searching using the Sequest search algorithm against the IPI Human database.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Materials
All chemicals purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise stated. Cell culture reagents were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA) unless otherwise noted.
Cell culture
DOV13 (X. Fang, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA), HEK293 (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and RAW264.7 (ATCC) cells were cultured in complete media (RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% low‐endotoxin FBS, 20 mm l‐glutamine, 100 mm HEPES, 10 mm sodium pyruvate, 1× nonessential amino acid solution, 100 μg·mL−1 penicillin, and 100 U·mL−1 streptomycin) at 37 °C in a 5% (v/v) CO2 humidified environment. HAP1 and HAP1 CRISPR/Cas9 SIKE knockout (SIKE‐CR) cell lines (Horizon Discovery, Cambridge, UK) were cultured in complete Iscove's modified Dulbecco's medium (IMDM) supplemented with 10% low‐endotoxin FBS, 100 μg·mL−1 penicillin, and 100 U·mL−1 streptomycin) at 37 °C in a 5% (v/v) CO2 humidified environment as per manufacturer's protocol. The HAP1 cell line is a near‐haploid human cell line of myeloid origin (immune cell lineages) that was derived from the male chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line KBM‐7 24. The SIKE‐CR cell line was created by Horizon Discovery from the HAP1 parental cell line using a CRISPR/Cas9 approach to introduce a frame shift mutation by deleting 5 nte from bp 173‐177 in exon 2 of the coding sequence (NM_025073). This frameshift was sequence‐confirmed and resulted in a premature stop codon following residue 78.
Scratch assays and analyses
HAP1 or SIKE‐CR cells were seeded in 35‐mm dishes at 2.5 × 106 cells·mL−1 in incomplete IMDM (IMDM supplemented with 0.5% FBS, 100 μg·mL−1 penicillin, and 100 U·mL−1 streptomycin) and allowed to adhere overnight at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 (v/v) humidified environment. Cell monolayer was assessed for confluency, and a scratch was introduced to the monolayer with a sterile 200‐μL pipette tip held perpendicular to plate surface. Medium was removed, and cells were washed 3× with 1× PBS and then replenished with complete IMDM. Bright‐field mages of the scratched area were taken every 10 min for 24 h with a 10× objective on an EVOS FL Cell Imaging System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An ibidi Gas Incubation System (Martinsried, Germany) was used to maintain incubation conditions at 37 °C, 5% CO2, and 90% humidity. A minimum of three replicates per cell line was completed.
Analysis of scratch closure was performed using the application ‘SketchAndCalc Area Calculator’ (http://www.SketchAndCalc.com). The entire image area and area of scratch were determined. At time zero, the percentage of area filled was calculated. At each subsequent time point, the percentage of area filled was calculated and subtracted from the time zero value to determine the percentage of scratch closure. Two analysis strategies were used to assess cell migration. The first method was a full image analysis; this strategy provided an analysis of the entire scratched area. The second method was a 300‐pixel analysis; the image was cropped 300 pixels from the cell/scratch boundary and scratch closure assessed on this defined area. As not all scratches were of uniform width, the 300 pixel analysis gave a standardized migration distance. Student's t‐test (unpaired, 95% confidence interval, two‐tailed) was used to assess HAP1 and SIKE‐CR data for significant differences in cell migration.
Transfections
Mass spectrometry samples
Cells were seeded in triplicate on a six‐well plate at 0.4 × 106 cells·mL−1 and transfected with 4 μg per well WT SIKE (pCMVFLAG5a SIKE 6xHis) using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per manufacturer's protocol. For dsRNA‐stimulated samples, 21 h after transfection, cells were stimulated with 50 μg·mL−1 polyriboinosinic : polyribocytidylic acid (pI : pC) in complete medium for 3 h. Cells were harvested 24 h after transfection by washing from plate and pelleted by centrifugation (3000 g, 3 min, 4 °C).
Cytoskeletal protein immunoprecipitation samples
A total of 1 × 106 cells were seeded in triplicate on 60‐cm2 plates and transfected with 24 μg of total DNA consisting of either a 1 : 1 ratio of pCMVFLAG5a SIKE 6xHis or phosphomimetic SIKE (pCMVHA‐SIKE S6E (S133, 185, 187, 188, 190, 198E) 9) and DNA of cytoskeletal protein (pmEGFP‐β‐actin, pmCherry‐α‐tubulin, or pEGFP‐α‐actinin (Addgene, Cambridge, MA, USA)) or individual constructs plus an empty vector (pCDNA 3.1) using Lipofectamine 2000 according to manufacturer's protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 48 h, transfection efficiency was assessed by fluorescence microscopy. Only plates with > 50% transfection efficiency were used for co‐immunoprecipitation studies. Where indicated, cells were stimulated with 50 μg·mL−1 pI : pC at the 36 h post‐transfection. Cells were harvested at 48 h by washing from plate and pelleted by centrifugation (3000 g, 3 min, 4 °C).
For MS and co‐IP samples
Cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (0.02 m HEPES, pH 7.4, 0.15 m NaCl, 10 mm NaF, 2 mm DTT, 2 mm EGTA, 1.5 mm MgCl2, 1 mm Na3VO4, 2.7 mg·mL−1 β‐glycerophosphate, 1 mg·mL−1 n‐ethylmaleimide, 0.5% Triton X‐100, and 1× complete EDTA‐free protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated to ensure complete cell lysis. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation (14 000 g, 30 min, 4 °C). Protein concentration of lysate was quantified by the Bradford method (Bio‐Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
Immunoprecipitations
Mass spectrometry samples
Immunoprecipitated lysate (5 mg protein) with 50 μL of anti‐FLAG M2 affinity gel following manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, lysate was incubated with resin overnight at 4 °C under rotation, washed with 1× TBS (three times) and eluted from resin with 100 μg·mL−1 FLAG peptide.
Cytoskeletal protein immunoprecipitation samples
7.5 μg of mouse anti‐GFP (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA) or rabbit anti‐mCherry (Thermo Fisher Scientific) antibody were cross‐linked to 50 μL of magnetic Dynabeads protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with BS3 cross‐linking reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per manufacturer's instruction. The incubation time was extended to 1 h at 4 °C, and the quenching was extended to 30 min. Lysates (500 μg of protein) were applied to the bead–antibody complex and allowed to incubate with rotation at 4 °C overnight. Beads were washed in triplicate with eight beads volumes of 1× TBS containing 0.1% Tween‐20 (TBS/Tween). The beads were resuspended in 100 μL of TBS/Tween and transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube to avoid eluting proteins bound to the tube wall. Immunoprecipitated proteins were released from the antibody bead complex by heating in 30 μL 1× SDS loading buffer and supernatant transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube.
Mass spectrometry
Sample prep
Mass spectrometry samples were diluted to 150–200 μL with 100 mm ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the concentration of salts prior to digestion. The samples were reduced with 5 μL of 10 mm dithiothreitol in 0.1 m ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h. Then samples were alkylated with 5 μL 50 mm iodoacetamide in 0.1 m ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 0.5 h. The samples were digested with 1 μg trypsin overnight and then quenched with 5% (v:v) glacial acetic acid. Fifty microlitre of each sample was concentrated down to 20 μL, and 3–7 μL of the final solution was injected for analysis.
LC‐MS
The LC‐MS system consisted of a Thermo Electron LTQ Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer system with a nanospray ion source interfaced to a Waters SCX trap column and a Waters NanoAcquity C18 reversed‐phase capillary column. Seven microlitre of the final solution was injected onto the trap column, and the peptides were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.4 μL·min−1 over 60 min. The nanospray ion source was operated at 3.5 kV. The digests were analyzed using the double play capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra to determine amino acid sequence in sequential scans. This mode of analysis produces approximately 10 000 CAD spectra of ions ranging in abundance over several orders of magnitude. Not all CAD spectra are derived from peptides.
Database searching
The data were analyzed by database searching using the Sequest search algorithm against the IPI Human database. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.2.0.206) and X!Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1)). Sequest (XCorr Only) was set up to search IPI_HUMAN_110411.fasta (92 104 entries) or HUMAN_130430.fasta (89 430 entries—WT SIKE run 2) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search the IPI_HUMAN_110411 database (92 104 entries) or HUMAN 130430.fasta (89 430—WT SIKE run 2) also assuming trypsin digestion. Sequest (XCorr Only) and X!Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.80 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 15 p.p.m. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Sequest (XCorr Only) and X!Tandem as variable modifications or Glu→pyro‐Glu of the N terminus, ammonia loss of the N terminus, Gln→pyro‐Glu of the N terminus, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in X!Tandem as variable modifications.
Criteria for protein identification
Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.0.1; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS‐based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the PeptideProphet algorithm 25. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 90.0–99.9% probability and contained at least 1–2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm 26. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.
All mass spectrometry data and analyses were completed by the VCU Chemical and Proteomic Mass Spectrometry core facility. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE 1 partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD007262.
Immunofluorescence assays
DOV13 (2.5 × 104 cells·mL−1) or RAW264.7 (1 × 104 cells·mL−1) were seeded on 22 × 22 mm acid washed cover slips. Twenty‐four hours after seeding, cells were rinsed with 1× PBS, fixed in ice cold 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at RT. All staining procedures were performed at room temperature and with gentle rotation unless otherwise indicated. Cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X‐100 in 1× PBS for 10 min. Cells were washed three times with 1× PBS. Cells were blocked in 5% goat sera (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 1× PBS for 1 h. Two hundred microlitre of primary antibody in 1× PBS and 5% goat sera was placed on parafilm in a humidity chamber; coverslips were placed, inverted, on top of primary antibody solution, and incubated overnight at 4 °C. In dual‐labeled experiments, both primary antibodies (from different species) were added simultaneously. Coverslips were returned to 35‐mm dishes and washed with 1× PBS three times. Coverslips were incubated for 1 h with 1 mL secondary antibody solution. In dual‐labeled experiments, secondary antibodies were added simultaneously. Following incubation with secondary antibodies, cells were washed in 1× PBS three times. For phalloidin staining, 200 μL of diluted AF555 phalloidin was placed on parafilm in a humidity chamber and coverslips were placed, inverted, on top of the diluted phalloidin. Coverslips were incubated for 20 min at room temperature. After incubation, AF555 phalloidin‐stained coverslips were returned to 35‐mm dishes with 1× PBS and washed three times with 1× PBS. To reduce nonspecific staining, coverslips were washed in 0.1% Triton X‐100 in 1× PBS, for 5 min, followed by three washes in 1× PBS. Coverslips were counterstained for DNA with Bisbenzimide H 33342 stain (10 μg·mL−1) in 1× PBS 1 min and then washed three times in 1× PBS. Coverslips were mounted on microscope slides using the SlowFade® Gold Antifade Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), sealed, and stored at 4 °C until imaged. Imaging was performed in Virginia Commonwealth University Microscopy Facility maintained by the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology (Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA). Dual‐labeled microscope slides were imaged using the Zeiss LSM700 confocal laser scanning microscope (Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Thornwood, NY, USA) configured around an Axio Imager stand with four solid state lasers (405, 488, 555, and 639 nm) equipped with a 63×/1.4 NA Plan Achromat oil immersion objective lens. Multichannel images were collected sequentially to ensure no cross talk between channels, and the detector offset and gain settings were maintained for all of the images collected within a series. Z‐stack images were obtained at a frequency of 0.39 μm per optic slice. Quantitative analysis of colocalization was performed on confocal images using the colocalization function of the zeiss zen software (v. 8.0; Carl Zeiss Microscopy) or volocity program (v. 6.3; PerkinElmer Life Sciences, Waltham, MA, USA). Thresholds were set for each channel according to signal intensity and background noise. Colocalization coefficient (zen) or colocalization by intersecting volumes (volocity) as well as PCC were calculated.
Immunoblot
Twenty microgram of protein from whole‐cell lysate or 15 μL of eluted proteins from immunoprecipitation were separated by Tris/glycine SDS/PAGE (8% α‐actinin, 10% tubulin or actin, 12% SIKE), and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was blocked in either 5% milk or 5% BSA (rabbit α‐tubulin‐HRP) in TBS/Tween. The immunoblot was probed for SIKE using mouse anti‐FLAG‐HRP or mouse anti‐HA or rabbit anti‐SIKE or cytoskeletal protein using either mouse‐α‐GFP (BioLegend) or rabbit α‐tubulin‐HRP (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) at 4 °C overnight. The blot was then washed with TBS/Tween: 6 × 5 min (rabbit anti‐FLAG‐HRP) or 3 × 5 min (all other blots). For blots requiring a secondary antibody, goat anti‐mouse or goat anti‐rabbit IgG‐HRP (Southern Biotech, Birmingham, AL, USA), was incubated with blot for 1 h, and washed with TBS/Tween (4 × 10 min). See Table 2 for antibody dilutions. Membranes were developed with Pierce ECL Plus reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per manufacturer's protocol and documented on a Gel Doc XR+ gel documentation system (Bio‐Rad) or a c‐DiGit blot scanner (LI‐COR, Lincoln, NE, USA). For whole lysate immunoblots, the blots were stripped, blocked in 5% milk TBS/Tween, probed for actin using mouse anti‐actin‐HRP, washed with TBS/Tween (7 × 5 min), and developed as described above.
Protein expression and purification
For pET15b (N‐terminal 6xHis tag) and pET26b (C‐terminal 6xHis tag) SIKE construct expression, vector was transformed into chemically competent BL21‐CodonPlus (DE3)‐RIPL (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's protocol. A single colony was used to inoculate an overnight culture of Luria broth plus 100 μg·mL−1 ampicillin. The overnight culture was subcultured 1 : 100 into 1 L LB/amp flasks grown at 37 °C until the cell density reached an A600 ≈ 0.6. Protein expression was induced with 1 mm isopropyl‐β‐d‐galactopyranoside and allowed to grow overnight at 20 °C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 7000 g. Cells were resuspended in 50 mm NaH2PO4, pH 8, 300 mm NaCl, 1 mm 2‐mercaptoethanol, 0.5 mg·mL−1 lysozyme, and 1× complete EDTA‐free protease inhibitor and sonicated to lyse cells. Insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation (14 000 g, 30 min) and the pellet solubilized in guanidine hydrochloride (GudHCl) buffer (6 m guanidine hydrochloride, 50 mm NaH2PO4 (pH 8.0), 300 mm NaCl and 1 mm 2‐mercaptoethanol). Resuspended insoluble material was clarified by centrifugation at 14 000 g, 30 min. The supernatant was mixed with 1.5 mL TALON resin (Clontech Laboratories, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA), pre‐equilibrated in GudHCl buffer. The lysate resin mixture was loaded into a column (Bio‐Rad) and washed by gravity with 50 column volumes (CV) of GudHCl buffer. Bound protein was refolded on the column using a 133 CV reverse gradient of GudHCl buffer to 50 mm NaH2PO4 (pH 8.0), 300 mm NaCl and 1 mm 2‐mercaptoethanol (Buffer 1) and eluted with 5 CV of Buffer 1 plus 500 mm imidazole. For pET26b, an additional 50 CV wash Buffer 1 + 50 mm Imidazole was incorporated prior to elution to remove a SIKE fragment (10–14 kDa). Protein purity was assessed by SDS/PAGE analysis and protein quantified by the Bradford method (Bio‐Rad).
 In vitro precipitation
SIKE (8 μm final concentration) and cytoskeletal proteins, tubulin and α‐actinin (Cytoskeleton, Inc., Denver, CO, USA), or control protein, lysozyme, were incubated at molar ratios of 1 : 0.5, 1 : 1, or 1 : 1.4 in 50 mm NaH2PO4, pH 8, and 0.3 m NaCl (EQ buffer) at 4 °C. Reactions were added to Ni‐NTA agarose (50 μL, pre‐equilibrated in EQ buffer) and incubated at RT with constant agitation. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (100 g, 3 min) and supernatant (Unbound (UB) sample) was retained for analysis. Beads were washed three times with 10 CV EQ buffer + 50 mm imidazole. 3 CV EQ buffer + 250 mm imidazole was added to beads, immediately transferred to new tube, and incubated for 10 min to release bound sample. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation (100 g, 3 min) and supernatant (bound (B) sample) was retained for analysis. Samples were separated by SDS/PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue or silver stain.

RESULTS:
Results
SIKE knockout cells show impaired cell migration
One defining response of innate immune defenses is cytoskeletal rearrangements to initiate cell movement either for migration or for phagocytosis. To assess if the biological role of SIKE was related to these host defense mechanisms, we examined cell migration via a scratch assay using a parental, HAP1, cell line and a HAP1 CRISPR/Cas9 SIKE knockout cell line, SIKE‐CR. Loss of SIKE expression in the SIKE‐CR cell line was confirmed via immunoblot (Fig. 1A). Confluent HAP1 or SIKE‐CR cells, plated in 35‐mm dishes with low sera medium, were scratched, and dead/loose cells were removed by PBS washing, replenished with complete medium, and imaged for 24 h (Fig. 1B,C). Data were analyzed in two ways, percentage of scratch closure (Fig. 1D) and percentage of scratch closure within 300 pixels from cell/scratch boundary edge (Fig. 1E). The second approach addressed any differences in scratch width between experiments. In both analyses, significantly decreased migration (P ≤ 0.05) was observed for the SIKE knockout cell line, ranging from 13.9% to 21.4% for scratch closure of entire area or 300‐pixel box, respectively.
SIKE interaction network identified by co‐immunoprecipitation tandem MS/MS
To identify a SIKE interaction network that would provide insight into how SIKE might associate with cytoskeletal structures, we used co‐immunoprecipitation coupled to tandem MS/MS to identify a SIKE interaction network. In this assay, SIKE, epitope tagged with FLAG, was transiently expressed in HEK293 cells, an easily transfected epithelial cell line. Lysates for basal or dsRNA (polyriboinosinic : polyribocytidylic acid (pI : pC)) stimulated conditions to mimic a viral infection that would induce a dsRNA‐mediated antiviral response were assessed. Immunoprecipitated SIKE and associated proteins were subjected to tryptic digestion followed by LC‐MS/MS to identify components of the precipitated networks. SIKE interactions were categorized into four types: cytoskeletal proteins, chaperones, nucleic acid‐associated, and enzyme (Fig. 2, Table 1).
Endogenous SIKE colocalizes with cytoskeletal proteins
To validate SIKE interactions identified by tandem MS/MS colocalization assays, immunofluorescence assays of endogenous SIKE and cellular markers were completed. Endogenous SIKE localization was examined in two cell types associated with initial host–pathogen interactions, epithelial, which line surfaces exposed to the host's environment, and myeloid, which represent immune cell lineages (Fig. 3). RAW264.7 cells, a mouse macrophage cell line, showed SIKE primarily in distinct cytosolic and nuclear puncta, whereas in DOV13 cells, a human ovarian epithelium cell line, SIKE is excluded from the nucleus and is found in cytosolic puncta, stress fiber structures, and underlying the plasma membrane. These data indicate cell‐type‐dependent and/or species‐specific localization of SIKE.
To classify the structures and proteins to which SIKE was associating, colocalization assays via immunofluorescence were completed. Two analyses of SIKE fluorescence with well‐characterized cellular markers were undertaken: co‐occurrence and codistribution. Co‐occurrence using a Mander's overlap coefficient measured the overlap of fluorescence between SIKE and the cellular marker from the perspective of SIKE fluorescence (how much SIKE fluorescence overlapped with the cellular marker fluorescence?) and the cellular marker (how much cellular marker fluorescence overlapped with SIKE fluorescence?). Significant co‐occurrence is designated by a value of ≥ 0.5 15. Codistribution measured the overlap of fluorescence between SIKE and the cellular marker to assess whether the majority of each protein's fluorescence overlapped, indicated by a Pearson's correlation coefficient (PCC) of ≥ 0.5 15. To identify cytosolic and nuclear puncta, SIKE colocalization with endosomal markers, RNA granules, and nucleolus‐associated proteins was assessed (Figs 4 and 5). No significant co‐occurrence (colocalization coefficient of ≥ 0.5 ± 2 SD, 95% confidence interval) between SIKE and these markers was identified (Fig. 6). The thresholded PCC also did not indicate significant codistribution (PCC value ≥ 0.5, data not shown) with SIKE. From these data, SIKE puncta do not colocalize with classic endosomal markers, RNA granules, or the nucleolus.
In addition to reduced migration when SIKE expression is knocked out, endogenous SIKE immunofluorescence and co‐immunoprecipitation tandem MS/MS data indicated SIKE associated with cytoskeletal structures and proteins, respectively. To determine which components of the cytoskeleton interact with SIKE, colocalization of SIKE with several cytoskeletal markers was examined (Figs 7 and 8). In epithelial cells (Fig. 7), co‐occurrence of SIKE fluorescence (colocalization ≥ 0.5, blue bars) with actin, α‐actinin, and ezrin fluorescence was observed, whereas no cytoskeletal marker fluorescence showed significant co‐occurrence (colocalization ≥ 0.5, cyan bars) with SIKE fluorescence (Fig. 9A) as measured by volocity software. Thresholded PCC analysis indicated no significant codistribution of SIKE and cytoskeletal markers (Fig. 9B). To share significant codistribution between two markers, the PCC should be in the range of ≥ 0.5–1. In myeloid cells (Figs 8 and 9C), significant intersection of SIKE fluorescence (colocalization ≥ 0.5, purple bars) with α‐actinin was retained, but was reduced compared to epithelial cells. Although below the value for significant colocalization (≥ 0.5), intersection of SIKE fluorescence with α‐tubulin was increased twofold, while SIKE to ezrin intersection was decreased fivefold in myeloid cells. The thresholded PCC analysis indicated a near zero value for all markers corresponding to no significant codistribution between SIKE and marker fluorescence. From this analysis, the greatest percentage of SIKE fluorescence intersected with α‐actinin in both epithelial (90 ± 5%) and myeloid (56 ± 11%) cells types.
SIKE interacts with α‐actinin and tubulin, but not actin in reciprocal immunoprecipitations
As MS and colocalization data suggested interactions with cytoskeletal elements, actin‐based filaments and/or tubulin/microtubules, reciprocal immunoprecipitation reactions using a cytoskeletal protein, actin or α‐actinin for actin‐based filaments or tubulin for microtubules, as bait were completed. Actin, α‐actinin, or tubulin, tagged with either eGFP or mCherry, was transiently transfected into HEK293 cells with either FLAG‐SIKE or phosphomimetic (S6E) HA SIKE. Using magnetic bead technology, the cytoskeletal proteins were immunoprecipitated from the lysates with either an anti‐GFP or anti‐mCherry antibody cross‐linked to the protein G‐labeled beads and precipitated networks assessed for cytoskeletal protein and SIKE. SIKE only lysates, used as controls to test for nonspecific SIKE interactions to either protein G‐labeled beads or antibody‐labeled beads, showed no interaction (data not shown). SIKE and GFP lysates (no labeled cytoskeletal proteins), used as a control to test for nonspecific SIKE interactions to GFP, showed no interaction (data not shown). SIKE : cytoskeletal protein interactions were tested under basal and dsRNA, which induces phosphorylation of SIKE 9, conditions. For each condition, replicates of the 5–6 independent experiments are shown. Under basal or dsRNA‐stimulated conditions, SIKE was not immunoprecipitated with actin (Fig. 10A,B). In contrast, SIKE : α‐actinin interactions were observed ± dsRNA stimulation (Fig. 10C,D). Using WT FLAG‐SIKE, the SIKE : tubulin interaction was enhanced following dsRNA stimulation with two of three reactions revealing a SIKE : tubulin complex (Fig. 11B), whereas under basal conditions only one of three reactions indicated a SIKE : tubulin interaction (Fig. 11A). These data suggested that dsRNA stimulation altered either the components of the complex or the environment to enhance the SIKE : tubulin complex. We had previously shown that dsRNA stimulation enhances SIKE phosphorylation, but the six phosphorylation sites of SIKE are not equally modified, even in in vitro reactions 9. To determine if the SIKE : tubulin interaction was dependent upon SIKE phosphorylation, we used a SIKE phosphomimetic (S6E) construct to complete the reciprocal immunoprecipitation reactions with tubulin (Fig. 11C,D). Under both basal and dsRNA‐stimulated conditions, all reactions showed a phosphomimetic SIKE : tubulin complex consistent with SIKE phosphorylation enhancing the SIKE : tubulin interaction.
SIKE interacts directly with tubulin and α‐actinin
As the reciprocal immunoprecipitations could not distinguish between direct or indirect interactions between SIKE and the cytoskeletal proteins, IVP reactions were completed. Recombinant 6xHis‐tagged SIKE and cytoskeletal protein or lysozyme (negative control) were combined in 1 : 0.5, 1 : 1, or 1 : 1.4 molar ratios. SIKE and associated proteins were precipitated from the reaction with Ni‐NTA agarose beads (bound (B) sample). Supernatant removed from the pelleted Ni‐NTA beads represented the unbound (UB) fraction. Starting material, bound, and unbound samples were assessed via SDS/PAGE (Fig. 12). Control reactions (Fig. 12E,F) showed that SIKE bound to the beads, but neither tubulin, α‐actinin, nor lysozyme bound nonspecifically to the beads. The negative control, lysozyme, did not form a complex with SIKE (Fig. 12D). In SIKE : tubulin reactions (Fig. 12A), SIKE : tubulin interactions were observed in the bound (B) samples of the 1 : 1 and 1 : 1.4 reactions. The SIKE : α‐actinin reactions using N‐terminal 6xHis‐tagged SIKE showed that α‐actinin remained in the unbound fraction (Fig. 12B). More importantly, as the α‐actinin concentration increased, the intensity of the SIKE band in the bound fraction decreased and a SIKE band appeared in the unbound fraction and increased in intensity with increasing α‐actinin concentration. This suggested that the SIKE : α‐actinin interaction interfered with the N‐terminal 6xHis tag of SIKE binding to the Ni‐NTA resin. When a C‐terminal 6xHis‐tagged SIKE was used, α‐actinin was precipitated with SIKE (Fig. 12C).