PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Lobule of mammary gland; Mammary gland; Breast
diseases: Breast cancer
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Human; Limited proteomics; Breast tissue; Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue; Mammary acini; Exploris 480; Laser capture microdissection; Spatial proteomics

ABSTRACT:
Novel In-insert FFPE proteomics combines single glass insert FFPE tissue processing with spatial quantitative data-independent mass spectrometry (DIA). The method represents a potent protocol for spatial FFPE tissue subsection processing in combination with laser capture microdissection, achieving sufficient MS signal from 50 um size mammary acini FFPE voxels. By eliminating additional robotic platforms, desalting and detergent removal steps  prior to injection to the liquid chromatograph, this method minimizes protein losses and keep the analysis cost effective. In-insert proteomics maintains sufficient sensitivity to preserve spatial context within a single FFPE tissue slide. This project aim was to acquire data-dependent data (DDA) on Exploris 480 to demonstrate the sensitivity of the In-insert protocol sensitivity and benchmark it with intersecting protocol published by Weke et al. (2022).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Novel protocol for spatial proteome analysis of microdissected formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Microdissection was performed using a PALM MicroBeam Laser Microdissection system (Zeiss), equipped with UV laser for cutting (355 nm) by a board certified pathologist. The slides were visualized using the PALMRobo 4.6 software (Zeiss) and areas containing mammary gland acini were selected. Prior to microdissecting the tissue of interest, the laser parameters were optimized for each employed objective. The microdissected tissue voxels were collected using the Laser Pressure Catapult (LPC) into tubes with an adhesive cap (AdhesiveCap 500, # 415190-9201-000, Zeiss) and stored on ice before further processing. The adhesive cap was examined under the light microscope at 10x zoom or with magnifying glass to confirm presence of LCM dissected FFPE tissue voxels. Subsequently, the tissue was carefully inspired into a pipette tip with the lysis buffer and transferred into a bottom part of glass insert (0.1 ml Micro-insert, Lab Logistics Group GMBH, cat. no: 7401744) without puncturing the glue. Tissue voxels were mixed with 0.2% DMM, 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Tissue was decrosslinked in a wet chamber on thermomixer for 1 h at 95°C and 600 RPM. Protein alkylation was performed by adding 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in LC-MS water to 10 mM final concentration in the reaction mixture. Protease digestion was performed by addition of 27 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 0.74 nmol/µl trypsin in LC-MS water and reaction mixture was homogenized per voxel. The Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit was used to fractionate pooled sample (approx. 10 ul of each voxel digest) into 8 fractions according to manufacturer guidelines. Fractions were evaporated in SpeedVac and dissolved in 20 µl of 0.08 % TFA, 2.5% AcN in LC-MS water prior LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide digests of voxels were centrifuged at 10000g/30 min/20°C and directly analyzed by both DIA and DDA acquisition on Exploris 480. Voxels number 2, 5, 8 were dropped from analysis due to suspicion to polymeric contamination introduced during voxel processing. Six microliters of the sample were injected to Thermo Scientific, UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System and concentrated on an a C18 precolumn. Injected sample was desalted on the precolumn by a 0.08 % TFA, 2.5% AcN in LC-MS water at constant mobile for 10 min. A linear gradient of mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in ACN (v/v)) in a mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water (v/v)) was used to separate peptides on 25 cm C18 PepMap column. Analytical peptide separation was enabled by a linear increasing of B up to 40% B in 90 min (60 and 20 min for gradient length comparison) with a constant flow of 300 nl/min. Exploris 480 acquired data in data dependent and data independent mode. A precursor range was set from m/z 350 Th to m/z 1200 Th. Normalized AGC target was set to 300% with auto setting on maximum injection time. Each MS scan was followed by a fragmentation of the top 15 most intense precursor ions and acquisition of their MS/MS spectra. The dynamic mass exclusion was set to 20 sec after the first precursor ion fragmentation. Orbitrap resolution was set to 15000. Normalized AGC target was set to Standard with 40 msec maximum injection time. DIA method covered a mass range from m/z 350 Th up to m/z 1100 Th with 12 Th window width and 1 Th overlap. Orbitrap resolution to 30000. Normalized AGC target was set to 1000% with automatic setting of maximum injection time.

DATA PROCESSING:
First, raw DDA files were centroided and converted into mzML formats using MSConvert. MSFragger search engine embedded in FragPipe , was used to search the data. All searches were done against Homo sapiens SwissProt+TrEMBL search database (06_2022) concatenated with a reverse decoy database containing equal amount of reversed target sequences and common contaminant protein sequences. The closed search was done in MSFragger with +-10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and with 10 ppm fragment mass tolerance. Enzyme digestion was set to trypsin and two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications were set to methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation. Data were mass recalibrated, and automatic parameter optimization setting was used to tune fragment mass tolerance. Output file format was set to pep.XML.