PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: T cell
diseases: Acute leukemia
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Ribosomes; Target therapy; Cancer; Lc-ms/ms

ABSTRACT:
Somatic mutations in ribosomal proteins (RPs), including RPL5, have been reported in approximately 10% of pediatric patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). In cancer, the incorporation of mutant RPs into ribosomes often disrupts canonical ribosome function, thereby contributing to disease development. In this study, we aimed to characterize the effects of the RPL5-I60V mutation in the context of T-ALL, focusing on its impact on translation and cellular responses to a panel of compounds in vitro. Using CRISPR-Cas9, we generated a homozygous knock-in mutant in Jurkat cells and investigated its effects on ribosome biogenesis. We observed both quantitative and qualitative alterations in the production of the large ribosomal subunit. Ribosomes containing the mutant RPL5 protein exhibited intrinsically increased protein synthesis activity, which correlated with enhanced cellular proliferation. We then evaluated the response of these mutant cells to a panel of compounds targeting protein synthesis at various levels—including an MNK1 inhibitor, metformin, silvestrol, homoharringtonine, anisomycin, resveratrol, and hygromycin B—as well as cytarabine, a chemotherapeutic agent commonly used in T-ALL treatment. Our results showed that the RPL5-I60V mutation confers increased sensitivity to most of these compounds, with the exception of hygromycin B. This study advances our understanding of how oncoribosomes contribute to cancer pathogenesis and highlights the therapeutic potential of directly or indirectly targeting altered ribosomes, offering insights for the development of personalized treatment strategies.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Ribosomal protein L5 (RPL5/uL18) I60V mutation is associated to increased translation and modulates drug sensitivity in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Proteins from cell-free ribosomal preparations were solubilized in Laemmli buffer before being stacked in the top of a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (Life Technologies), stained with R-250 Coomassie blue (Bio-Rad) and in-gel digested using modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega). The dried extracted peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and the Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 75 μm 250 mm C18 column (Aurora Generation 2, 1.6 µm, IonOpticks ). The nano-LC method consisted of a 120 min multi-linear gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min, ranging from 5 to 41% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The MS method was described previously (Lezzerini et al NAR 2020).

DATA PROCESSING:
Data were processed automatically using Mascot Distiller software (version 2.7.1.0, Matrix Science). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.8) through concomitant searches against Uniprot (Homo sapiens taxonomy, March 2022 version), the mutated RPL5 protein sequence, classical contaminants database (homemade) and their corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerance were set, respectively, to 10 ppm and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (fixed), acetyl (protein N-terminal, variable) and oxidation (variable). The Proline software (version 2.1) (Bouyssié Bioinformatics 2020) was used to merge DDA results. After combination, results were filtered: conservation of rank 1 peptide-spectrum match (PSM) with a minimal length of 6 and a minimal score of 25. Peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) score filtering is then optimized to reach a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of PSM identification below 1% by employing the target decoy approach. A minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group was set. Proline was then used to perform MS1-based label free quantification of the peptides and protein groups from the different samples with cross-assignment. Protein abundances were computed from razor and specific peptides. For RPL5 and mutated RPL5, only specific peptides were used. Statistical analysis was performed using ProStaR 1.38.0 (Wieczorek et al Bioinformatics 2017) to determine differentially abundant proteins. Protein sets were filtered out if they were not identified in at least two replicates of one condition. Protein sets were then filtered out if they were not quantified across all replicates in at least one condition. Reverse protein sets and contaminants were also filtered out. After log2 transformation, POV missing values were imputed with slsa method and MEC ones with 1-percentile value of each sample. Statistical testing was conducted using limma test. Differentially-expressed proteins were sorted out using a log2(fold change) cut-off of 1.5 and a p-value cut-off allowing to reach a FDR inferior to 1% according to the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
Somatic mutations in ribosomal proteins (RPs), including RPL5, have been reported in approximately 10 % of pediatric patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). In cancer, the incorporation of mutant RPs into ribosomes often disrupts canonical ribosome function, thereby contributing to disease development. In this study, we aimed to characterize the effects of the RPL5-I60V mutation in the context of T-ALL, focusing on its impact on translation and cellular responses to a panel of compounds in vitro. Using CRISPR-Cas9, we generated a homozygous knock-in mutant in Jurkat cells and investigated its effects on ribosome biogenesis. We observed both quantitative and qualitative alterations in the production of the large ribosomal subunit. Ribosomes containing the mutant RPL5 protein exhibited intrinsically increased protein synthesis activity, which correlated with enhanced cellular proliferation. We then evaluated the response of these mutant cells to a panel of compounds targeting protein synthesis at various levels-including an MNK1 inhibitor, metformin, silvestrol, homoharringtonine, anisomycin, resveratrol, and hygromycin B-as well as cytarabine, a chemotherapeutic agent commonly used in T-ALL treatment. Our results showed that the RPL5-I60V mutation confers increased sensitivity to most of these compounds, with the exception of hygromycin B. This study advances our understanding of how oncoribosomes contribute to cancer pathogenesis and highlights the therapeutic potential of directly or indirectly targeting altered ribosomes, offering insights for the development of personalized treatment strategies.