PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Skin
diseases: Carcinoma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: residues isobaric at 128.058578 Da; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation; Acetyl
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Vomitoxin); uniaxial cell stretching; a431 cells; biomechanical stimulation; Deoxynivalenol (don

ABSTRACT:
Morphology together with the capability to respond to surrounding stimuli are the key elements governing the spatial interaction of a living cell with the environment. In this respect, biomechanical stimulation can trigger significant physiological cascades that can potentially modulate or interact with toxicity. Deoxynivalenol (DON, vomitoxin) is one of the most prevalent mycotoxins produced by Fusarium spp. and it was used to explore the delicate interaction between biomechanical stimulation and cytotoxic processes in A431 cells. In fact, in addition of being a well-known food contaminant, DON is becoming a relevant toxin also for other organ systems. The combination between biomechanical stimulation and the mycotoxin revealed how DON can impair crucial functions like cellular morphology and lysosome trafficking at concentrations far below those known to be cytotoxic in routine toxicity studies. Moreover, sub-toxic concentrations of DON (0.1-1 μM) impaired the capability of A431 cells to respond to a biomechanical stimulation that normally sustains trophic effects in this cell line. Ultimately, the effects of DON (0.1-10 μM) were partially modulated by the application of uniaxial stretching (0.5Hz, 24h, 15% deformation) suggesting a deep cross-talk between the cytotoxic potential of the mycotoxin and the biomechanical stimulation.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Impact of biomechanical stimulation in the toxicity of deoxynivalenol in A431 cells: impairment of “dynamic” cell functions

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell culture For the characterization of the toxicity of DON in the biomechanical stimulated environment the epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 was used. Cells were cultivated in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with L-glutamine (4.5 g/L), 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and maintained in humidified incubators at 37°C and 5% CO2. For the performance of the biomechanical stimulation experiments, cells were seeded on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membrane functionalized with Matrigel Matrix (Corning, Discovery Labware, MA; USA). At the day of the experiments, medium was substituted by phenol-red free medium D-2909 supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal serum (FBS), 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and 25mM HEPES (pH 7.4). If not otherwise specified, cell culture media and supplements were purchased from GIBCO Invitrogen (Karlsruhe, Germany), Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Munich, Germany) and Sarstedt AG & Co (Nuembrecht, Germany), VWR International GmbH (Vienna, Austria) and Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH (Vienna, Austria). Deoxynivalenol DON was purchased from Romer Labs Diagnostic GmbH (Tulln, Austria). For cellular experiments, solid substance was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) at the respective stock solutions were stored at -80°C and dilutes in cell culture medium (1:1000) for the performance of the experiments.  Proteomic analysis For the proteomic analysis cells were seeded in 6-well plates, allowed to settle for 48h and incubated with DON (0.1, 1, 10µM) or solvent control (DMSO 1:1000) for 24h. At the end of the incubation, cells were lysed in isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail  (Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria) and 1 mM PMSF under mechanical shear stress. By centrifugation at 3500 g and 4 ° C for 5 min, the cytoplasmic proteins were separated from the nuclei and precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at −20 °C. MS-sample preparation 50 μg of each sample was loaded on an SDS-PAGE and allowed to separate for 0.3 cm, after what proteins in the gel were stained by an MS-compatible silver staining procedure. Afterward, each protein band was cut into pieces. Upon reduction with DTT (37°C, 30 min) and alkylation with IAA (30°C, 30 min in the dark), the proteins were digested for 14 h and 4 h at 37 °C using Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI). The digested peptides were eluted, three times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and twice with 5% FA. The eluted peptide samples were collected and dried. LC-MS analysis Dried samples were reconstituted in 5µl 30% formic acid (FA) containing 10fmol each of four synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40µl mobile phase A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). 5µl of this solution were then injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC-system coupled to a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). As a pre-concentration step, peptides were loaded on a 2cm x75µm C18 Pepmap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) at a flow rate of 10µl/min using mobile phase A. Elution from the pre-column to a 50cm x75µm Pepmap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and subsequent separation was achieved at a flow rate of 300nl/min using a gradient of 8% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 2% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 90min. For mass spectrometric detection, MS scans were performed in the range from m/z 400-1400 at a resolution of 70000 (at m/z =200). MS/MS scans of the 8 most abundant ions were achieved through HCD fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 17500 (at m/z =200).

DATA PROCESSING:
Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Cell culture
For the characterization of the toxicity of DON in the biomechanical stimulated environment, the epidermoid carcinoma cell line A431 was used. Cells were cultivated in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with L-glutamine (4.5 g/L), 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and maintained in humidified incubators at 37 °C and 5% CO2. For the performance of the biomechanical stimulation experiments, cells were seeded on a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) membrane functionalized with Matrigel Matrix (Corning, Discovery Labware, MA; USA). At the day of the experiments, medium was substituted by phenol-red free medium D-2909 supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal serum (FBS), 1% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin and 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.4). If not otherwise specified, cell culture media and supplements were purchased from GIBCO Invitrogen (Karlsruhe, Germany), Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH (Munich, Germany) and Sarstedt AG & Co (Nuembrecht, Germany), VWR International GmbH (Vienna, Austria) and Thermo Fisher Scientific GmbH (Vienna, Austria).
Deoxynivalenol
DON was purchased from Romer Labs Diagnostic GmbH (Tulln, Austria). For cellular experiments, solid substance was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) at the respective stock solutions were stored at −80 °C and diluted in cell culture medium (1:1000) for the performance of the experiments.
Immunocytochemistry
For immunofluorescence analysis cells were seeded in 8-well microscopy slides (Falcon, Corning, New York, USA). After 48 h cells were incubated with DON (final concentration range 0.1–10 µM) or solvent control (DMSO 1:1000) for 24 h. Cells were rinsed with PBS (37 °C) and fixed with pre-warmed formaldehyde (3.7% in PBS, 15 min). Cells were then permeabilized with triton-X (0.2% in PBS, 10 min), washed and blocked with heat inactivated goat serum (10% in PBS, 1 h, RT). For the detection of tubulin the anti α-tubulin antibody (Tubulin; B-7; 1:1000 dil. Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Heidelberg, Germany) was used. Afterwards, fluorescent labeled anti mouse secondary antibody was added (1.5 h, Alexa Fluor 488 Donkey Anti-Mouse (A-21202) dilution 1:1500, Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). After removal of secondary antibody slides were post-fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde (10 min, RT); at the end of the post-fixation 100 mM glycine was used to mask reactive sites and slides were mounted with Roti-Mount FluorCare DAPI (Carl Roth GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) and sealed. Images were acquired with a Confocal LSM Zeiss 710 equipped with ELYRA PS. 1 system using a Plan Apochromat 63×/1.4 oil objective (zoom 1.5) and an Andor iXon 897 (EMCCD) camera.
Live cell imaging
For the evaluation of cellular responses to both incubation with DON and uniaxial stretching, live cell imaging experiments were performed. Cellular structures/organelles were stained with specific dyes: cell membrane was stained with CellMask™ Deep Red Plasma membrane Stain (1:1000 dilution, white), lysosomes with LysoTracker® Red DND-99 (1:1000 dilution, red, indicated as LysoTracker), mitochondria with MitoTracker® Green FM (1:1000 dilution, green, indicated as MitoTracker), tubulin with TubulinTracker™ Green (1:2000 dilution, green, indicated as TubulinTracker), and cell nuclei with Hoechst 33258 (1:1000 dilution, blue). Staining solutions were diluted in Live Cell Imaging Solution (all from Molecular Probes, Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). At the end of the staining, cells were rinsed and maintained in Live Cell Imaging Solution for the microscopy analysis. Time series and confocal images were acquired with Confocal LSM Zeiss 710 equipped with ELYRA PS. 1 using a Plan Apochromat 63X/1.4 oil objective (Figs 1–3), whereas membranes were imaged with a Plan Neofluar 10X/0.3 (zoom 4; Figs 4–6). Moreover, membranes were also analyzed with the Cytation3 Imaging Multi-Mode Reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA) for image acquisition and evaluation of the fluorescent signal (objects-mean per optical field; Fig. 7).
Automated evaluation of cell diameter and cell volume
For the determination of the cell size and cell diameter a CASY TT Cell Counter and Analyzer (OMNI Life Science GmbH & Co. KG, Bremen, Germany) was used. To this aim, the range of dimensions measured was set constant for every experiment and used also for the regular cell counting, with the cursor position optimized for the cell line of interest (minimum diameter detected 10.6 μm). At the end of the incubation with the toxin, cells were gently detached from the petri dishes with accutase and re-suspended in medium to a final volume of 1 mL. Mean volume and diameter of the cells were evaluated injecting in the instrument 100 µL of the cell suspension diluted in the measuring solution CASY Ton, as specified by the supplier. Data are expressed as µm (Diameter) and fL (Volume). Data are presented as average of the quantification of 13 different samples obtained from 7 independent cell preparations (biological replicates).
Biomechanical Stimulation
In order to verify the influence of biomechanical stimulations on the effect of DON, different experiments were performed with the help of the cell stretcher. This device is able to deliver accurate, repeatable and controlled uniaxial strain cycles to a PDMS membrane on which a population of cells can be cultivated. During the experiment, the cells are stimulated mechanically by experiencing cyclic deformation. The upper limits for the frequency of stimulation and the amplitude of the strain are 10 Hz and 20%, respectively. In the context of the experiments, 15% strain mechanical stimulation was applied for 24 h at a frequency of 0.5 Hz. For the evaluation of the impact of DON on the capability of A431 cells to respond to biomechanical stimulation (Figs 4–6) cells were pre-incubated for 24 h with DON and afterwards maintained in static or biomechanically stimulated environment in toxin free medium (schematic workflow Supplementary Material Fig. S2). Biomechanical stimulation experiments were always carried out in parallel and the results compare directly static and stretched incubation conditions (Figs 4–7). Since the biomechanical stimulation was differentially distributed on the PDMS membrane, the methods of choice for the evaluation of the biological effects of the stretching in combination with exposure to DON were live cell imaging coupled with image analysis and fluorescence signal quantification. In fact, these methods allowed the evaluation of the area of the membrane that was more consistently stimulated by the stretching protocol. To this aim a multi-parametric workflow was established including image analysis with several endpoints (average cell number, cell area, integrated density of the fluorescence signal/area, mean intensity of the fluorescence/cell and for lysosomes also % of the cell area occupied by the organelles), moreover information about cytotoxicity were provided with a non-destructive method (WST-1 assay).
Image Analysis
Analysis of the raw data of the images was performed with software ZEN 2012 SP3 (black; Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany). Analysis of lysosomes movement after staining with LysoTracker was performed with the Tracking plugin of Fiji free software. Data are the results of the quantification of n = 5 independent movies, considering for each movie 4 different cells and following at least 5 trajectories (particles) per cell. For evaluation of the (i) average cell area (ii) mean fluorescence/cell (iii) area covered by lysosomes/cell all images were processed consistently prior to quantification and in order to avoid bias, the channels of interest were temporarily disabled during the selection of the cells within the optical fields. In parallel, integrated density of the fluorescence signal/area was performed independently with the free software ImageJ as previously reported. In order to avoid the possibility that ad interim evaluation could influence the selection/quantification process, statistical evaluation of the datasets obtained with ImageJ and ZEN 2012 SP3 were performed only at the end of all the analyses. Each data point is the average of the quantification of minimum 45 cells/region acquired from 3 independent experiments, thus resulting from the random selection, for each experiment, of 5 cells in 3 different optical fields (o.f.). Moreover, since the mechanical stimulation is not uniform on the membranes, image acquisition was performed consistently in the central region of the PDMS substrates, as schematically depicted in the relevant figures. In order to rule out the possibility that the differences in the quantification between static and stretched cells could be due to focus variations during the stimulations protocol, the signal of the nuclei was also quantified (Supplementary Material S4). In this case, no major differences were observed between static and stretched cells.
For both, image analysis with ZEN 2012 SP3 (black) and with ImageJ, respective background correction was applied. For the images acquired with the Cytation3 instrument, fluorescence intensity was expressed as object (cell) mean per optical field. For every experimental condition data are mean of at least 12 randomly acquired optical fields from 3 independent cell preparations.
Assessment of cytotoxicity
In order to give an indication about the cellular proliferation or cytotoxic potential of the experiments performed with the cell stretcher, WST-1 assays were performed in selected steps of the experimental layout. Briefly, Cell Proliferation Reagent WST-1 (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) was diluted 1:10 (v/v) in phenol-red free DMEM-2909 and applied to A431 cells for 45 minutes. Subsequently, supernatant was transferred in a 96 well plate and absorbance was measured at 450 nm (reference wavelength 650 nm) with a Victor3V 1420 Multilabel Counter Plate Reader (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, USA). Afterwards, cells were rinsed with PBS and, according to the experimental layout, further incubated in static or stretched conditions or stained for live cell imaging. For each experimental condition, measurements of the supernatants were performed in triplicate and data (solvent controls; DMSO 1:1000, 0.1, 1, 10 µM DON) are average of 3–5 independent experiments.
Sulforhodamine B (SRB) experiments presented in Supplementary Fig. S1 (Supplementary Materials Fig. S1a) were performed according to the protocol of Skehan and co-workers. Briefly, at the end of the incubation, cells were rinsed with pre-warmed PBS, fixed with 50% trichloroacetic acid (30 min, 4 °C) and stained with SRB reagent (0.4% in 1% acetic acid, 1 h, RT). Stained cells were rinsed with diluted acetic acid (1%) and bi-distilled water. In the end, protein-bound SRB reagent was diluted in Tris base (10 mM) and absorbance was read at 570 nm with a Cytation3 Imaging Multi-Mode Reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA).
Proteomic analysis
For the proteomic analysis, cells were seeded in 6-well plates, allowed to settle for 48 h and incubated with DON (0.1, 1, 10 µM) or solvent control (DMSO 1:1000) for 24 h. At the end of the incubation, samples were processed using a classical bottom up proteome analysis strategy; to this aim high-resolution mass spectrometry was employed as described in detail previously. In short, cells were lysed, protein content in the cytoplasmic fraction was determined using a Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Vienna, Austria; Fig. S1b), and sample aliquots were digested with Trypsin/Lys-C mixture (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA). Peptides were separated by nano-flow UHPLC (Ultimate 3000RSLC Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and analyzed with a Q Exactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Data analysis was accomplished using the MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 software including the Andromeda search engine and the UniProt database for human proteins (version 102014 with 20,195 entries). For protein identification, a FDR < 0.01 was applied both on peptide and protein level with at least two peptides identified per protein. For label free quantification, a FDR < 0.05 was applied to a two-sided T-test and a minimum of a twofold abundance difference.
Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed with the help of the software OriginPro 2016G (OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, USA). Multiple comparison of independent samples was performed with one way ANOVA test followed by Fisher test for pairwise comparisons. Mann-Whitney and Student’s t-tests were applied for the direct comparison of groups of data. Distributions were considered different using threshold values of 0.05. Proteome data were analyzed with the Perseus statistical analysis package An overall false discovery rate (FDR) smaller than 0.05 was applied for significant regulatory events. q-values corresponding to corrected p-values for multi-parameter analysis were obtained for each protein.
Data Availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008996 and are available at http://www.proteomexchange.org/. Additional representative images acquired during independent biological experiments (corresponding to Figs 4–6) are available in Supplementary Materials Fig. S5. Further information about the datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the study are available on request from the corresponding author (giorgia.del.favero@univie.ac.at). Questions/requests concerning the cell stretcher can be addressed directly to O S (sbaizero@units.it).

RESULTS:
Results
Toxicity of DON in A341 cells: impact on tubulin cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton is a key element governing cellular biomechanical properties, thus preliminary experiments were performed in order to verify the potential impact of the mycotoxin DON on the tubulin cytoskeleton. Incubation of A431 cells with DON (0.1, 1, 10 µM) for 24 h caused a concentration-dependent alteration of the appearance of the intensity of filaments of α-tubulin (Tubulin Fig. 1a, green). Image analysis of the fluorescence associated to the immunolocalization of tubulin confirmed the results with a significant decrease of the signal intensity starting from the incubation with 1 µM DON. Concomitantly, a concentration dependent increase of the average nuclear area was observed (Fig. 1b). Moreover, in order to give an insight into the potential cytotoxicity of DON in A431 cells, the average number of cells/optical field was manually quantified. This analysis revealed a tendency toward the increase in the number of cells incubated with 0.1 µM DON (Fig. 1c) and a significant decrease of the cell number in wells incubated with 10 µM DON (Fig. 1c).
Effect of DON on tubulin and lysosome trafficking
In order to verify if the alteration of the appearance of the tubulin cytoskeleton observed by immunofluorescence could also have a functional impact on living cells, live cell imaging experiments were conducted. Imaging was performed after 24 h incubation with DON (Fig. 2) and confirmed a concentration-dependent effect on the appearance of the tubulin network (Fig. 2a), associated with a progressive clustering of the lysosomes in the perinuclear region (Fig. 2a, in red). In parallel, automated evaluation of cell diameter and volume confirmed a progressive alteration of cell dimensions associated with toxin incubation (Fig. 2b,c). Moreover, in order to verify if the alteration of the tubulin cytoskeleton induced by the mycotoxin might have an impact on the movement/trafficking of lysosomes, sequential time series of the same optical field were also acquired. Representative frames, acquired at regular intervals are presented in Fig. 3a. Accordingly, the organelles and/or small lysosome clusters moved more rapidly in control conditions (DMSO 1:1000) and in cells incubated with DON (0.1 µM). Moreover, it was possible to observe areas of high motility/clustering of lysosomes corresponding to areas of aggregation of tubulin (Fig. 3c). Cells incubated with 1 and 10 µM DON were characterized by both, an accumulation in the perinuclear region of the organelles, and by progressive decrease of their movement (Figs 2a and 3a,b).
Effect of DON on the response of A431 cells to uniaxial stretching: cell viability and morphology
Considering the effect of DON to alter the tubulin cytoskeleton and associated physiological processes, we investigated the effects of the mycotoxin on the cellular capability to respond to uniaxial cell stretching. Control cells incubated under static and stretched conditions presented similar cell numbers and also similar proliferation rates (DMSO 1:1000; Fig. 4a–c), however an increase of the average cell area was observed in cells mechanically stimulated (Fig. 4a,d). 24 h pre-incubation with 0.1 µM DON did not cause any alteration in comparison to the behavior of the control cells, even if a moderate variation in the cell number was discernable (Fig. 4a,b). Pre-incubation with 1 µM DON seemed to alter the proportion between the number of cells/optical field and cellular area in A431 incubated in static conditions and mechanically stimulated (Fig. 4a,b,d). In both experimental conditions (i.e. STATIC and STRETCHED incubation) a progressive tendency toward the decrease of proliferation was noticeable (% proliferation 1 µM DON + STATIC: 121.67 ± 10.97%, 1 µM DON + STRETCHED: 113.78 ± 14.83%; controls STATIC 151.96 ± 30.39%; controls STRETCHED 154.05 ± 19.61%; Fig. 4c). In cells pre-incubated with the highest concentration of toxin the proliferation rate was significantly compromised in stretched cells (Fig. 4c; 10 μM DON) together with a more prominent effect on cellular morphology (Fig. 4a,d, 10 μM DON).
Effect of DON on the response of A431 cells to uniaxial stretching: tubulin cytoskeleton
Since the pre-incubation with DON seemed to affect the capability of A431 cells to respond to the biomechanical stimulation, more focused analysis was performed on the tubulin cytoskeleton (Fig. 5a). In control conditions, cells mechanically stimulated for 24 h presented an increase of the tubulin signal, both, after quantification of the integrated density of the signal per area, and the quantification of the mean fluorescence/cell (Fig. 5b,c; DMSO 1:1000). In cells pre-incubated with 0.1 µM DON, the stretching protocol failed to trigger the increase of the signal of the cytoskeletal element (Fig. 5b,c). In cells pre-incubated with 1 or 10 µM DON, the application of the stretching protocol caused a clear morphological alteration of A431 cells (Fig. 5a) that was associated with an increase of the tubulin signal (Integrated density/area Fig. 5b; 1–10 µM DON). Several areas of co-localization of TubulinTracker and LysoTracker were observed (yellow Fig. 5d, 1 µM DON + STRETCHED), whereas control cells were generally characterized by a more even distribution of the cytoskeleton and the organelles (Fig. 5d DMSO 1:1000).
Effect of DON on the response of A431 cells to uniaxial stretching: lysosomes
Incubation with DON proved to alter the properties of tubulin cytoskeleton upon the application of the uniaxial stretching and therefore parallel studies were performed to verify also the effects of the toxin on lysosomes (Fig. 6a). In control conditions, cells that underwent the mechanical stimulation protocol presented an evident increase of the intensity of the signal associated with the localization of the organelles (Fig. 6b,c; DMSO 1:1000). However, the percentage of the cellular area covered by the lysosomes remained constant (Fig. 6d; DMSO 1:1000). In cells pre-incubated with 0.1 and 1 µM DON this effect was abolished (Fig. 6b,c). On the contrary, cells that were pre-incubated with 10 µM DON, were characterized by high values of fluorescence intensity/cell, but also by an increase of total cellular area covered by the lysosomes, as suggested by the visual appearance of prominent red-colored areas in the optical field (Fig. 6a–d).
Effect of biomechanical stimulation on the toxicity of DON
Exposure to DON significantly altered the physiological properties of A431 cells and hampered their capability to respond to uniaxial cyclic stretching. For this reason, it was decided to perform also experiments following a reversed protocol in order to verify if biomechanical preconditioning might modulate the capability of A431 to respond to the toxin. Initially, imaging and quantification of the fluorescence associated with the lysosomes were performed (Fig. 7a,b). In line with the previous data (Figs 5a and 6a), cells that underwent mechanical stimulation were characterized by a more elongated morphology associated with an increase of the signal of the LysoTracker. After incubation with DON, cells maintained in static conditions were characterized by a strong increase of the lysosomal signal. On the contrary, in cells pre-incubated with the stretching protocol the effect was reduced (Fig. 7b; 0.1 and 1 μM DON). However, the effect appeared to be concentration dependent and in cells incubated with 10 μM DON no difference was further detectable (Fig. 7b). Moreover, in order to obtain a preliminary insight if the effect of the stretching protocol followed by the incubation with DON could also have an impact on the physiological function of the lysosomes, an additional staining for the mitochondria was also included (MitoTracker; Fig. 7c). Mitochondria turnover is part of the normal physiological function of the lysosomes and selected experiments were performed labeling both organelles. In control conditions, the stretching protocol induced a slight decrease of the mitochondrial signal (−4.39 ± 3.05%) in association with an increase of the lysosomes (+14.76 ± 3.49%). Upon static incubation with 1 µM DON, an increase of the signal of the MitoTracker was observed, which appeared less pronounced in cells that were mechanically preconditioned (STATIC +28.83 ± 6.91%; STRETCHED +5.27 ± 3.89%; Fig. 7c).
Impact of DON on the proteome of A431 cells
Since the toxic effect of DON appeared to be strongly interconnected with the capability of cells to respond to the biomechanical stimulation, untargeted proteomic analysis was performed in order to increase the understanding of the molecular effects triggered by the toxin in A431 cells. 24 h incubation with 0.1 µM DON showed no significant alterations of the proteome profile. Four proteins were found significantly downregulated upon treatment with 1 µM and 66 proteins were found deregulated upon treatment with 10 µM DON (Fig. 8a). Principal component analysis confirmed the concentration-dependency of the abovementioned effects, and the specificity of the response (Fig. 8b). Among the regulatory events, the incubation with 10 µM DON significantly downregulated several proteins governing cell adhesion like the neural cell adhesion molecule L1 (L1CAM), protein lyric (MTDH), the amyloid-beta A4 protein (APP) and the galectin-3-binding protein (LGALS3BP; Fig. 8c). Moreover, significant alterations were found also in proteins organizing the extracellular matrix (ECM), such as the laminin subunit gamma-1 (LAMC1) and collagen alpha-2 (IV) chain (COL4A2; Fig. 8d) and in proteins regulating cytoskeleton dynamics such as the dystroglycan (DAG1) and the La-related protein 4 (LARP4; Fig. 8e).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
The integration of biomechanical stimulation in cytotoxicity testing is an approach that is becoming more and more frequent. In fact, under physiological conditions, cells are continuously exposed to mechanical stimulation, as a result of both, the movement of the tissues/organism to which they belong and the flow of the extracellular fluids. In this respect, mechanical stimulation can actively modulate cellular physiology, but the impact of these effects in the response to xenobiotics is rarely taken into consideration. Indeed, the knowledge about the impact of biomechanical stimulation on the toxicity is limited in comparison to the numerous in vitro studies performed in static conditions. In general terms, if the potential impact of stretching in cells like myocytes, or vascular endothelial cells is very easy to foresee, more and more studies describe that also other cell types can modulate their responses, if cultured in a mechanically stimulated environment.
Deoxynivalenol (DON) is one of the most common food contaminating mycotoxins. It is regularly detected in food commodities all over the world and has been already associated to several cases of intoxication. DON is known to act primarily on protein synthesis, blocking the ribosomal subunit 60S. Obviously, the inhibition of protein synthesis can have impact on a wide variety of cellular physiological processes, and the biological effects of DON have been extensively studied in numerous in vitro models, but typically in static conditions. In this respect, many cytotoxicity assays are routinely performed measuring several endpoints like protein content, membrane permeability and functionality of cellular organelles. In more detail, cytotoxicity studies commonly evaluate mitochondria or lysosome function alone or in combination. Lysosomes are acidic organelles that play a crucial role in the turnover of cellular components and autophagic degradation. Proper cellular function of these organelles is tightly related to their spatial localization and their interaction with tubulin microtubules. Recent studies connected the importance of autophagic processes to biomechanical responses. Similarly, the role of autophagy in the toxicity of DON has recently been highlighted, but the interplay of these processes in a more complex environment, thus characterized by mechanical stimulation has never been addressed. Therefore, in the present study the potential connection between the effect of the trichothecene mycotoxin DON and the alteration of the lysosome function is investigated through the interaction with the cytoskeleton. Moreover, the interplay between the biomechanical stimulation and the cytotoxicity of DON is explored comparing directly static incubations and cyclic uniaxial stretching. To this aim, we used a prototype device, designed and built for the application of cyclic uniaxial stretching to cultivated cells. In fact, biomechanical stimulation is known to have a positive impact on the cellular cytoskeleton and trophic stimuli sustaining, among others, cellular proliferation and survival. In the present study the effect of DON was investigated on the epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells, since, in recent times, DON has been described also for its effects at dermal level and A431 cells have been extensively used as a model for studies on the effect of natural compounds in human skin cell models. A431 cells are characterized by excellent adhesion properties which are crucial for the consistent performance of experiments in mechanically stimulated environment. Particular attention was given to the evaluation of the functional properties of A431 cells after exposure to different concentrations of DON, establishing a workflow based on the evaluation of living cells. Moreover, the study was completed by the evaluation of the effect of DON on the proteome profile of A431 cells. The capability of the mycotoxin to impair the biomechanical properties of A431 cells is described for the first time, opening a new horizon in the importance of the integration of biomechanical stimulation in toxicity testing also in the field of mycotoxins.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41598-018-29728-5.
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.