PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Kidney
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Human; Proximal tubule; Kidney

ABSTRACT:
We analyzed microdissected single tubules from human with shotgun proteomics.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Shotgun proteomics analysis of single human tubules

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
We lysed human tubules in SDS and subjected them to reduction, alkylation, tryptic digestion and nLC-MS/MS. For details, see the method section of the respective paper.

DATA PROCESSING:
We analyzed the data by MaxQuant. For details, see the method section of the respective paper.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
In diseases of many parenchymatous organs, heterogeneous deterioration of individual functional units determines the clinical prognosis. However, the molecular characterization at the level of such individual subunits remains a technological challenge that needs to be addressed in order to better understand pathological mechanisms. Proteinuric glomerular kidney diseases are frequent and assorted diseases affecting a fraction of glomeruli and their draining tubules to variable extents, and for which no specific treatment exists. Here, we developed and applied a mass spectrometry-based methodology to investigate heterogeneity of proteomes from individually isolated nephron segments from mice with proteinuric kidney disease. In single glomeruli from two different mouse models of sclerotic glomerular disease, we identified a coherent protein expression module consisting of extracellular matrix protein deposition (reflecting glomerular sclerosis), glomerular albumin (reflecting proteinuria) and LAMP1, a lysosomal protein. This module was associated with a loss of podocyte marker proteins while genetic ablation of LAMP1-correlated lysosomal proteases could ameliorate glomerular damage in vivo. Furthermore, proteomic analyses of individual glomeruli from patients with genetic sclerotic and non-sclerotic proteinuric diseases revealed increased abundance of lysosomal proteins, in combination with a decreased abundance of mutated gene products. Thus, altered protein homeostasis (proteostasis) is a conserved key mechanism in proteinuric kidney diseases. Moreover, our technology can capture intra-individual variability in diseases of the kidney and other tissues at a sub-biopsy scale.