PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Hepatocyte
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Affinity purification coupled with mass spectrometry proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Dimethyl Labeling
keywords: Fxr rxr nuclear receptor transcription regulation ms/ms dna pulldown

ABSTRACT:
The Farnesoid-X-Receptor (FXR) is a class II nuclear receptor (NR), a class that obligately heterodimerizes with the Retinoid-X-Receptor (RXR). FXR is expressed as 4 isoforms (α1-α4) activated by bile acids that drive transcription from response elements IR-1 (inverted repeat-1). We recently showed that FXR isoforms α2 and α4 bind to non-canonical response elements ER-2 (everted repeat-2), thereby increasing mitochondrial respiratory capacity and limiting de novo lipogenesis. Binding to ER-2 motifs in mouse liver organoids represented 89% of all FXR genome wide binding. However, mechanistic differences in FXR binding and activation from these two response elements remained unexplored. Using DNA pull down followed by mass-spectrometry, we show that RXR is not involved in FXR binding to ER-2 response elements. Instead, RXR inhibited FXR binding and activation from these elements in luciferase reporters. Genome wide, RXR-lacking FXR binding sites showed higher enrichment for ER-2 motifs in mouse liver. Pharmacological and mutational abrogation of FXR-RXR heterodimerization specifically retained ER-2 transactivation capacities in luciferase reporters and HepG2 cells. Transcriptome-wide, 25% of FXR targets were inhibited upon RXR overexpression, but specifically activated by a novel heterodimerization-deficient mutant FXRα2L434R. These genes were ER-2 responsive and were involved in lipid metabolism and ammonia detoxification. In conclusion, we discovered that RXR is not required and even inhibits binding of FXRα2 to ER-2. Thus, whereas FXR α1 and α3 seem to be genuine class II NR, FXRα2 and α4 are  facultative class II at ER-2 motifs. This novel feature holds promise to exploit and tailor therapeutic responses to FXR agonism.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
FXR controls gene expression independently of RXR at non-canonical response elements

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
HepG2 cells overexpressing FXRα2wt were cultured in medium with FBS replaced with dialyzed FBS (Gibco) 24h before harvesting, and cells were treated with 10µM OCA for 1h before harvesting. Afterwards nuclear extracts for DNA-oligonucleotide pulldown were prepared. Cells were incubated in hypotonic Buffer A (10 mM HEPES (pH 7.9), 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl and 0.15% NP40), after which they were lysed by dounce homogenization. Nuclei were collected by centrifugation at 4oC and lysed in Buffer C (420 mM NaCl2, 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.9), 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, EDTA-free complete protease inhibitors (Roche), and 0.5 mM DTT) for 1h at 4oC). DNA oligomers were purchased with a 5`-azidogroup attached to the forward strand (IDT, sequences can be found in supplemental table 4). Oligos were annealed by combining 500 pmol of the forward and 750 pmol of the reverse strand in 2x annealing buffer (20 mM TRIS, pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl), denatured for 10’ at 95oC and left to cool overnight for hybridization. The oligos were bound to alkyne-beads using a click-reaction using the contents of the Click-iT protein Enrichment Kit (Invitrogen) by combining 1 µmol oligos in 50 µL annealing buffer with 50 µL bead slurry, 200 µL DNA binding buffer (DBB: 1 M NaCl, 0.05% NP40, 10 mM TRIS, pH 8.0), and 250 µL Click-iT 2x catalyst solution (manufacturer’s instructions). The mixture was incubated for 18h at RT in the dark while rotating, followed by washing once with DBB and twice with protein binding buffer (PBB: 50 mM NaCl, 0.25% NP40, 50 mM TRIS, pH 8.0, EDTA-free complete protease inhibitors, and 1 mM DTT). The beads were then split in two, which were used for the forward and reverse pull down reactions. Subsequent steps were performed at 4oC. Nuclear extract (500 µg) and 10 µg of competitor DNA (5µg poly-dIdC, 5µg poly-dAdT) were added to PBB to 600 µL total. Proteins were allowed to bind to the oligos for 90’ while rotating. The beads were washed three times with PBB and two times with PBS. The beads were resuspended in freshly prepared elution buffer (2M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT in ultra-pure H2O) and incubated for 20’ at RT while shaking at 1200 rpm. The proteins were alkylated by addition of iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 50 mM, followed by a 10’ incubation at RT while shaking in the dark. On-bead digestion was done by adding 0.25 µg trypsin and a 2h incubation at RT. The supernatant was collected after pelleting the beads by centrifugation, an additional 0.1 µg trypsin was added, and proteins were digested overnight at RT. The digest was desalted and concentrated on C18 StageTips without acidification 30. Peptide labelling was done by dimethyl labelling, and StageTips were stored at 4oC until measurement by LC-MS/MS 8. Peptide samples were eluted from StageTips with elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure H2O), and light and medium labelled samples for the forward and reverse reaction were combined. Next, the samples were reduced to 10% of the original volume by vacuum concentration and diluted in 0.1% formic acid to ~12 µL. 5 µL sample was injected and peptides were separated using an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher) using a 7 to 32% acetonitrile gradient over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Data-dependent measurements of the peptides were performed on a Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher).

DATA PROCESSING:
Protein identification and quantification was done in MaxQuant v1.6.0.1  with standard settings and requantify enabled 31.  N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation modifications were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed cysteine modification. Light (+0) and medium (+4) dimethyl labelling on the N-termini and lysine residues was specified under ‘labels’. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a human Uniprot database downloaded in June 2017. Mass tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm for precursor ion and fragment ions, respectively. FDR was set at 0.01 for both the peptide and protein level. Two ratio counts were required for protein quantification. Common contaminants and decoy database hits were removed from the resulting MaxQuant proteinGroups file. Protein groups were required to have at least two assigned peptides, of which at least one was a unique peptide, and only protein groups with a quantified ratio for the forward and reverse reaction were considered for further analysis. Statistical significance thresholds were set at Q3 + 1.5 * IQR and Q1 – 1.5 * IQR, and proteins were required to exceed these thresholds in both the forward and reverse run to be labelled as significant.