PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
instruments: Q Exactive HF-X
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Mitochondrial biology; Lipidomics; Lipid metabolism; Proteomics; Peroxisomes

ABSTRACT:
OCIAD1 (Ovarian Cancer Immunoreactive Antigen Domain Containing 1) is a membrane protein largely localized to mitochondria, however, its function in health or disease is not well understood. To comprehensively characterize the molecular changes upon lack of OCIAD1, we used mass spectrometry to study the mitochondrial and cellular proteome and lipidome. We find extensive lipidome rearrangement in OCIAD1 KO cells, characterized by two main phenotypes of decreased ether phospholipids and decreased phospholipids with an odd number of carbons. The lipidomic changes suggest alterations in peroxisomal lipid metabolism. At the same time, proteins responsible for mitochondrial fatty acid β oxidation are significantly increased. Together with a global loss in peroxisomal proteins and a meta-analysis of proximity labeling data, this gives a function to the previously observed partial localization of OCIAD1 to peroxisomes. We suggest a role for OCIAD1 in balancing mitochondrial and peroxisomal lipid metabolism, and a direct impact on the key enzymes FAR1 and ABCD3. This work was supported by the National Science Centre, Poland (2021/40/C/NZ3/00283).

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Integrated proteome and lipidome analyses place OCIAD1 at mitochondria-peroxisome intersection balancing lipid metabolism

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
500 µL MeOH were added to each sample after lipidomics extraction. Samples were then centrifuged at 14 000g for 10 min at 4C and the supernatant removed. After 100 µl lysis buffer (8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.5) was added to the pellet and the mixture sonicated, the samples were centrifuged at max. speed and the supernatant diluted 5 times with 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 containing 10 mM TCEP and 15 mM CAA. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin (Promega V5113). Then, samples were acidified with TFA to a final pH of ∼ 2 and peptides were desalted using STAGE tips of three layers AttractSPE Discs Bio C18 (Affinisep) (Myers et al. 2019). The resin was conditioned with methanol and equilibrated with 150 μl of 0.5% formic acid (FA). Approximately 30 μg of digested peptides were loaded and washed with 150 μl of 0.1% FA followed by elution with 60 μl of 60% ACN in 0.1% FA. The solvents were removed by SpeedVac after which peptides were dissolved in 2% of acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA before LC-MS/MS measurement.  Chromatographic separation was performed using an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column (50 cm long × 75 μm inner diameter, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 45 °C by applying 120 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous FA at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with survey scans acquiring at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200. Up to 15 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge states <6 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 27. Dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s, and maximum ion injection times for the survey and MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 200) were 45 and 28 ms, respectively. The AGC target for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the intensity threshold for MS/MS was set to 1.6e4.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data was processed with MaxQuant v. 2.0.3.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against the UniProt KB Human Proteome (downloaded on 18.09.2023) using the built-in Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Label free quantification was performed and match between runs was enabled. Digestion was set to Trypsin/P and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins, and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. The resulting protein groups were filtered to remove reverse (decoy), only identified by site, and potential contaminant protein groups.