PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cerebrospinal fluid
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Retinoblastoma; Cerebrospinal fluid (csf); Proteomic analysis; Case report; Liquid biopsy

ABSTRACT:
This study focuses on the proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in a patient with stage III retinoblastoma (RB) with the aim to identify molecular changes associated with central nervous system (CNS) relapse. The child received systemic chemotherapy and intrathecal topotecan as CNS prophylaxis, along with enucleation of the left eye. After two chemotherapy cycles, CNS relapse occurred, evidenced by positive CSF findings and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showing leptomeningeal involvement at the anterior skull base. The child’s condition deteriorated, and two months later, he died due to progressive CNS disease. The aim of the study was to analyze serial CSF samples collected at different stages of treatment, as well as a control sample, to identify differences in CSF protein expression profiles during CNS RB relapse. Using mass spectrometry, a total of 1,029 proteins were identified across all CSF samples. An unsupervised heatmap revealed 46 differentially expressed proteins. Over-regulated proteins in CSF-RB samples were primarily involved in inflammation, extracellular matrix remodeling, epithelial mesenchymal transition initiation, migration, invasion, and cellular metabolism (PON1, RNPEP, MCAM, NEGR1, NID1, SERPINA1, FAT2, RELN, NEGR1, and SEZ6). These processes are key drivers of cancer progression and metastasis. Proteomic analysis could be valuable in identifying proteins modulated in CSF during disease progression in RB patients, offering potential for new prognostic biomarkers.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in a Retinoblastoma patient.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
For proteomic analysis, CSF was processed by in-StageTip (iST) method. The tryp- column, thermostated at 55 °C. The peptides were separated with an organic solvent at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, using a non-linear gradient of 5–45% solution B (80% CAN and 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) in 140 min, and analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Instruments, Bremen, Germany). Orbitrap detection was used for both MS1 and MS2 measurements at re-solving powers of 120 K and 30 K (at m/z 200), respectively. Data dependent MS/MS analysis was performed in top speed mode with a 2 sec cycle-time, during which pre-cursors detected within the range of m/z 375−1500 were selected for activation in or-der of charge state, using CHarge Ordered Parallel Ion aNalysis (CHOPIN).

DATA PROCESSING:
MaxQuant software was used to process the raw data, setting a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for the identification of proteins, peptides and PSM (peptide-spectrum match), a minimum length of 6 amino acids for peptide identification was required. Andromeda engine, incorporated into MaxQuant software, was used to search MS/MS spectra against Uniprot human database.