PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast)
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: S-carboxamidoethyl-L-cysteine
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: SILAC
keywords: Mitochondria; Hsp70; Chaperone; Protein aggregation; Proteostasis; Yeast

ABSTRACT:
The potential proteotoxicity of mitochondrial aggregates in yeast cells is reduced by a sequestration of affected polypeptides into a mitochondrial protein quality control compartment (IMiQ). Based on the expression of an aggregation-prone protein in the mitochondrial matrix, we determined the effect of organelle dynamics on aggregate sequestration. Fusion deficient cells were unable to accumulate the aggregates in the IMiQ, resulting in a stress-sensitive phenotype. In contrast, fission deficient cells could not separate the aggregate from the mitochondrial network. In these mitochondria, the aggregates were neutralized by the formation of a shell formed by mitochondrial chaperones. We also performed quantitative mass spectrometry to analyse the mitochondrial proteome and the extent of co-aggregation of mitochondrial proteins. While only minor changes of the total proteome were detected in response to aggregate accumulation, we found a recruitment of proteins of the respiration complexes and of the protein quality control system (PQC). In particular members of the Hsp70 chaperone family were prominently associated with the aggregate. We conclude that this chaperone-dependent neutralization prevents a major co-aggregation of endogenous mitochondrial proteins.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Prevention of mitochondrial proteotoxicity by formation of a chaperone-dependent protective shell around aggregated polypeptides

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Peptide preparation Protein solutions were processed with the SP3-approach [Hughes, C.S., et al., Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments. Nat Protoc, 2019. 14(1): p. 68-85.]. Briefly, solutions with 50 µg protein each were treated with 20 mM DTT and 40 mM acrylamide in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate for reduction and alkylation of cysteines. A mixture of hydrophilic carboxylate-coated magnetic beads (Sera-Mag SpeedBeads, GE Healthcare, nos. 45152105050250 and 65152105050250) were added at a ratio of 10:1 (w/w bead:protein). Protein binding was induced by adding 3 volumes of ethanol. Beads with bound proteins were washed with 80% ethanol (three times) and subjected to tryptic digestion at 37 °C, 18 h using a trypsin-protein ratio of 1:25. Peptides were separated from the beads and dried in a vacuum concentrator. For measurements, 10 µg of peptides were further desalted with C18 ZipTips (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) to remove residual beads and purify the peptides. LC/MS analysis  Dried peptides were dissolved in 10 µl 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and separated with a Dionex Ultimate nano UPLC system (Dionex GmbH, Idstein, Germany) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 1 µg peptides were separated on a C18 analytical column (350 mm length, 100 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr.  Maisch GmbH Ammerbuch-Entringen).  The samples were analyzed with data-dependent acquisition during a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min within 120 min. Ions between 330 and 1600 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap every 3 seconds (R=120,000). Polysiloxane (m/z 445.12002) was used for internal calibration. Ions with z>1 were subjected to higher-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD: 1.0 Da quadrupole isolation, threshold intensity 25,000, collision energy 27%) and fragments analyzed in the Orbitrap (R=15,000).

DATA PROCESSING:
Data processing and analyses of database searches were performed with Proteome Discoverer software 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in-house Mascot server version 2.8.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK) against the Uniprot yeast reference proteome sequences and a database of common contaminants[Frankenfield, A.M., et al., Protein Contaminants Matter: Building Universal Protein Contaminant Libraries for DDA and DIA Proteomics. J Proteome Res, 2022. 21(9): p. 2104-2113.]. MS1 m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, MS2 m/z tolerance was 20 ppm. Tryptic peptides (Trypsin/P) with up to two missed cleavages were searched, propionamide was set as a static modification of cysteines, while oxidation of methionine and isotope label on lysine (+8) were set as dynamic modifications. Spectrum match confidences were assessed by the Percolator algorithm 3.05 in Proteome Discoverer[Kall, L., et al., Assigning significance to peptides identified by tandem mass spectrometry using decoy databases. J Proteome Res, 2008. 7(1): p. 29-34.]. Spectra with low confident matches (q-value > 0.01) were sent to a second Mascot search with semi-specific enzyme cleavage and dynamic modification of cysteines. Only proteins with at least two identified peptides were reported. For quantification, summed abundances from extracted ion chromatograms (heavy and light) were normalized on total peptide amounts.

ABSTRACT (PubMed):
The potential proteotoxicity of mitochondrial aggregates in yeast cells is reduced by a sequestration of affected polypeptides into a mitochondrial protein quality control compartment (IMiQ). Based on the expression of an aggregation-prone protein in the mitochondrial matrix, we determined the effect of organelle dynamics on aggregate sequestration. Fusion-deficient cells were unable to accumulate the aggregates in the IMiQ, resulting in a stress-sensitive phenotype. In contrast, fission-deficient cells could not separate the aggregate from the mitochondrial network. In these mitochondria, the aggregates were neutralized by the formation of a shell formed by mitochondrial chaperones. We also performed quantitative mass spectrometry to analyse the mitochondrial proteome and the extent of co-aggregation of mitochondrial proteins. Although only minor changes of the total proteome were detected in response to aggregate accumulation, we found a recruitment of proteins of the respiratory chain complexes and of the protein quality control system (PQC). In particular, members of the Hsp70 chaperone family were prominently associated with the aggregate. We conclude that this chaperone-dependent neutralization prevents a major co-aggregation of endogenous mitochondrial proteins.