PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Cerebrospinal fluid
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deaminated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: label-free quantification
keywords: Lc-msms; Mus musculus; Cd38; Csf; Alzheimer's disease

ABSTRACT:
Protective immunity, essential for brain maintenance and repair, may be compromised in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Here, using high-dimensional single-cell mass cytometry, we find a unique immunometabolic signature in circulating CD4+ T cells preceding symptom onset in individuals with familial AD, featured by the elevation of CD38 expression. Using female 5xFAD mice, a mouse model of AD, we show that treatment with an antibody directed to CD38 leads to restored metabolic fitness, improved cognitive performance, and attenuated local neuroinflammation. Comprehensive profiling across distinct immunological niches in 5xFAD mice, reveals a high level of disease-associated CD4+ T cells that produce IL-17A in the dural meninges, previously linked to cognitive decline. Targeting CD38 leads to abrogation of meningeal TH17 immunity and cortical IL-1beta, breaking the negative feedback loop between these two compartments. Taken together, the present findings suggest CD38 as an immunometabolic checkpoint that could be adopted as a pre-clinical biomarker for early diagnosis of AD and might also be therapeutically targeted alone or in combination with other immunotherapies for disease modification.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Targeting CD38 immunometabolic checkpoint improves metabolic fitness and cognition in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Mice were deeply anesthetized with an i.p. injection of ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg). For cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collection the skin of the neck was shaved, and the mouse was placed prone to secure the head. The surgical site was swabbed with 70% ethanol, and a sagittal incision of the skin was made inferior to the occiput. Subcutaneous tissue and muscles were separated by blunt dissection with forceps, the dura mater was blotted dry with a sterile cotton swab, and ± 10 μL of CSF was collected using a sterile pulled capillary to penetrate the cisterna magna (through the dura mater, lateral to the arteria dorsalis spinalis) and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.  Mouse CSF samples (10 μl) were added 190μL 8M urea buffer and loaded onto 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Volume was reduced to 25μL by centrifugation at 14,000g for 10min. Filters were reversed and centrifuged to extract the proteins. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) for 1hr at room temperature, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted to 2M urea with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then subjected to digestion with 250 ng trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C at 50:1 protein:trypsin ratio, followed by a second trypsin digestion (250ng) for 4 hr. The digestions were stopped by addition of trifluroacetic acid (1% final concentration). Following digestion, peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB, μElution format (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The samples were vacuum dried and stored in -80˚C until further analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant v2.0.1.0. The data were searched with the Andromeda search engine against the mouse (Mus musculus) protein database as downloaded from Uniprot (www.uniprot.com), and appended with common lab protein contaminants. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionines, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy (MaxQuant’s “Revert” module). The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match-between-runs option checked. Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. The quantitative comparisons were calculated using Perseus v1.6.0.7. Decoy hits were filtered out and only proteins that were detected in at least 50% of the samples of at least one experimental group were kept. A Student’s t-Test, after logarithmic transformation, was used to identify significant differences between the experimental groups, across the biological replica. Fold changes were calculated based on the ratio of geometric means of the different experimental groups.