PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; Neutrophil
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
quantification: Relative quantification
keywords: Epigenetics; Neutrophil; Hypoxia; Reprogramming

ABSTRACT:
The long-term impact of systemic hypoxia resulting from Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) on the function of short-lived innate immune cells is unclear. We show that patients 3-6 months after recovering from ARDS have persistently impaired circulating neutrophil effector functions and an increased susceptibility to secondary infections. These defects are linked to a widespread loss of the activating histone mark H3K4me3 in genes crucial for neutrophil activities. By studying healthy volunteers exposed to altitude-induced hypoxemia, we demonstrate that oxygen deprivation alone causes this long-term neutrophil reprogramming. Mechanistically, mouse models of systemic hypoxia reveal that persistent loss of H3K4me3 originates in proNeu and preNeu progenitors within the bone marrow and is linked to N-terminal histone 3 clipping, which removes the lysine residue for methylation. Thus, we present novel evidence that systemic hypoxia initiates a sustained maladaptive reprogramming of neutrophil immunity by triggering histone 3 clipping and H3K4me3 loss in neutrophil progenitors.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Hypoxia induces histone clipping and H3K4me3 loss in neutrophil progenitors resulting in long-term impairment of neutrophil immunity

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Samples were processed for LC-MS analysis at the University of Dundee. In short, neutrophil proteins were extracted in 5 % SDS after a red blood cell lysis step to prevent erythrocyte contamination followed by sonication and alkylation. Protein lysates were processed for mass spectrometry using s-trap spin columns following the manufacturer’s instructions (Protifi). The peptides were sequentially eluted and 1.5 ug of peptide analysed on an Exploris 48053 (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer.

DATA PROCESSING:
The data-independent acquisition (DIA) data were analysed with Spectronaut 16 using the directDIA option. The FDR threshold was set to 1% Q-value at both the Precursor and Protein level. The directDIA data were searched against the human SwissProt database (January 2021) and included isoforms. Normalized intensity values were obtained by dividing the intensity values of each protein detected in a sample by the total sum intensity detected for that particular sample.