PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood; T cell
diseases: Female breast cancer
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: Breast cancer; cd8+ t-lymphocytes; rna degradation; granzymes

ABSTRACT:
Peripheral blood CD8+ T-lymphocytes play a crucial role in cell-mediated immunity and tumour-related immune responses in breast cancer. The protein profile analysis of CD8+ T-lymphocytes in benign, Luminal A, Luminal B and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients in comparison to healthy control via a label-free proteomic quantification and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) were performed. The results confirmed that the most significantly of RNA degradation signalling pathway was down-regulated in all groups (benign, Luminal A, Luminal B, TNBC) was observed. Given the immunological role that T cells play in the treatment of disease, a better knowledge of RNA metabolism, i.e., the role that mRNA degradation pathways play in human physiology and pathology may lead to novel approaches to the therapeutic use of T cells.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Peripheral Blood CD8+ T-Lymphocyte Immune Response in Benign and Subpopulations of Breast Cancer Patients

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Peripheral blood samples were diluted and centrifuged to separate the plasma. CD8+ T lymphocytes were isolated using magnetic bead-based cell sorting. The isolated cells were lysed through sonication and vortexing, followed by precipitation and centrifugation. The protein pellet was resuspended, and its concentration was determined. Proteins were then digested using trypsin and incubation steps involving DTT and IAA. Finally, the protein cleavage was stopped, and the samples were adjusted for the desired protein concentration.

DATA PROCESSING:
Processed samples were measured using a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 high-resolution mass spectrometer coupled to a Thermo Scientific™ Vanquish™ Neo UHPLC System nanoliquid chromatograph. Thermo Scientific™ EASY-Spray™ nano-spray injection (NSI) source was used as the ion source. All raw files acquired from LC/MS runs were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer (PD) version 2.5 (Thermo Scientific™) software. Protein identification was performed using the combination of three search engines available in PD, specifically MS Amanda 2.0, SequestHT, and Mascot utilizing Uniprot Homo sapiens database (release 2023_02 which contained 182,026 sequences) for MS Amanda and SequestHT and Swiss-Prot Homo Sapiens database for Mascot. Unique and razor peptides were used for Label-Free Quantification (LFQ) where the precursor abundance in the samples was compared based on the integration of intensities of the identified peptides. To determine the statistical significance of the LFQ results, a t-test was employed.