PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Hcc; Cancer; Asct2

ABSTRACT:
Although a nonessential amino acid in normal cells, the demand for glutamine is dramatically increased throughout malignant transformation, supporting a range of metabolic processes including mitochondrial ATP production, protein synthesis, purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis. We previously showed that triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells rely on glutamine uptake by the amino acid transporter ASCT2 to sustain their unique glutamine metabolism, thereby supporting in vitro growth and in vivo tumour formation. However, it is known that TNBC cells can also utilise non-transporter mediated nutrient uptake facilitated by processes such as macropinocytosis.   We examined proliferation and colony forming ability of human breast cancer cell lines after ASCT2 CRISPR/Cas9 knockout (clonal and polyclonal populations) and shRNA knockdown. Proteomics and mRNAseq analysis further examined cellular and adaptive changes to ASCT2 knockout. Cellular changes were further analysed by western blotting, with macropinocytosis examined using 70kDa dextran-FITC uptake. Metabolic changes were assessed using targeted metabolomics approaches including 13C-labelled substrate tracing and liquid chromatography coupled tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to determine intracellular levels of key tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle intermediates, glycolytic metabolites, fatty acid precursors, nucleotides, and amino acids in human TNBC cell lines in vitro. Despite our previous data showing a significant reduction in cell growth after ASCT2 knockdown, ASCT2 knockout was well-tolerated by both TNBC and Luminal A breast cancer cell lines, with proliferation rates similar to non-targeted CRISPR/Cas9 control cells. This adaptation to knockout was not due to the high glutamine levels present in culture media, as the knockout cells could be cloned in media containing physiological 0.5 mM glutamine. Previous data have shown that TNBC cell lines can undergo constitutive macropinocytosis, and that this could be enhanced when cells are cultured in low nutrient conditions. Indeed, not only did the TNBC cell line HCC1806 undergo constitutive macropinocytosis, the amount of macropinocytosis was significantly enhanced (5-10 fold) in 5 separate ASCT2 knockout clones. By comparison, the ASCT2 knockdown cell line, which have a significant proliferation deficit, showed a modest 2-fold increase in macropinocytosis. Despite in-depth analysis of gene and protein levels by mRNAseq and proteomics, ASCT2 knockout cells did not display a significant alteration in macropinocytic gene expression, but instead showed a substantial upregulation of Ser473-Akt phosphorylation which may drive the adaptive macropinocytosis in TNBC. These data suggest that the constitutive macropinocytosis present in TNBC cell lines provides a novel resistance mechanism to strategies targeting glutamine uptake alone. Despite this adaptation, TNBC cells continue to rely on glutamine, however therapeutic targeting may need to focus on other unique TNBC metabolic pathways such as single-pass glutaminolysis, which couples glutamine and glucose metabolism together.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
¬Macropinocytosis mediates metabolic resistance to loss of glutamine transport in triple-negative breast cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell lysate preparation for proteomics HCC1806 WT and KO cells were seeded in 10 cm plates and lysed at >80% confluency using 500 L denaturing lysis buffer (4% SDS, 20 mM sodium phosphate pH 6.0, 100 mM NaCl, Complete Protease Inhibitors (EDTA-free) and phosphatase inhibitors) with scraping to collect the lysates. The extracts were heated at 65oC for 10 min and sonicated using the QSonica Q800R2  30sec ON, 30sec OFF for 10min total at 80% amplitude at room temperature. The extracts were centrifuged at 18,000 g for 10 min at 18oC and supernatants stored at -20°C till further processing for proteomics.  Proteomics using mass spectrometry Lysate proteins from each sample (100 g) were precipitated for proteome analysis using chloroform methanol precipitation as described previously (PMID: 33657384). The precipitated protein was dissolved in 8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0 at room temperature by vortexing, then diluted to 1 M urea. Trypsin (1 g) was added and proteins were digested for 16 h at 37oC. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to 1% final concentration and 10ug of peptides were purified using SDB-RPS StageTips as described previously (PMID: 30892045). The digested peptides were separated by nano-LC using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC. Samples (injection volume 3µL - 1 g total peptide) were directly injected onto a 50 cm x 75 m C18 column (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany, 1.9µm). Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient from 5% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 10mM ammonium formate) to 30% of buffer B for the first 125 mins than 60% of buffer B for the next 5 min and 98% for the remaining time at a flow rate of 500 nL/min over a total run time of 140 min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at 2.3 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q Exactive-HFX mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher) using HCD fragmentation in positive mode. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra of the top 20 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient. MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1400 m/z (60,000 resolution, 3 × 106 AGC target, 20 ms maximum injection time) and MS2 scans having a fixed first m/z of 140 (15,000 resolution, 1 × 105 AGC target, 25 ms maximum injection time, 27 NCE, 1.4 m/z isolation width).

DATA PROCESSING:
RAW data files were analysed using the integrated quantitative proteomics software and search engine MaxQuant. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy was used for protein and peptide identification. The database used for identification contained the Uniprot human database alongside the MaxQuant contaminants database. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragments. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn/Gln, pyro-Glu/Gln, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification. The MaxLFQ algorithm was used for label-free quantitation.