PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood plasma
diseases: Covid-19
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 240
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: TIC
keywords: Dia-nn; Data-independent acquisition; Deep proteome analysis; Plasma proteomics; Fractionation; Clinical proteomics; Covid-19; Biomarkers

ABSTRACT:
Plasma proteomic is a precious tool in human disease research, but requires extensive sample preparation in order to perform in-depth analysis and biomarker discovery using traditional Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA). Here, we highlight the efficacy of combining moderate plasma prefractionation and Data-Independent Acquisition (DIA) to significantly improve proteome coverage and depth, while remaining cost- and time-efficient. Using human plasma collected from a 20-patient COVID-19 cohort, our method utilises commonly available solutions for depletion, sample preparation, and fractionation, followed by 3 LC-MS/MS injections for a 360-minutes DIA run time. DIA-NN software was then used for precursor identification, and the QFeatures R package was used for protein aggregation. We detect 1,346 proteins on average per patient, and 2,135 unique proteins across the cohort. Filtering precursors present in under 25% of patients, we still detect 1,231 average proteins and 1,603 unique proteins, indicating robust protein identification. Differential analysis further demonstrates the applicability of this method for plasma proteomic research and clinical biomarker identification. In summary, this study introduces a streamlined, cost- and time-effective approach to deep plasma proteome analysis, expanding its utility beyond classical research environments and enabling larger-scale multi-omics investigations in clinical settings.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Deep plasma proteomics with data-independent acquisition: A fastlane towards biomarkers identification

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Protein depletion was performed according to manufacturer instructions. Briefly, the High Select™ Top14 Abundant Protein Depletion Resin homogenised by inverting the tube several times. Then 600µl of resin is deposed into a 2mL Protein LoBind® Eppendorf tube and allowed to equilibrate to room temperature (RT) (15°C – 25°C). 22µl of plasma sample are then mixed via inversion before adding the tube on a rotator at 12 RPM for 10 minutes. The plasma-resin mixture is then transferred to a Pierce™ Micro-Spin Column placed in a 2mL Protein LoBind® Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 1000g for 2 minutes at RT . The flow through is first incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes , then the sample is allowed to cool for 5 minutes at RT. 33µl of 50mM DL-Dithiothreitol are then added to the sample and incubated at 56°C for 1 hour at 1000 RPM . 37µl of 500mM chloroacetamide are added and the mixture is vortexed briefly and spun down, then incubated at RT for 30 minutes in the dark. Then 65.5µl 100% trichloroacetic acid (15% final concentration) are added, the sample is then vortexed briefly and, again, spun down, and finally, incubated on ice for 30 minutes. After incubation, the sample is centrifuged for 4000g for 7.5 minutes, then washed 3 times by removing supernatant, adding 500µl -20°C acetone sonicating at 37kHz pulsed for 2 minutes, then centrifuging at 4000g for 5 minutes. Next, 75µl triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) 50mM are added to the tube, followed by two rounds of sonication at 37kHz pulsed for 2 minutes each. The sample is subsequently vortexed and spun-down, then 2.5µg sequencing grade modified trypsin are added and the sample is incubated overnight at 37°C at 750 RPM. Following incubation, 8.3µl 1% trifluoroacetic acid are added to the sample, then 80µg total peptide are directly deposed on a Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation column and centrifuged at 3000g for 2 minutes. The flow through is then discarded, and the column washed with 300µl MS grade water at 3000g for 2 minutes. Fractions are collected from column in 1.5mL Protein LoBind Eppendorf tubes by adding 300µl of the appropriate elution solution to the column and centrifuging at 3000g for 2 minutes. Elution solutions contain 0.1% triethylamine with either 7.5%, 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, or 50% acetonitrile.. Following fractionation, pooling of the fractions are carried out with 100µl each of fraction 1, 2, and 5 as pooled fraction 1, 150µl each of fraction 3 and 6 as pooled fraction 2, and 150µl each of fraction 4 and 7 as pooled fraction 3. The pooled fractions are then incubated on dry ice for 5 minutes, then open tubes are placed into a vacuum concentrator at 4°C. 20µL MS resuspension buffer (3.5% ACN, 0.1% TFA) are subsequently used to resuspend each tube, and 3 sonication cycles at 37kHz pulsed for 2 minutes are repeated. Finally, each resuspended sample is briefly vortexed and spun down DIA LC-MS/MS injection 1 µg of peptides dissolved in solvent A  0.1% TFA in 3.5% ACN) was directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was achieved using a reversed-phase analytical EasySpray column with a 120 minute linear gradient of 4%–32% solvent B (0.1% TFA in 80% ACN) for 100 minutes, 32%–50% solvent B for 5 minutes, 50%–90% for 5 minutes and holding at 95% for the last 9 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300nL/min on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC system . The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer with enabled advanced peak determination (APD). The peptides were subjected to an EasySpray ionization source, followed by MS/MS in the Exploris 240 coupled online to the HPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a full width at half-maximum resolution of 30,000 (FWHM) and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap after stepped higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 22%, 26% and 30% of maximum. A data-independent procedure of MS/MS scans was applied for the precursor ions within a m/z range of 500-740 and an m/z isolation window of 4 at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM).  DDA LC-MS/MS injection The peptides were analyzed by an Exploris240 Orbitrap mass spectrometer . The peptides were subjected to nanospray ion source followed by MS/MS in Exploris240 coupled online to the nano-LC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at an FWHM resolution of 60,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using HCD setting at 30%; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at an FWHM resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for 3 seconds for ions above a threshold ion count of 1.0e4 in the MS survey scan with 40.0 seconds dynamic exclusion.

DATA PROCESSING:
DIA-NN was first used to generate an in-silico predicated spectral library using all peptides from the Human PeptideAtlas (2023-01 build) 31.  Following HPLC-MS/MS acquisition, Thermo .raw spectra files for all fractions and all patients were imported into DIA-NN 27 using the Thermo MS File Reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States). The in-silico library was used as the spectral library, and to further aid peak detection, match-between-runs mode was enabled. In addition to default options, the following options were used: FASTA digest for library-free search/library generation; Deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction; Maximum number of variable modifications = 1, Modifications = N-term M excision, C carbamidomethylation, Ox(M); Unrelated runs; MBR; Neural network classifier = Double-pass mode; Quantification strategy = Any LC (high accuracy); Precursor FDC (%) = 1.0. After processing, the corresponding report file was then loaded into R for processing (v4.3.1) 32. The complete script can be found in Appendix 1, but in brief, runs were separated into fractions 1, fractions 2, and fractions 3 to be processed separately via QFeatures(v3.17) 33 log transformation, and normalisation. The 3 fraction assays were then combined and aggregated into protein groups via the robust summary methodology 34 The process for non-fractionated samples was similar, except that runs did not have to be separated and then recombined. For DDA samples, the resulting MS/MS data was processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) against a Homo sapiens protein database obtained from Uniprot (32,314 entries), trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 2 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met (+15.995 Da), pyro-Glu formation from Gln or Glu (-17.027 Da or -18.011 Da respectively) were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Label free quantification was performed by Proteome Discoverer 2.5 using the area under the curve (AUC) for each peptide. During data analysis, predicted protein concentrations in plasma were obtained from the Plasma Proteome Database which reports plasma protein levels in healthy conditions as reported in literature 35,36. For COVID-19 biomarkers and COVID-19 associated proteins, the OncoMX COVID-19 biomarker database and OpenTargets platform (targets associated with COVID-19) were used respectively 37,38. Statistical analysis of the data was carried out using R(v4.3.1) 32. Two sample proportion tests and t test were used to evaluate the significance of the data when appropriate, and are referenced within the text when needed alongside the p-values. For t tests comparing DDA to DIA, or non-fractionated to fractionated, the assumption is that DIA, or fractionation, produces superior results and so one-sided t tests are used in these cases. Significance levels of differentially expressed proteins was calculated using t tests. All code used to generate statistics can be found in appendix 1.

METHODS:
Methods
Proof-of-Concept Sample Cohort
The cohort included in this study comprises a 20-patient subcohort from the HYGIEIA study. Patients were enrolled from August 2020 to December 2023. The protocol has received ethical approbation from the local ethical committee (2021/30DEC/543) and has been registered on clinicaltrial.gov (NCT05557539). During recruitment, a subset of 20 patients were selected for a validation cohort and split into five balanced groups (n = 4): healthy controls, respiratory infection controls, moderate COVID-19 WHO score ≤2, severe COVID-19 WHO score 3–5, and critical COVID-19 WHO score ≥6. Each group was composed of two males and two females; the average age of the cohort was 47 years old at hospitalization, and the average BMI was 26 kg/m2. Sixteen patients were of Caucasian ethnicity, with the remaining four patients having North African, Caribbean, Arab, and unknown ethnicities (self-reported by patients).
Patient Sample Storage
Patient samples were collected during the acute phase of the infection and/or within 1 day of patient consent to study inclusion. Plasma samples were collected in 4 mL Lithium heparin gel prepared S-Monovette tubes (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany) and kept at 4 °C for a maximum of 4 h until plasma was separated via centrifugation (2600g for 10 min at 4 °C) (Sigma 3–16KL, Sigma Laboratory Centrifuges, Osterode am Harz, Germany), then aliquoted, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80 °C until later processing.
Protein and Peptide Quantitation
In the following methodology, where appropriate, protein quantitation was performed using the Bio-Rad Protein assay kit II (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, United States), and peptide quantitation was performed using the Pierce Quantitative Peptide Assays & Standards (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States).
Protein Depletion
Protein depletion was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, the High Select Top14 abundant protein depletion resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) is gently homogenized by inverting the tube several times. Then, 600 μL of resin is deposed into a 2 mL Protein LoBind Eppendorf tube (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and allowed to equilibrate to room temperature (RT) (15– 25 °C). 22 μL of plasma sample is then added and gently mixed via inversion before adding the tube on a rotator (Loopster digital, IKA, Staufen, Germany) at 12 rpm for 10 min at room temperature (RT, 18–25 °C). It should be noted that the ratio of resin to plasma used allowed for significant depletion of high-abundant proteins, without total depletion, to prevent loss of associated carrier proteins.
The plasma–resin mixture is then transferred to a Pierce Micro-Spin Column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) placed in a 2 mL Protein LoBind Eppendorf tube and centrifuged at 1000g for 2 min at RT (Microcentrifuge 5415, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).
Digestion
The flow through is first incubated at 95 °C for 5 min (ThermoMixer C, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), and then the sample is allowed to cool for 5 min at RT. 33 μL of 50 mM dl-dithiothreitol (5 mM final concentration) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, United States) was then added to the sample and incubated at 56 °C for 1 h at 1000 rpm (ThermoMixer C, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). 37 μL of 500 mM chloroacetamide (50 mM final concentration) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, United States) is added, and the mixture is vortexed briefly (max power, 3 s, Vortex-Genie 2, Scientific Industries, Bohemia, United States) and spun down (3 s, Mini Centrifuge, ExtraGene, Davis, United States) and then incubated at RT for 30 min in the dark. Then 65.5 μL of 100% trichloroacetic acid (15% final concentration) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, United States) is added, the sample is then vortexed briefly and, again, spun down and finally, incubated on ice for 30 min.
After incubation, the sample is centrifuged at 4000g for 7.5 min and then washed 3 times by removing the supernatant, adding 500 μL – 20 °C acetone (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), sonicating at 37 kHz pulsed for 2 min (Elmasonic P, Elma, Singen am Hoentwiel, Germany), and then centrifuging at 4000g for 5 min. After repeating 3 times, the supernatant is again removed, and the sample is allowed to air-dry for 10 min at RT. Next, 75 μL of triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) 50 mM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) is added to the tube, followed by two rounds of sonication at 37 kHz pulsed for 2 min each. The sample is subsequently vortexed and spun down, and then 2.5 μg sequencing grade modified trypsin (V5117, Promega, Madison, United States) is added (50:1 protein/protease), and the sample is incubated overnight at 37 °C at 750 rpm (ThermoMixer C).
Fractionation
Following incubation, 8.3 μL of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (Biosolve, Dieuze, France) was added to the sample (0.1% final concentration), and then 80 μg of the total peptide was directly deposited on a Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) and centrifuged at 3000g for 2 min. The flow through was then discarded, and the column was washed with 300 μL of MS grade water at 3000g for 2 min. Fractions were collected from the column in 1.5 mL Protein LoBind Eppendorf tubes (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) by adding 300 μL of the appropriate elution solution to the column and centrifuging at 3000g for 2 min. Elution solutions contain 0.1% triethylamine with either 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20, or 50% acetonitrile for collecting fractions 1 through 7, respectively.
Following fractionation, pooling of the fractions is carried out with 100 μL each of fractions 1, 2, and 5 as pooled fraction 1, 150 μL each of fractions 3 and 6 as pooled fraction 2, and 150 μL each of fractions 4 and 7 as pooled fraction 3. Pooling fractions in such a way helps ensure that chemically dissimilar peptides are pooled together. The pooled fractions are then incubated on dry ice for 5 min, and then open tubes are placed into a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac SRF110, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) at 4 °C until pooled fractions have fully evaporated. 20 μL of MS resuspension buffer (3.5% ACN, 0.1% TFA) is subsequently used to resuspend each tube, and 3 sonication cycles at 37 kHz pulsed for 2 min are repeated. Finally, each resuspended sample is briefly vortexed and spun down. A summary of the different fractionation strategies used in this paper can be seen in Figure 1.
DIA LC-MS/MS Injection
1 μg amount of peptides dissolved in solvent A ((MS resuspension buffer) 0.1% TFA in 3.5% ACN) was directly loaded onto a reversed-phase precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was achieved using a reversed-phase analytical EasySpray column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 0.075 mm × 250 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) with a 120 min linear gradient of 4–32% solvent B (0.1% TFA in 80% ACN) for 100 min, 32–50% solvent B for 5 min, 50–90% for 5 min, and holding at 95% for the last 9 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States). The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Exploris 240 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) with enabled advanced peak determination (APD). The peptides were subjected to an EasySpray ionization source, followed by MS/MS in the Exploris 240 coupled online to the HPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a full width at half-maximum resolution of 30,000 (fwhm), and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap after stepped higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at 22, 26, and 30% of maximum. A data-independent procedure of MS/MS scans was applied for the precursor ions within a m/z range of 500–740 and an m/z isolation window of 4 at a resolution of 60,000 (fwhm). MS1 spectra were obtained with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1.2 × 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 55 ms. MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 1.5 × 105 ions and the maximum injection time set to auto. For MS2 scans, the m/z scan range was set at 145–1450. Run time for each injection was 120 min.
DDA LC-MS/MS Injection
Peptides were injected and separated, as described above. The peptides were analyzed by an Exploris 240 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, United States). The peptides were subjected to a nanospray ion source followed by MS/MS in Exploris 240 coupled online to the nano-LC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at an fwhm resolution of 60,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using the HCD setting at 30%; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at an fwhm resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by MS/MS scans was applied for 3 s for ions above a threshold ion count of 1.0 × 104 in the MS survey scan with 40.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.1 kV. MS1 spectra were obtained with an AGC target of 4 × 105 ions and a maximum injection time of 50 ms; MS2 spectra were acquired with an AGC target of 5 × 104 ions and a maximum injection time set to dynamic. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 375–1800. Run time for each injection was 120 min.
Bioinformatic Analysis
DIA-NN 1.8.1 was first used to generate an in silico predicted spectral library from the UniProtKB human reference proteome (accession UP000005640) featuring only review (Swiss-Prot) canonical proteins.
Following HPLC-MS/MS acquisition, Thermo.raw spectra files for all fractions and all patients were imported into DIA-NN 1.8.1 using the Thermo MS File Reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States). The in silico library was used as the spectral library, and to further aid peak detection, match-between-runs mode was enabled. In addition to the default options, the following options were used: FASTA digest for library-free search/library generation; deep learning-based spectra, RTs and IMs prediction; maximum number of variable modifications = 1, modifications = N-term M excision, C carbamidomethylation, Ox(M); unrelated runs; MBR; neural network classifier = double-pass mode; quantification strategy = Any LC (high accuracy); precursor false discovery rate (%) = 1.0. Quantification was performed at the MS2 level. After processing, the corresponding report file was then loaded into R for processing (v4.3.1). The complete script can be found in Supporting Material S1, but in brief, runs were separated into pooled fraction 1, pooled fraction 2, and pooled fraction 3 to be processed separately via QFeatures(v3.17), log transformed, and normalized. The 3 fraction assays were then combined, and protein intensities were aggregated into protein groups via the robust summary methodology. The process for nonfractionated samples was similar, except that runs did not have to be separated and then recombined.
For DDA samples, the resulting MS/MS data was processed using the Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, United States) against the same Uniprot database used for the DIA predicted library; trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 2 modifications per peptide, and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met (+15.995 Da) and pyro-Glu formation from Gln or Glu (−17.027 or −18.011 Da, respectively) were considered as variable modifications. C carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification. Quantification was performed at the MS1 level. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using Percolator, and thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification sites were specified at 1%. Label-free quantification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.5 using the area under the curve (AUC) for each peptide.
During data analysis, predicted protein concentrations in plasma were obtained from the Human Protein Atlas. For COVID-19 biomarkers and COVID-19 associated proteins, the OncoMX COVID-19 biomarker database and OpenTargets platform (targets associated with COVID-19) were used, respectively. PCA plots were generated using a 0% missing protein cutoff.
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD047901.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis of the data was carried out using R(v4.3.1). Two sample proportion tests and t test were used to evaluate the significance of the data when appropriate, such as when comparing the differences in the mean number of identified proteins in fractionated and nonfractionated samples. The types of tests used are referenced within the text when needed alongside the adjusted p-values. For t tests comparing DDA to DIA, or nonfractionated to fractionated, the assumption is that DIA, or fractionation, produces superior results, and so one-sided t tests are used in these cases. Significance levels of protein abundance were calculated using t tests. All code used to generate statistics can be found in Supporting Material S1.

RESULTS:
Results
In the current study, our objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of different proteomic workflows in plasma sample analysis with a focus on biomarker discovery. The analysis was conducted on samples from a cohort of 20 patients, employing three distinct methodologies: unfractionated, fractionated-pooled, and fractionated-separated (Figure 1). The intention behind these workflows was to explore the potential for increased proteome coverage and the enhanced detection of low-abundance proteins. The unfractionated approach provided a baseline by analyzing the plasma samples in their entirety, without any preprocessing steps. Conversely, the fractionated approaches aimed to deepen our insights into the plasma proteome by segregating the samples into fractions, which were then analyzed either collectively (pooled) or individually (separated). The primary goal was to identify a workflow that not only maximizes proteome coverage but also remains practical for routine applications in the context of infectious disease biomarker identification. All results presented below have been collected through DIA analysis unless stated otherwise.
Enhanced Protein Detection with Fractionation
The mean number of proteins detected and quantified in human plasma is found to be significantly higher, with an increase of around 50% for fractionated-pooled samples as compared to unfractionated samples, with an average of 1321 and 894 proteins per patient for fractionated-pooled and unfractionated samples, respectively (right-tailed, paired, t test, p-value = 1.17 × 10–6). A similar trend is seen for total unique quantified proteins, with 2031 total unique proteins found in fractionated-pooled samples and 1765 in unfractionated samples. The number of common proteins detected in all patients was also significantly increased in fractionated-pooled samples, with 570 common proteins (around 43% of proteins on average) compared to 303 in unfractionated samples (around 34% of proteins on average) (two sample proportion test, p-value = 1.38 × 10–63). Alongside the enhanced detection of proteins within fractionated-pooled samples, fractionation also appears to improve the protein detection consistency between samples. This is visualized in Figure 2A, which shows a higher consistency of protein identification across patient samples with fractionation-pooled as opposed to unfractionated samples.
Not only are more unique proteins found within fractionated-pooled samples, but a higher proportion of these proteins are also found within a higher number of samples.
Looking at Figure 2B, we can also see that the majority of information (in terms of detected proteins) is almost completely found within the fractionated-pooled samples, with unfractionated samples providing only a small number of unique proteins. Indeed, out of 2061 unique proteins in both fractionated-pooled and unfractionated samples, 296 are uniquely found in fractionated-pooled samples, 1735 are found in both, and only 30 are found uniquely in unfractionated samples.
Looking at how protein intensities were aggregated, fractionated-pooled samples generally aggregate proteins using more unique precursors (83% of proteins aggregated with two or more unique precursors), while a major fraction of unfractionated proteins, 42%, are aggregated from just one unique precursor (Supporting Figure 2). The mean number of unique precursors used for protein aggregation was 12 vs 5 for fractionated-pooled and unfractionated samples, respectively, while the median was 3 and 2, respectively, a significant difference (Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test, p-value <2.2 × 10–16).
In Figure 3, most of the commonly identified proteins tend to be present at higher concentrations than the uniquely identified proteins, which are all identified uniquely in the fractionated samples and present at lower concentrations. Fractionation of samples results in a slightly enhanced detection of proteins found at lower biological concentrations (log 10 concentration (mg/mL) of −4.8 vs −4.6 for fractionated-pooled and unfractionated samples respectively, left-tailed t test, p-value = 0.0007). Although both methodologies are able to detect similarly low-abundant proteins, fractionated-pooled samples are able to detect these proteins more commonly across a cohort, with denser data allowing for far superior downstream data analysis.
Comparative Advantages of DIA over Traditional DDA Approaches
As far as how these additional precursors relate to protein identification, Figure 4 shows data from the same samples processed with the 3 different fractionation methods and acquired in the LC-MS/MS system in either DDA or DIA modes, in order to make a comparison between fractionation methods as well as acquisition methods. Figure 4 shows a large increase in protein identification in both fractionation strategies compared with the unfractionated strategy. This increased protein identification tends to be predominantly for lower abundant proteins. In terms of how the pooling process affects protein identification, we can see a 16% drop (232 proteins) from the fractionated-separated to fractionated-pooled. For DDA data, this drop is more pronounced, with a 24% drop in protein identification between fractionated-pooled and fractionated-separated (121 proteins). As expected, these proteins tend to be toward the lower end of the concentration range for each method, although both fractionation workflows are able to identify proteins in equally low concentrations.
Figure 4 shows a significant increase in the number of identified proteins using DIA as compared to DDA. Using DIA boosts the number of unique, detected proteins by 249% for unfractionated samples (+744 proteins), 211% for fractionated-pooled (+826 proteins), and 183% for fractionated-separated (+937 proteins). Additionally, the proteins uniquely identified in samples ran in DIA mode all tend to be low-abundant proteins, and although there is some overlap between the abundances of proteins identified in DDA and DIA modes, DIA mode has a much greater abundance range of acquisition. 90% of the identified DDA proteins have a concentration between 92.5 and 0.082 μg/mL, whereas 90% of DIA proteins have an abundance between 10.1 and 0.0014 μg/mL. The median concentration was 2.1 and 0.055 μg/mL for DDA and DIA proteins, respectively.
Using the entire 20-patient cohort, Figure 5 shows a direct comparison between DDA and DIA analytical modes for unfractionated samples. More than triple the average number of proteins per sample are found in DIA samples as compared to DDA samples, 838 vs 236, respectively, and a similar magnitude of increase is seen for the total unique proteins between DIA and DDA, 1765 vs 563, respectively. Further, DIA is also seen to have slightly better coverage in terms of identification of each protein within samples, with each protein appearing in an average of 9.49 samples vs an average of 8.39 samples for DDA proteins (out of 20 samples total) (right-tail t test, p-value = 0.0015). When considering proteins found in both DIA and DDA, the difference is further exacerbated, with these proteins being found in 17.1 DIA samples vs 9.77 DDA samples (right-tail t test, p-value <2.2 × 10–16). Finally, in terms of core proteins (those proteins found within all 20 samples), DIA has more than double the number of core proteins at 303, as compared to 116 core proteins found with DDA (DIA vs DDA, unfractionated samples).
Taken together, these data would suggest that not only does DIA allow for a great increase in the number of proteins detected per sample and at lower abundances but that it also allows for a much greater identification rate of those proteins between samples.
Biomarker Discovery in COVID-19: Insights from a Preliminary Cohort
As the cohort used here was part of the larger HYGIEIA cohort for a study into COVID-19, we provide here some preliminary biostatistical analyses to investigate how the fractionated-pooled samples compare to unfractionated samples when investigating biological differences. Figure 6 shows that both methodologies can separate healthy controls and moderate COVID-19 from the respiratory failure group and severe COVID-19, which required hospitalization when analyzed by principal component analysis (PCA, principal components 1 and 2, only core proteins retained for analysis). The unfractionated samples separate these four groups along PC1 and PC2, while the fractionated samples separate the four groups along PC1 only. Including PC3 for fractionated-pooled samples can help to further separate overlapping healthy controls and moderate COVID-19 patients to some extent. Unfractionated samples are able to capture around 65% of the data variation in PC1 and PC2, while fractionated-pooled samples are only able to capture around 40% in these two components.
When looking at a differential abundance analysis (moderate COVID-19 patients vs hospitalized (severe and critical) COVID-19 patients), we see the fractionated-pooled samples (Figure 7A,7B) significantly outperform the unfractionated samples (Figure 7C,D) at identifying differentially abundant proteins, 264 vs 23 (two sample proportion test, p-value = 4.73 × 10–35). Of these differentially abundant proteins (full list found in Supporting Material S3), the number of COVID-19 biomarkers (OncoMX COVID-19 biomarker database) is also greater in fractionated-pooled samples (9 vs 5), although not at a significantly different proportion (two sample proportion test, p-value = 0.086). Identified biomarkers were C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A1, cystatin C, albumin, colony-stimulating factor 1, von Willebrand factor, selectin P, galactin 3, and S100 calcium-binding protein 9 for fractionated-pooled samples and C-reactive protein, serum amyloid A1, cystatin C, von Willebrand factor, and S100 calcium-binding protein 9 for unfractionated samples. Finally, we are also able to detect a significantly higher number of COVID-19-associated proteins in fractionated-pooled samples (80) than in unfractionated samples (13) (two sample proportion test, p-value = 1.67 × 10–10).
Some of the most significantly abundant proteins in fractionated samples were tyrosine 3-monooxygenase, reticulon-4, pleckstrin, profilin-1, and haptoglobin.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Human plasma proteomics is a rapidly evolving field aimed at identifying and understanding the functions of proteins in human blood. Plasma contains a wide array of substances, including hormones, metabolites, and proteins produced by various organs and tissues within the body, providing a comprehensive snapshot of an individual’s overall health. Over 4500 canonical proteins have been detected in human plasma, representing approximately 20% of the currently detectable human proteome. Plasma’s ease of collection and significant biological relevance make it a valuable resource for disease research. For example, extensive research into the effects of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has leveraged plasma proteomics to identify biomarkers such as S100A9, ITIH2, TNF- α, and cytokines. These studies have partially elucidated disease pathophysiology by discovering dysregulated proteins and pathways, thereby identifying potential drug targets and treatments.
Studying the human plasma proteome, however, presents several challenges. First, plasma is an incredibly heterogeneous sample containing lipids, metabolites, and other small molecules that must be removed to prevent interference with protein detection and quantification. Second, the protein content of plasma is complex, varies between individuals, and is dynamic, with protein concentrations spanning 12–13 orders of magnitude. This is outside the dynamic range of modern analytical instruments, complicating the detection and quantification of low-abundant proteins. Third, many proteins undergo post-translational modifications, generating numerous proteoforms that require specialized techniques and equipment to identify. Lastly, analyzing the large data sets generated by these studies requires sophisticated bioinformatics and biostatistical tools, as well as expertise to interpret and validate the data, requiring a multidisciplinary approach. Despite these challenges, advances in technology and methodology are providing new opportunities to explore the plasma proteome.
Depleting high-abundant proteins can enhance the detection of low-abundance ones, but this process may also inadvertently deplete many low-abundant proteins, as high-abundant proteins (such as albumin, immunoglobulins, fibrinogen, and apolipoprotein) often have carrier functions. Despite this off-target protein depletion, it remains a critical strategy for any proteomic study seeking to delve deeply into the human proteome. As depletion does not completely remove highly abundant proteins, high-sensitivity techniques (such as data-independent acquisition (DIA)) may still identify them, making this less of an issue. However, because depletion may distort the relative quantification between samples, studies utilizing depletion methodologies should back up quantitative results with targeted methods, such as enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), ensuring accuracy and reliability of the relative quantification.
Beyond depletion strategies, fractionation techniques further enhance proteomic analysis by dividing samples into fractions of lower complexity, helping to better identify low-abundant proteins. Fractionation usually occurs after digestion at the peptide level for bottom-up proteomics. Generally, more fractions lead to more proteins identified, with one study showing increases of 90, 48, and 32% unique proteins identified at 5 vs 20, 12 vs 24, and 20 vs 40 fractions, respectively. However, drawbacks include minor sample loss and increased analytical time, which can greatly increase the costs.
Traditionally, untargeted mass spectrometry proteomics relied on data-dependent acquisition (DDA), but its selectivity and reproducibility have limitations due to its stochastic nature. Consequently, DIA techniques have grown in popularity. Many DIA techniques have been introduced,− but the general results are that all precursor product ions are analyzed in a systematic and unbiased manner. This allows DIA to achieve reproducibility rates of up to 99 and 98% at the peptide and protein levels, respectively, compared to around 80% for DDA methods. However, DIA usually results in highly complex MS2 spectra, which are challenging to interpret and quantify, requiring specialized software and computational resources.
A multitude of software have been developed to aid in DIA bioinformatics, the most popular being Skyline, OpenSWATH, EncylopeDIA, Spectronaut, DIA-Umpire, and DIA-NN. DIA-NN, in particular, employs deep neural networks to better distinguish real signals against analytical noise, coupled with new quantification and signal strategies. These methodologies enhance detection sensitivity and specificity, as validated in multiple benchmarking studies where DIA-NN has outperformed other DIA analytical strategies in terms of numbers of identified proteins while minimizing missing values within the data.
Within this paper, we present a simplified sample preparation protocol consisting of depletion followed by fractionation and subsequent pooling of fractions, resulting in 3 LC-MS/MS injections per sample (360 min total run time). Coupled with the recent developments in DIA-based proteomics and DIA analytical software, we are able to achieve an average of 1231 proteins identified per sample and 1603 unique proteins in a 20-patient preliminary cohort (described below) at a much lower cost-per-sample than highly fractionated DDA methodologies, using widely available commercial kits and solutions (48.77€ ex. VAT, Belgium. Price excludes common laboratory reagents and plastics, machine running costs, and technician hours, which can vary greatly between laboratories and countries).

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Data Availability Statement
Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD047901.
Supporting Information Available
Supporting Material S1: R script detailing data processing, figure generation, and statistical analysis (R File) (TXT)
Supporting Material S2: Results. Analysis of data after filtering precursors present in less than 25% of patients, information on protein and precursor abundances, information on precursor distribution across fractions, and a PCA done using precursor abundances. Figures S1–S5 included (PDF)
Supporting Material S3: Differential abundance results. Table includes UniProtKB accession numbers (Protein), log fold change (log FC), average log abundance (AveExpr), t statistic (t), p-value (P.Value), adjusted p-value (adj.P.Val), b statistic (B), if protein meets differential expression criteria of adjusted p-value 1 (differentially_expressed), Entrez ID (ENTREZID), gene symbol (SYMBOL), and the fractionation method of the sample (Experimental_method) (XLSX)
Supporting Material S4: Linking the protein names (protein name) used in this paper to the corresponding UniprotKB accession number (UniprotKB accession number) (CSV File) (XLSX)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00104.
Supplementary Material
Author Present Address
‡ Integrated Pharmacometrics, Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacokinetics Group (PMGK), Louvain Drug Research Institute (LDRI), UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
§ Louvain Center for Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology (LTAP), Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique (IREC), UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
∥ WELBIO (Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology), Pole of Pharmacology and Therapeutics (FATH), Institut de Recherche Experimentale et Clinique (IREC), Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
⊥ Department of Internal Medicine, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
# Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute (LDRI), UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
∇ WELBIO (Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology), WELBIO department, WEL Research Institute, avenue Pasteur, 6, 1300 Wavre, Belgium
Author Present Address
○ Institute of Experimental and Clinical Research (IREC), UCLouvain, Université catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
◆ WELBIO (Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology), de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
¶ Department of Laboratory Medicine, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
†† Department of Biochemistry, de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
‡‡ Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Unit (CBIO), de Duve Institute, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
§§ Computer Science and Engineering Department (INGI), Institute of Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics and Applied Mathematics (ICTEAM), UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
Author Present Address
∥∥ Pôle de Microbiologie, Institut de Recherche Expérimentale et Clinique, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium
Author Present Address
⊥⊥ De Duve Institute, and MASSPROT Platform, UCLouvain, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium