PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Mus musculus (mouse)
organism parts: Retina
diseases: Retinopathy of prematurity
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Retinopathy of prematurity; Dha; Retinal vasculature; Postnatal hyperglycemia

ABSTRACT:
Introduction: Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) with early vessel loss (Phase I) followed by uncontrolled vessel growth (Phase II) causes visual impairment in premature infants. Although supplementation with n-3 docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) alone has mixed results to prevent ROP, combined supplementation with DHA and n-6 arachidonic acid (ARA) in early postnatal life reduces severe ROP by 50% (Mega Donna Mega study). The underlying mechanisms are unknown. Objectives: To evaluate protective effects and mechanism of combined dietary n-3 DHA and n-6 ARA in a neonatal mouse model of Phase I ROP. Methods: In the Mega Donna Mega study, most preterm infants had early postnatal hyperglycemia episodes, a strong risk factor for severe ROP. We used a neonatal mouse model of hyperglycemia-induced suppression of retinal vascular development (Phase I ROP). Dams were fed diets enriched with 3%DHA or 1%DHA+2%ARA. In P10 milk-fed pups, we assessed retinal vascularization, and proteome, and fatty acid profiles in retina, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) complex and plasma. In vivo, oligomycin A, a mitochondrial ATP synthase inhibitor, was used to assess mitochondrial participation in the combined lipid protective effects. Results: In 201 (97.6%) of 206 randomized infants there was at least one elevated glucose measurement during the first 14 days. In a neonatal mouse model of hyperglycemia-induced suppression of vascular development, maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet promoted pup retinal vessel growth. Fatty acid profiling confirmed lipid changes in pup plasma and RPE complex in accord with DHA and ARA levels in the maternal diets. Proteomic retinal analysis revealed increased abundance of proteins related to mitochondrial respiration and glucose metabolism in the combined diet. Inhibition of mitochondrial ATP synthase negated the protective effects of the combined diet on retinal vascularization. Conclusion: Combined DHA+ARA oral supplementation in the early postnatal period protects against Phase I ROP in mouse neonates, through enhanced retinal metabolism suggesting the potential of balanced lipid supplementation for preventing ROP.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Combined dietary omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids protect against hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy in neonatal mice

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Retinas from P10 pups after STZ and DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet (n=8 mice/group; both retinas pooled) were processed for label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics. Pooled retina samples were homogenized in RIPA buffer and lysates were proteolyzed using the iST in-solution digestion kit (PreOmics GmbH, Germany) automated on the PreON robot (PreOmics): 50 µg retina protein sample per 10 µL was added to 40 µL LYSE buffer (PreOmics). The samples were trypsinized for 3 hours following the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluted peptides were dried in a speed vacuum (EppendorfVacufuge) and resuspended in 40 µL LC-load. Mass spectra were acquired on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were diluted 5-fold using sample loading buffer and 4 ul injections separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 HPLC Column, 75 µm X 70 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# 164946); and an EASY-Spray™ HPLC Column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat# ES902). The column was heated at a constant temperature of 45 ˚C. The gradient flow rate was 300 nl/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) for 75 minutes, 21 to 30% solvent B for 15 minutes, and another 10 minutes of a 95%-5% solvent B in a jigsaw wash. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in mass spectrometry-grade water. The mass spectrometer was set to 120,000 resolution, and the top N precursor ions in a 3 second cycle time (within a scan range of m/z 400-1500; isolation window, 1.6 m/z) were subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID, collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing.

DATA PROCESSING:
The acquired peptide spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer package (PD, Version 2.5) using the SEQUEST-HT search algorithm against the Mouse UniProt database (63,603 entries, updated January 2022). The digestion enzyme was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance window to 0.6 Da. Methionine oxidation and n-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as a static modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by the PD Percolator algorithm and peptides were filtered based on an FDR threshold of 1.0%. Peptides that were only assigned to one given protein group and not detected in any other protein group were considered unique and used for further analyses. A minimum of 2 unique peptides for each protein were required for the protein to be included in the analyses. The Feature Mapper was enabled in PD to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but may not have been sequenced in all samples. Chromatographic alignment was performed with a maximum retention time shift of 10 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of 5. Precursor peptide abundances were based on their chromatographic intensities and total peptide amount was used for PD normalization.

METHODS:
Materials and methods
Ethics statement
Mouse experiments followed the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Publication 8523, revised 2011) and the ARVO Statement for Use of Animals in Ophthalmic Vision and Research. The work was approved by Boston Children’s Hospital’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol 0001619).
The previously published Mega Donna Mega study, an open-label, randomized controlled trial (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03201588) aimed to evaluate if a combined enteral fatty acid supplementation with DHA and ARA could reduce severe ROP. The Regional Ethics Review Board in Gothenburg (303–11 and T570–15) and the Swedish Ethical Review Authority (2020–02381) approved the trial protocol. All procedures followed the Helsinki Declaration of 1975 (revised 2008). The WHO Guiding Principles on Human Cell, Tissue and Organ Transplantation are not applicable. Parents or guardians provided written informed consent. We analyzed longitudinal glucose blood samples of infants included in the study born before 28 weeks of gestational age at three neonatal intensive care units in Sweden between 2016 and 2019.
Mouse model of hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy and quantification
For all animal experiments, C57BL/6J mice (#000664, Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were bred in-house with 12-hour light/dark cycle and ad libitum chow. Because hyperglycemia in the early postnatal period is a strong ROP risk factor, and as most infants in our clinical study had at least one incidence of hyperglycemia, we used the neonatal hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy mouse model to study lipid intervention in early ROP. The dietary ratio of DHA:ARA (1:2) used in mice was aligned with the Mega Donna Mega clinical trial. To induce hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy (a Phase I ROP model with suppression of physiological retinal vascular growth), mouse pups were intraperitoneally injected with 50 μg/g body weight streptozotocin (STZ, S0130, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA; 50 μg/μL in PBS) daily from postnatal day (P) 1–P9. C57BL/6J moms were fed fully defined rodent feed (Research Diets, Inc., New Brunswick, NJ, USA) including either 3 % DHA or 1 % DHA + 2 % ARA (DHA+ARA) of the diets’ lipid content (10 % of the chow) from P1–P10 (Table 1). DHA and ARA oils were sourced from DSM (Heerlen, Netherlands). At P10, after using a lethal intraperitoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine, plasma, RPE complex (retinal pigment epithelium with choroid and sclera), and retinas of pups with body weight ≥ 3.8 g were collected.
For inhibition of mitochondrial ATP synthase, oligomycin A (0.25 μg/g body weight) (#11342, Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 0.25 μg/μL in PBS with 30 % dimethylsulfoxide) was intraperitoneally injected daily from P7–P9 during deep retinal vessel formation. A higher concentration of oligomycin A (0.5 μg/g body weight) in neonatal mice caused postnatal growth retardation, which affects retinal vascular development (data not shown).
After fixation of the whole eye in 4 % paraformaldehyde, retinas were dissected and permeabilized using 1 % Triton X-100 in PBS. Isolectin B4 (Alexa Fluor 594, I21413, Invitrogen™, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in 1 mM CaCl2 in PBS was used overnight to stain vessels. Four images (one per quadrant) were taken between the optic nerve head and the leading vessel edge in the deep and superficial vascular layer on a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 microscope (200x magnification). The retinal vascular status (number of meshes and total vessel length per field) was assessed with the “Angiogenesis analyzer” ImageJ plugin. At least 3 litters per group were analyzed.
Mouse model of oxygen-induced retinopathy and quantification
To validate findings from the hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy model, maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet from P1–P17 was applied in the oxygen-induced retinopathy model. C57BL/6 J pups and their nursing dams were exposed to 75 % oxygen from P7–P12 with hyperoxia leading to retinal vessel regression (vaso-obliteration, VO; modeling oxygen-induced Phase I ROP) and return to room air at P12 resulting in relative hypoxia and subsequent formation of pathological retinal neovascularization (NV; modeling hypoxia-induced Phase II ROP). At P17, both eyes of pups with body weight 5.0–7.5 g were collected after intraperitoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine.
Retinas were dissected and stained as described above. Images were acquired at 50x magnification with a Zeiss fluorescent microscope. Quantification of VO and NV was performed using ImageJ, and the proportions of NV and VO to the total retinal area were compared between diet groups.
Analysis of postnatal hyperglycemia
In the Mega Donna Mega study, premature infants receiving combined DHA+ARA (1:2 ratio) within 3 days after birth until 40 weeks postmenstrual age vs. standard of care without oral lipid supplementation showed a 50 % reduction in severe ROP. As hyperglycemia in the first weeks of life is associated with increased ROP incidence and severity, we analyzed maximum daily glucose values over the first 14 postnatal days of infants born before 28 weeks of gestational age. Of the 206 randomized infants, 201 (97.6 %) had available glucose measurements during the first 14 days. Included infants’ (n = 201) mean gestational age was 25.5 weeks (SD ± 1.4), and mean birth weight was 792.1 g (SD ± 195.1). Routine blood samples for glucose measurement were drawn according to local guidelines and clinical indications. All glucose levels were retrieved from the infants’ medical records until 14 postnatal days. When multiple glucose levels were available for an infant on the same day, the highest value during that day was used to define presence of hyperglycemia (> 10 mmol/L).
Fatty acid profiling
P10 retinal samples of known weight from pups after STZ and maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet (n = 18 samples/group; both retinas pooled) were disrupted with glass homogenizers. For total lipid extraction, the following were sequentially added: 1.75 mL 0.88 % potassium chloride, 2 mL methanol, 4 mL chloroform. Heptadecanoic acid (17:0) was used as an internal standard. Total lipids were extracted overnight and then methylated with methanolic boron trifluoride (100 °C, 1 h). Fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) were quantified in a gas chromatograph with a flame ionization detector (Varian, Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA). FAMEs were eluted on a DB-FFAP column (30 m × 0.25 mm i.d. × 0.25 μm film thickness) by set program at initial oven temperature of 50 °C for 1 min, following with a ramp-up to 130 °C at a 30 °C/min rate, 175 °C at 10 °C/min, 230 °C at 5 °C/min, then held for 9.5 min, and a ramp-up to 240 °C at 5 °C/min for 11.13 min. Using peak comparison to the internal standard, 31 fatty acid species were quantified (8 species of saturated and 8 monounsaturated fatty acids, 8 species of n-6 and 7 species of n-3 PUFAs). At least 4 litters per group were analyzed.
Proteomics
Retinas from P10 pups after STZ and maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet (n = 8 mice/group; both retinas pooled) were processed for label-free LC-MS/MS proteomics. At least 2 litters per group were analyzed. An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used for mass spectrometry. Peptide spectra were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Included proteins had ≥ 2 unique peptides. For each protein, logarithmic transformation, student’s t-test (p-value), and Benjamini-Hochberg method (FDR-adjusted p-value, called q-value) were performed (Qlucore Omics Explorer, v3.5, Qlucore, Lund, Sweden). Gene Ontology pathway enrichment (Biological Process, Molecular Function, Cellular Component) of significantly decreased or increased proteins (p < 0.05; |log2 fold change| > 0.2) was analyzed using EnrichR (retrieved 10/2024). Pathways with p < 0.05 (Fisher’s exact test) were considered significantly enriched.
Raw data are available on the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE repository (identifier PXD061307, https://doi.org/10.6019/PXD061307).
Statistics
Infant glucose values were displayed graphically as a longitudinal curve using locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (LOESS). For infant characteristics and neonatal morbidities, Fisher’s exact test was used for dichotomous variables, Mantel-Haenszel Chi-square trend test was performed for categorical ordered variables, and Mann-Whitney U test was applied for continuous variables.
Mouse data are presented as mean ± SEM. For non-omics data, normality (quantile-quantile plot) and variance (F-test) were tested, followed by parametric (unpaired t-test or Welch’s t-test) or non-parametric (Mann-Whitney U test) analysis (Prism v9.0, GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA). Statistical significance was considered at p < 0.05. Heatmaps were created using https://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus/.

RESULTS:
Results
In hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy in neonatal mice (modeling Phase I ROP), maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet promoted physiological vessel growth
In the hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy model, the impact of maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet was examined (Fig. 1A). The diets had no effect on pup body weight and blood glucose levels (Fig. 1B, C). Oral milk from mothers on DHA+ARA vs. DHA maternal diet resulted in increased density of the deep (Fig. 1D, E) and superficial (Fig. 1F, G) retinal vasculature in pups at P10, indicating that combined DHA+ARA vs. DHA lipid diet promoted physiological retinal vessel growth in mice with neonatal hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy.
In oxygen-induced retinopathy in neonatal mice, maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet promoted physiological vessel growth
To validate findings in hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy, the maternal diets were tested in the oxygen-induced retinopathy mouse model (Supplemental Fig. 1A, B). Body weight was unchanged by the diets (data not shown). Maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet resulted in a reduction of vaso-obliteration, suggesting improved physiological retinal vascularization (Supplemental Fig. 1C, D), while pathological neovascularization was unaffected (Supplemental Fig. 1E, F). These data confirm the protective effect of maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet on physiological retinal vessel growth in two mouse models of Phase I ROP.
Hyperglycemia incidence in the first two weeks after preterm birth in the Mega Donna Mega study
In the Mega Donna Mega study, the median number of glucose blood samples per infant was 27 (IQR 17–47). The mean glucose level across all days was 7.9 mmol/L (SD ± 2.9), and, considering the maximum glucose levels, the mean was 9.5 mmol/L (SD ± 5.4). Of the 2298 samples, 770 (33.5 %) met the criteria for hyperglycemia (> 10 mmol/L), and 146 infants (72.6 %) had at least one hyperglycemic sample (Supplemental Fig. 2). Infants with hyperglycemia were more immature at birth and more often affected by neonatal morbidities, including ROP (Table 2).
Maternal diet composition was reflected in the pup lipid profile of plasma and RPE complex
Given the frequency of hyperglycemia and its association with ROP in premature infants in the Mega Donna Mega trial, we further focused on the hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy mouse model. At P10 in plasma and RPE complex, DHA levels were significantly increased in DHA diet group pups, while ARA was higher in DHA+ARA diet group pups (Fig. 2A, B), suggesting that fatty acids in the maternal diet can reach the pups via maternal milk and can incorporate into the pups’ ocular tissue. However, in the retina, DHA and ARA were comparable between the diet groups, and higher maternal dietary DHA (3 % vs. 1 %) did not further increase retinal DHA in pups (Fig. 2C), suggesting a tight regulation of local retinal lipid composition. Other retinal (C14:0, C18:2n-6) and circulating (C14:0, C18:0, C20:5 n-3, C22:4n-6) fatty acids were changed by diets.
The maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet increased retinal proteins related to mitochondrial respiration
We assessed the global proteome of P10 STZ retinas isolated from DHA+ARA vs. DHA maternal diet pups to uncover mechanisms involved in the combined diets’ protective effect on retinal vessels. In total, 4203 proteins with ≥ 2 unique peptides were detected. Each diet group displayed a distinct proteome profile. DHA+ARA vs. DHA retinas showed 198 proteins with increased and 176 proteins with decreased abundance passing p < 0.05 (q < 0.37) and |log2 fold change| > 0.2 (Fig. 3A, B). Gene ontology pathways related to mitochondrial respiration, fatty acid and glucose metabolism were significantly (p < 0.05) enriched (Fig. 3C) with increased protein abundance of mitochondrial complex I subunits (NDUFS8, NDUFB6, NDUFS3) and of glucose transporter 1 (SLC2A1) (Fig. 3D). Pathways with decreased protein abundance in the DHA+ARA vs. DHA group were related to autophagy, pexophagy, mitochondrial apoptosis, lysosomes, endosomes, and negative regulation of growth factor signaling (data not shown).
Pharmacological inhibition of mitochondrial ATP production negated the maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA diet promotion of retinal vessel growth
Next, we tested whether mitochondrial respiration contributed to the combined diet promotion of retinal vessel growth. In hyperglycemia-associated Phase I retinopathy, pups with maternal DHA+ARA or DHA diet received intraperitoneal injection of oligomycin A, inhibiting mitochondrial ATP synthase (Fig. 4A). No differences in body weight and blood glucose levels between maternal diet groups were observed (Fig. 4B, C). After pharmacological suppression of mitochondrial ATP energy production, no differences between DHA+ARA and DHA maternal diet groups in deep (Fig. 4D, E) and superficial (Fig. 4F, G) retinal vasculature at P10 were observed. These findings suggested that mitochondrial energy production was a key component in the combined DHA+ARA diet promotion of retinal vessel growth in neonatal hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a potentially blinding eye disorder characterized by two phases. In Phase I, physiological retinal vascular growth and neuroretinal development are suppressed; in Phase II, pathological retinal neovascularization is triggered by both local hypoxia in vaso-obliterated retinal areas and oxygen-independent stimuli.
Metabolic factors modulate ROP development and progression. In Phase I, perinatal hyperglycemia is common, and alterations in omega-3 (n-3) and omega-6 (n-6) long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (LCPUFA) levels, particularly n-3 docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and n-6 arachidonic acid (ARA), occur, as the normal supply from the uterine environment is disrupted.
DHA and ARA, “conditionally essential” fatty acids, are crucial during fetal and postnatal development, particularly in the retina. DHA makes up ~ 50 % of total phospholipid fatty acids in retinal photoreceptor outer segments, while ARA is enriched in photoreceptors and retinal vessels. After preterm birth, DHA and ARA levels fall dramatically due to disrupted in utero supply of these lipids. Reduced DHA and ARA blood levels persist for at least 4 weeks after birth and are associated with increased ROP severity. Clinical trials have explored the potential of nutritional/metabolic interventions in ROP. Parenteral supplementation of n-3 LCPUFAs alone yields inconsistent results regarding ROP development and progression. The DIAMOND (DHA Intake And Measurement Of Neural Development) study found that supplementation of DHA and ARA (1:2 ratio) in early life improved visual acuity at 12 months of age. Increased DHA supplementation, however, yielded no additional improvement of visual acuity. The recent Mega Donna Mega study showed that enteral supplementation immediately after birth with n-3 DHA (50 mg/kg/d) and n-6 ARA (100 mg/kg/d) at a 1:2 ratio reduced severe ROP incidence by 50 % in extremely preterm infants (< 28 weeks of gestational age), suggesting that the balance between DHA and ARA may be crucial in protecting against ROP. However, the underlying mechanisms are unknown.
Hyperglycemia in the early postnatal period after preterm birth, seen in 45 % of preterm infants with birth weight < 1000 g and 80 % of preterm infants with birth weight < 750 g, is associated with increased ROP incidence and severity. In this study, we examined postnatal hyperglycemic status in the Mega Donna Mega trial. We tested a balanced maternal rodent diet containing 1 % DHA + 2 % ARA vs. 3 % DHA in hyperglycemia-associated retinopathy in pups, modeling Phase I ROP. We have previously shown that maternal diet composition is reflected in milk-fed pups’ retinas. We assessed the impact of DHA+ARA vs. DHA maternal diet on pup retinal vascular development, fatty acid profile of retina, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) complex, and plasma, as well as retinal proteome, to uncover protective mechanisms of combined nutritional n-3 and n-6 LCPUFAs as a potential strategy for prevention and treatment of Phase I ROP.
The primary aim of this study was to determine whether combined maternal DHA+ARA supplementation provides benefit over DHA alone in mouse models of ROP, as well as to investigate the underlying mechanisms. The 1:2 DHA:ARA ratio was chosen according to the Mega Donna Mega and the DIAMOND clinical trials. We hypothesized that maternal DHA+ARA vs. DHA may be protective in murine ROP models.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.phrs.2025.107877.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors have declared no conflict of interest.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Masanori Aikawa: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Funding acquisition. Chuck T. Chen: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Methodology. Sasha A. Singh: Writing – review & editing, Methodology. Chaomei Wang: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Hitomi Yagi: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Katherine Neilsen: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Myriam Boeck: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Mathew Yu: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Aldina Pivodic: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Jeff Lee: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Pia Lundgren: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Zhongjie Fu: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Deokho Lee: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Richard P. Bazinet: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Taku Kasai: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Lois EH Smith: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Victoria Hirst: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Ann Hellström: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Shen Nian: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Yan Zeng: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Andrew McCutcheon: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis. Anders K. Nilsson: Writing – review & editing, Investigation, Formal analysis.
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT and Perplexity AI to refine the manuscript language. After using these tools, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.