PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture; Fibroblast
diseases: Esophagus adenocarcinoma
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
keywords: Human; Secretome; Oesophageal cancer

ABSTRACT:
We improve on currently-available resources by describing a mass spectrometry (MS)-based strategy using stable isotope dynamic labelling of secretomes (SIDLS) that discriminates between authentic secretory proteins and intracellular proteins within the secretome of cultured cells. By monitoring the rate of incorporation of labelled amino acids into newly synthesised proteins as they appear in the media, we can differentiate those proteins that have been destined for secretion, and exhibit rapid labelling, from those with low rates of labelling or low turnover relative to the growth rate of the cells which is a feature of intracellular proteins. Part of the wet lab protocol for our analysis of secretomes, is the use of the resin, Strataclean (Agilent). In this Supplementary dataset to our main paper (also in PRIDE/ProteomeXchange), we characterise the linearity of capture of secreted proteins using Stracalean resin, by label-free quantitative mass spectrometry. We mix cell-coditioned culture media with 'virgin' media in different ratios and analayse the capture capacity of equal quantitites of StrataClean reagent.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Stable isotope dynamic labelling of secretomes: Strataclean Linearity C4PR_LIV

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Cell-conditioned media samples were concentrated using StrataClean prior to proteolytic digestion with trypsin and LC-MSMS analysis on a Nano-Acquity RP-HPLC system, coupled in-line to an LTQ Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Digests (2 microL) from each secretome taken at each time point, were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm x 75 microM inner diameter, C18, 3 microM, 100 Å) at 5 microL per min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1%(v/v) TFA and 2%(v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 15 cm x 50cm inner diameter, C18, 2 microlM, 100 Å) (Dionex). Peptides were loaded in 0.1%(v/v) formic acid and eluted with a linear gradient of 3.8–40% buffer B (HPLC grade acetonitrile 80%(v/v) with 0.1%(v/v) formic acid) over 95 min at 300 nl per min, followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (15 min at 3.8% solvent). All peptide separations were carried out using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was operated at a constant temperature of 35 °C and the LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2, +3, and/or +4 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0 Th for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 100 ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20 s.

DATA PROCESSING:
Acquired MS data were searched and analysed using Andromeda and MaxQuant 1.5.8.3 against a reviewed human UniProt protein database (date: 07/12/2015), using the default settings; briefly: the minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids long and a single missed cleavage was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation was allowed as a variable modification. The initial precursor and fragment ion maximum mass deviations were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 1%, the ‘requant’ function activated and ‘match between runs’ enabled with the default parameters. To assess changes in the label-free abundance of proteins identified from the 1% FDR Andromeda searches, we used the intensity values reported by MaxQuant (in proteinGroups.txt) on a per protein basis in the cell-conditioned:virgin culture medium mixtures.

METHODS:
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cell Culture
Human primary cancer-associated myofibroblasts (CAMs) were derived from resected human esophageal squamous cancer tissue, obtained from patients as described previously. Esophageal squamous cell cancer cells, OE21, were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). All cells were maintained at 37 °C, in 5% v/v CO2, and cultured in DMEM, supplemented with 10% v/v FBS as previously described.
Stable Isotopic Dynamic Labeling, Mass Spectrometry and Protein Identification
Cells (1 × 106) were seeded in complete medium (DMEM) in five T75 flasks giving 80–90% confluency, per flask. The following day, the cell-conditioned medium on each flask was changed to fresh 37 °C heavy-labeled ((13C6)-labeled l-lysine) DMEM (10 ml volume per dish, serum-free). At the following time intervals - 30 min, 1 h, 2 h, 6 h, and 24 h - all 10 ml of now heavy-labeled cell-conditioned DMEM from each flask was collected for subsequent secretome profiling (Fig. 1A), as follows. Each medium/secretome preparation was centrifuged at 800 × g for 7 min to remove debris and the protein component within each was concentrated by mixing, with agitation, with 25 μl StrataClean resin (Agilent Technologies Ltd., Wokingham, UK). The resin beads were washed twice in 25 mm ammonium bicarbonate (ambic). Each secretome-loaded StrataClean suspension was re-suspended in 80 μl of 25 mm ambic and 5 μl of 1% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, Hertfordshire, UK) in 25 mm ambic, prior to on-bead proteolytic digestion with trypsin (MS grade Trypsin Gold, Promega). The samples were heated at 80 °C for 10 min after which proteins were reduced, by the addition of 5 μl of 60 mm DTT at 60 °C for 10 min, before being cooled prior to addition of 5 μl of 180 mm iodoacetamide and incubation at RT for 30 min in the dark. Trypsin (1 μg) was added and the samples incubated at 37 °C overnight on a rotary mixer. Peptide digests were subsequently acidified by the addition of 1 μl of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubated at 37 °C for 45 min. Following centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 30 min, 10 μl of each clarified supernatant (peptide mixture) was prepared for nano LC-MS/MS. Peptide digests (2 μl) from each sample were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at 5 μl/min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Peptides were loaded in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and eluted with a linear gradient of 3.8 - 40% buffer B (HPLC grade acetonitrile 80% (v/v) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 95 min at 300 nl/min, followed by a washing step (5 min at 99% solvent B) and an equilibration step (15 min at 3.8% solvent). All peptide separations were carried out using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex). The column was operated at a constant temperature of 40 °C and the LC system was coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), as described previously. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the 10 most abundant peptides of charge state between 2+ and 4+ were selected for fragmentation by higher energy collisional dissociation with an isolation window of 2.0 Th and normalized collision energy of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 100 ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E5 for the MS/MS scans. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20 s.
Acquired MS data were searched and analyzed using Andromeda and MaxQuant 1.5.8.3 against a reviewed human UniProt protein database (date: 03/09/2016 containing 20,203 entries), using the default settings; briefly: the minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids long, trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme and a single missed cleavage was allowed. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation was allowed as a variable modification. The initial precursor and fragment ion maximum mass deviations were set to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDRs) were set to 1%, the “requant” function activated and “match between runs” enabled with the default parameters. In supplemental material (supplemental Fig. S5), we include copies of relevant figures in the main text (Figs. 3A/3B, 6A/6B, and 8A/8B) where the requant function was disabled, to demonstrate that although the total number of proteins is lower, the results and conclusions of this study are unchanged.
Quantification and Kinetic Analysis of Secretion
To analyze the rate of incorporation of heavy stable isotope-labeled amino acids into nascent proteins within secreted proteins, the MaxQuant peptide-level “evidence.txt” output file was analyzed in detail. Initially, peptides from known contaminant proteins as well as those generated by proteolytic mis-cleavage events (thus potentially carrying >1 labeling site) were omitted. Although only lysine-terminated peptides have the potential to carry a dynamic stable isotope label for kinetic measurements, identification of secretome proteins was based on both arginine- and lysine-terminated tryptic peptide matches. It would, of course, be possible in the future to use both labeled lysine and arginine to increase the number of kinetically informative peptides but the principles of the method we describe here would not change as a consequence. Peptide mass spectral “evidence data” for secretome proteins were then split into two lists, according to cell-line (OE21 or CAM).
For each peptide passing a 1% FDR threshold in the Andromeda search, the relative isotope abundance (RIA) was calculated at each time point if present in the MS data. RIA is expressed as abundance of heavy, labeled peptide (H), divided by the abundance of all (heavy + light) peptide (RIAt = H/H+L). We applied a set of stringent criteria to produce high quality data-sets for each cell line analyzed. To model the secretome labeling trajectory, the RIA data for at least three time-points were used. We focused on peptides that had been identified and quantified, allowing RIA calculation, at more than one time point in the labeling trajectory, so that we were effectively tracking their RIA behavior over time. Moreover, because the protein content of the secretome increases with time, we only analyzed peptide mass spectral data that included RIA data at 6 h and 24 h post exchange of culture medium. A small number of peptides were rejected from further analysis if they implied labeling profiles that could not be biologically possible in this experimental system, specifically, where the calculated RIA at 30 min or 60 min after medium exchange was greater than that after 6 h or 24 h - these are likely artifacts. Because proteins at t = 0 are completely unlabeled and for fully labeled proteins, RIA = 1, we fitted a simplified version of the general first order equation:  which generates the optimal fitted curve for a first order rise to plateau labeling (k) from an initial value of 0 to a final value of 1.0. Fitting was achieved using the nls() function in R.
To assess changes in the abundance of proteins identified from the 1% FDR Andromeda search in our secretomes, we summed the mass spectral peptide intensity reported by MaxQuant for labeled (heavy) and unlabeled (light) features to obtain a quantification value. These intensity values represent the summed eXtracted Ion Current (XIC) of all isotopic clusters associated with the identified peptide sequence. If more than one peptide was identified and quantified per protein, we calculated the mean abundance of labeled (heavy) and unlabeled (light) peptide species. This was used to monitor changes in abundance of each individual protein in the secretome with time which, for a physiologically secreted protein, should increase. To calculate a measure of the flux of each protein from intracellular to extracellular pools/compartments, we first measured the abundance (P) secreted over an 18 h period by subtracting the amount secreted after 6 h from that after 24 h. We then multiplied this with the first-order rate constant (k) at which newly synthesized protein acquired heavy isotopic label, to give flux (flux = k. (P)). In order to obtain protein-level kinetic data, RIA data for peptides belonging to the same protein were grouped together and fitted using the nls() function in R. Our high-quality data-sets for both cell lines were then cross-annotated with the output from SignalP (as described in Functional analysis, below), to explore the relationship(s) between labeling kinetics and predicted sub-cellular localization. All mathematical modeling and data visualizations used R (v3.5.0) and ggplot2 (v2.0.1). Extraction and visualization of mass spectral isotopic patterns and XIC data were carried out using the “RforProteomics” package (1.15.0). Abundance and kinetic plots are provided for every protein in supplemental material.
Functional Analysis
All protein hits from the 1% FDR Andromeda search were subsequently used for subcellular localization and GO enrichment analysis. The FASTA amino acid sequence for each protein identified in OE21 or CAM secretomes was extracted from the UniProt database and submitted to SignalP v4.1 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/), to identify classically secreted proteins wherein a threshold SignalP d-score >0.5 defines classical secretion, as described previously.
UniProt accession numbers for all proteins in each secretome collected over the labeling trajectory were loaded into the R/Bioconductor package “clusterProfiler” (version 3.8.0) to allow GO over-representation analyses. We used the “enrichGO” function together with “compareCluster” to track changes in the functional enrichment profile with time, based on a hypergeometric distribution using a background list of all proteins in the H. sapiens annotation database. To remove redundant GO terms the “simplify” function was applied using the “Wang” measure of semantic similarity (similarity cut-off of 0.5), reporting only terms with the lowest FDR-adjusted p values. A similar approach was taken to obtain GO functional profiles of our secretomes based on labeling kinetics.
Western Blot Analysis
Secretomes were probed by Western blotting for selected classically secreted proteins, namely MMP1 (antibody BAF901, R&D Systems, Oxfordshire, UK), MMP3 (antibody AF913, R&D Systems), TGFB/TGFβig-h3 (antibody AF2935, R&D Systems) and SCG2 (antibody ab96589, Abcam, Cambridge, UK). In some experiments, the cells were pre-incubated for 30 min with 10 μg.ml−1 brefeldin A (BFA; eBioscience, Ltd., Hatfield, UK), or 10 μg.ml−1 cycloheximide (Sigma, Dorset, UK) and/or 1 μm ionomycin (Sigma). Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and processed for Western blotting as described previously.

RESULTS:
RESULTS
Experimental Strategy
Secretomes, particulary in the early periods of incubation, are low abundance and we concentrated proteins by adsorption onto StrataClean, a silica-based bead preparation with a high affinity for protein. This captures all secretome proteins, and tryptic digests can be conducted directly on the beads—SDS-PAGE of bead eluate after digestion confirms completeness of digestion (results not shown). Peptides recovered from the on-bead digests were then used directly for LC-MS/MS. To establish the linearity of the StrataClean bead capture, we completed control experiments in which fresh “virgin” (v) culture media was mixed in different proportions (specifically, 0:100, 20:80, 50:50, 80:20 and 100:0) with media that had been cell-conditioned (cc) for 24 h with CAM cells (supplemental Fig. S1, supplemental Table S1). StrataClean was used exactly as described under Experimental Procedures. The label free abundance of recovered proteins exhibited excellent linearity with protein load, confirming the quantitative performance of the protein capture method (supplemental Fig. S1, supplemental Table S1). Further, the assessment of the degree of labeling of protein captured by StrataClean is internally controlled and thus independent of the quantity of protein.
Kinetic Parameters for Secretome Proteins: Abundance and Flux
Each protein in a secretome has two kinetic parameters of relevance. The first is the change in abundance as a function of time. A protein that is actively secreted should accumulate in the medium, unless there is an opposing removal process that takes the protein back into the cell or which elicits extracellular degradation (a possibility, given the number of endopeptidases that are secreted from cells). Thus, abundance is not enough to define secretome kinetics. The second necessary parameter is flux, or the rate at which the protein flows from the intracellular pool to the extracellular space. Measurement of flux can also discriminate between classically secreted proteins and those that are released from the cell through necrotic or apoptotic changes, provided a labeling method is used to discriminate these pools. If a cell is supplied with labeled precursors, such as amino acids, the newly synthesized and labeled intracellular proteins will enter and equilibrate with the unlabeled pre-existing pool. Thus, although newly synthesized proteins are fully labeled, they are diluted by a large, pre-existing pool of unlabeled protein, and thus the RIA is low. Subsequent leakage from the cell would reflect loss of this minimally-labeled mixture. If a small proportion of this pool is then released from the cell, the fraction of protein molecules that are labeled will be low. By contrast, proteins that are classically secreted by the constitutive pathway do not have a large intracellular reservoir to dilute the labeling of newly synthesized molecules, so all labeled proteins exiting the endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi are immediately secreted from the cell and will exhibit rapid acquisition of complete labeling in the medium. A third class of proteins, those of the regulated secretory pathway which is a feature of neural, exocrine, and endocrine cells, can have a large, stored intracellular pool in secretory vesicles, and thus, newly synthesized protein should enter this pool and may exhibit relatively slow labeling. We reasoned that these different kinetic behaviors could be used to discriminate between classically secreted proteins and those derived from intracellular protein leakage.
Tensioned against protein turnover is the change in protein abundance. Secretome protein pools that expand would be expected to exhibit a rapid increase in label enrichment, consistent with a small intracellular pool and physiological secretion. By contrast, continued leakage of an intracellular protein, e.g. through cell damage, will reflect the extent of labeling of the intracellular pool, and unless this is an intrinsically high turnover protein, the degree of labeling will be low. To develop this logic further, a secreted protein pool that is static (not increasing) but which has a high degree of labeling must be subject to rapid removal from the extracellular pool (Fig. 1B). It follows that two measurements, changes in secretome protein abundance and the kinetic profile of labeling, could resolve proteins that are physiologically secreted from those that leak from the cell.
Rapid Labeling and Secretion in Both Cancer and Stromal Cells of a Classically Secreted Protein but Not an Intracellular Protein
In this study, a cancer (OE21) cell and a stromal cell (CAM) were labeled over 24 h with a stable isotope-labeled amino acid in the medium and the size of the secreted pool was assessed by summing the abundance of labeled (heavy, H) and unlabeled (light, L) peptide mass spectral features over time (0.5 to 24 h; Fig. 1C, 1D). Concurrently, the extent of labeling was assessed by monitoring changes in the relative isotope abundance (RIA, expressed as H/(H+L)) of these features, with time. Both cell types were monitored over time for incorporation of (13C6)lysine, and for protein abundance. To illustrate the concept: the peptide SQNPVQPIGPQTPK from an established physiologically secreted protein, matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1), could be detected in unlabeled form 30 min after incubating CAMs in (13C6)lysine-containing culture medium but, at this time, no labeled peptide was present (Fig. 1C, 1D). The unlabeled material defines MMP1 that was pre-synthesized prior to medium exchange and equilibration of the extracellular labeled amino acid with the intracellular tRNA pool. Over time, there was a progressive increase in labeled MMP1, highlighted by the shift in the relative peak heights of either XICs (Fig. 1C) or peptide precursor ion isotopic envelopes (Fig. 1D), as well as in change in RIA with time (RIAt, Fig. 2A, red line). However, intracellular proteins, of which tubulin beta 3 (TBB3) is a representative example, incorporated virtually no label during the same period (Fig. 2A, blue line). Moreover, a comparison of the quantified abundance (summing both labeled and unlabeled peptides to obtain the total pool) revealed that although the output of MMP1 increased steadily over the period of the experiment, the abundance of TBB3 remained relatively static or even declined (Fig. 2B).
Secretome Constituents Meeting the Criteria for Kinetic Analysis
We established a dataset of secretome proteins upon which a rigorous analysis of secretory kinetics might be made. After removing peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) from known contaminant proteins (included in the MaxQuant installation by default), we had a dataset with 92,480 PSMs: 48,933 in OE21 secretome samples corresponding to 2109 unique proteins and 43,547 in CAM samples corresponding to 1815 unique proteins. Approximately 9% of total PSMs (8,274) were generated by proteolytic mis-cleavage events and although those containing lysine residues could also report on labeling extent, they were excluded in this analysis. Arginine-terminating PSMs accounted for ∼40% of the total (OE21, 19,243; CAM, 17,566) and were used for protein identification purposes but not for measurement of label incorporation. The remaining 55,671 PSMs (OE21, 29,690; CAM, 25,981) were lysine-terminated with a single instance of this amino acid; these mapped to 1751 (OE21) and 1484 (CAM) unique proteins. Further application of the stringent filtering criteria described in the experimental procedures section yielded 910 individual proteins from OE21 cells (RIAt data generated from 13,585 PSMs) and 549 proteins from CAMs (RIAt data generated from 11,313 PSMs). Pre- and postfiltered RIAt data sets can be found in supplemental Table S2.
Classically Secreted Proteins Exhibit Distinct Secretory Kinetics
For each protein in the reduced and filtered data set, the labeling vector was measured as a first order rate constant (k) defining the rise to plateau labeling and, if appropriate, exchange into a pre-existing, unlabeled intracellular pool. Moreover, the quantified abundance (summing both labeled and unlabeled peptides to obtain the total pool) was used to determine the rate of pool expansion. These two parameters were then used to discriminate classically secreted proteins from intracellular proteins that were externalized by leakage. Complete labeling trajectory and abundance curves for individual proteins from both CAMs and OE21 cells are provided in the supplemental material (supplemental Fig. S2 (CAM) and supplemental Fig. S3 (OE21); red plots—labeling kinetics; blue plots—abundance). Many proteins were rapidly labeled and after a short period the RIAt reached unity. By contrast, other proteins were barely labeled in the same time frame. Further exploration of the data indicated that well known classically secreted proteins (e.g. MMP1, MMP2, MMP3, TGFβig-h3) incorporated (13C6)lysine rapidly whereas known intracellular proteins (e.g. BAG3, COF1, SYSC, TBB5) were labeled minimally. In addition, the abundance in the cell medium of classically secreted proteins increased whereas that of intracellular proteins remained either constant or declined (for abundance data-sets for both CAM and OE21 cells, see the blue plots in supplemental Fig. S2 and supplemental Fig. S3, respectively). These observations therefore support the hypothesis that the rate of labeling of a protein (k) is a reliable indicator of physiological secretion, i.e. proteins destined for secretion by virtue of an N-terminal signal sequence and with no large intracellular pool to dampen the incorporation of label. High k values are associated with those proteins that were operationally defined as secreted, whether based on direct knowledge or through bioinformatically-derived (SignalP) prediction (Fig. 3A and 3B, see also supplemental Fig. S5A and S5B with requant disabled). The SignalP d-cutoff score is a combined value from both signal-peptide and cleavage site prediction networks. The default thresholds resulting in a positive prediction of a signal peptide are 0.5 or 0.45 for eukaryotic proteins with or without a transmembrane domain, respectively. Based on our biology-driven SIDLS approach, these thresholds appear to be accurate (see gray dashed lines in Fig. 3A, CAMs; and 3B, OE21 cells).
Matching Secretory Kinetics and SignalP Scores
To relate secretome kinetics to a protein classification we divided the secretome data into proteins with a SignalP score of >0.5 (classical secretory proteins) compared with those without (<0.5). From the secretomes of the two cell types it was readily possible to identify six different protein populations, namely classically secreted or not, those that were common to the two cells or those exclusive to OE21 or CAMs (Fig. 4). After 6 h of labeling, the RIA of CAM secretome proteins with SignalP >0.5 was clearly distinguishable from those with <0.5. This was also evident although less pronounced in OE21 cells at 24 h (Fig. 5). Rates of label exchange differed for individual proteins (Fig. 6A, CAMs; and Fig. 6B, OE21 cells) but the discrimination based on SignalP score was nonetheless impressive. There are proteins, however, that appear to acquire label very quickly, but which are not classically secreted proteins (i.e. with SignalP scores <0.5; for e.g. see dashed lines in Fig. 6A and 6B, see also supplemental Fig. S5C and S5D with requant disabled). These initially raised concerns to us but their RIAt data are suspicious in that they show an instant rise to plateau without any subsequent increase over time. Detailed inspection of the peptide-level chromatography and mass spectrometry data for these proteins revealed them to be erroneous measurements derived from mis-assignment of heavy/light peptide features by MaxQuant. In fact, in all these cases, there was no tandem MS evidence of both light and heavy features, and we believe these are anomalous data-points. The association between SignalP >0.5 and k >0.02/h (combined k for SignalP >0.5 in OE21, Fig. 6B, red line) was highly significant for both CAMs and OE21 cells (Fisher exact text, p < 0.001 in both cases). Combined fits of all proteins, in each cell type, sub-classified based on SignalP score (> or <0.5), indicated a >10-fold difference in the rate of label exchange (k) in CAMs (Fig. 6C), and an ∼5-fold difference in OE21 cells (Fig. 6D).
A cut-off of k ≥ 0.1/h for the kinetics of a classically secreted protein was initially selected based on an empirical assessment of the data. Indeed, in support of this, inspection of Fig. 6C (red line) shows the predicted k for all proteins with SignalP >0.5 in CAMs was quite close to this cut off, i.e. 0.058/h. However, the selection of the cut-off in k to differentiate classically secreted proteins may vary for different cell types depending on their biology. For example, there were lower rates of label exchange in the cancer cell line (OE21; Fig. 6D). Alternative approaches to defining the cut-off may prove useful in comparative studies between cell types. Taking a combined fit value of each secretome sub-classified by SignalP > or <0.5, which is valid also based on its relationship to k (Fig. 3), identified a distinct group of 108/549 (CAMs) and 57/910 (OE21) proteins that are “true” physiologically secreted proteins.
Validation of the Kinetics of Classically Secreted Proteins
To determine whether the SIDLS kinetic profiles were compatible with those derived by other methods, we used orthogonal analysis by Western blots to define the kinetic responses of three representative classically secreted proteins, MMP1, MMP3 and transforming growth factor-beta-induced protein ig-h3 (TGFBI/TGFβig-h3), following pharmacological treatments that arrest protein secretion. When translation was inhibited in CAMs with cycloheximide, the accumulation in the medium of MMP1 and TGFβig-h3 was already inhibited at 1 h and for these two as well as MMP2 was very clearly inhibited at 4 h (Fig. 7A, left). Similarly, using the ER-to-Golgi transport inhibitor, brefeldin A (BFA), to block progression along the secretory pathway, the appearance of MMP1 was suppressed at 1 h and for all three proteins at 2 h (Fig. 7A, right). The rate of appearance and abundance of all three proteins in the secretome measured using immunoblotting closely mirrors that determined by SIDLS (Fig. 7B).
Application of SIDLS to Proteins Exhibiting Regulated Secretion
Constitutively secreted proteins predominate in the secretomes of the two cells studied here. However, stromal myofibroblasts including CAMs may exhibit a modest regulated secretory pathway and in this context it is interesting that a marker of the pathway, secretogranin-2 (SCG2), was identified and exhibited rapid label incorporation (k = 0.274/h). Immunoblotting confirmed that secretion of SCG2 was stimulated by a short (30 min) stimulation with ionomycin, consistent with calcium-evoked exocytosis and the response was resistant to cycloheximide and BFA, consistent with release from storage vesicles (Fig. 7C). Thus, SIDLS can also be applicable to proteins of the regulated secretory pathway. The kinetics of labeling of these proteins in the medium may be slower than for constitutively secreted proteins although this may be offset to a substantial extent for those regulated secretory proteins that exhibit preferential secretion of newly synthesized material.
Meta-analysis of Classically Secreted Proteins in the CAM Secretome
Classically secreted proteins included representatives of several important classes of secreted protein, notably extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as TGFB/TGFβig-h3, proteases (e.g. MMP1, MMP3, C1R), protease inhibitors (e.g. TIMP1, TIMP2, SERPINE1, SERPINE2), chemokines (e.g. RARRES2), cytokines (e.g. the growth factors, VEGFC and CTGF) and growth factor-associated proteins (e.g. IGFBP3, -4, -5, -6), some of which have already been characterized in previous studies of myofibroblast secretomes. When flux is plotted against estimated k, this subset is readily distinguishable (Fig. 8, selected examples are highlighted, see also supplemental Fig. S5E and S5F with requant disabled).
Using a SignalP d-score < or >0.5, in isolation, as a classifier of secretion (Fig. 9A (CAM) and Fig. 9C (OE21)), GO over-representation analysis revealed molecular function (GOMF) terms linked with binding to multiple ECM components for secreted proteins (SigP >0.5). Nonsecreted proteins, however, showed an enrichment with terms associated primarily with translation and cell structure, consistent with the idea that these are simply “leaked” proteins that function in these intracellular processes. Using our data-driven, SIDLS-determined classification of the secretome, in combination with SignalP (see Fig. 6C and 6D) to separate the secretome into a “high k” group (k > combined fit for SignalP >0.5 proteins) and a “low k” group (k < combined fit for SignalP >0.5 proteins) reveals an almost identical pattern of GOMF terms (Fig. 9B (CAM) and 9D (OE21)), adding further confidence to our SIDLS-mediated approach to secretome classification.

INTRODUCTION:
Protein secretion critically supports a diverse range of cellular functions including cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, as well as specialized functions such as hormone or digestive enzyme release. The constitutive secretion of proteins is a property of all cells, whereas regulated secretion (i.e. dependent on release of preformed stores after increased intracellular Ca2+) occurs in specialized cells including neurons, endocrine and exocrine cells. It is now appreciated that an understanding of secretomes (the totality of secreted proteins) is of crucial importance in health and disease. For example, the secretomes of cancer and stromal cells contribute strongly to the cellular microenvironment that determines tumor progression. Thus, secretome studies have proven attractive both because they may provide insight into mechanisms of disease and because they facilitate the discovery of biomarkers that can be used for diagnosis, staging and monitoring of therapy.
Despite considerable progress in developing methods for secretome profiling there remain problematical issues in interpretation of the data. Such studies frequently identify “classical” secreted proteins defined by an N-terminal signal sequence, but they also identify many intracellular proteins, the apparent secretion of which is often of uncertain significance and not readily discriminated from tissue leakage/cell death. Interpretation is further compounded by the fact that many studies are performed at a single time point, such that kinetic differences in the release of different components of the secretome are obscured. The classification of secretome proteins by gene ontology (GO)1 terms or predictions from computational tools/algorithms such as SignalP or SecretomeP can be used to segregate classically secreted proteins from intracellular proteins. However, experimental approaches that support this classification would be of obvious advantage. For example, a triple-labeling, single time point approach was adopted by Kristensen and colleagues, in which they pointed out that the extent of labeling could be used to discriminate newly synthesized secretome proteins and those that were mobilized from pre-existing stores. Here, we extend this thinking by describing a mass spectrometry (MS)-based strategy using stable isotope dynamic labeling of secretomes (SIDLS) that discriminates between classical secretory proteins and intracellular proteins within the secretome of cultured cells. The method differs from traditional SILAC, in which proteins are labeled for a fixed period to ensure all are fully labeled. Further, it differs from the single time point pulsed SILAC approach through dynamic labeling, in which the progressive incorporation of label into proteins is monitored over time. We demonstrate that a time dependence of labeling is of considerable value in the study of cell secretomes. A kinetic approach exploits the different labeling kinetics of classical secretory proteins that exhibit rapid incorporation of label compared with the much slower labeling of the bulk of intracellular proteins, even though some of the latter are present in the secretome. By monitoring the rate of incorporation of labeled amino acids into newly synthesized proteins as they appear in the media, we can differentiate those proteins that have been destined for secretion from those with low rates of labeling or low turnover relative to the growth rate of the cells, a feature of intracellular proteins.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
DATA AVAILABILITY
The mass spectrometry proteomics data for the SIDLS dynamic labeling aspect of this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD007231. Equivalent data for the linearity of protein capture by StrataClean are deposited to ProteomeXchange too, with the identifier PXD009838. The output of the MaxQuant searches of the SIDLS dynamic labeling proteomics data are available using MS-Viewer (http://msviewer.ucsf.edu/prospector/cgi-bin/msform.cgi?form=msviewer), using the search key identifier: 88dyh3qzvc. All annotated spectra can be accessed here. That for the StrataClean linearity experiment is also available using MS-Viewer using the search key idenitifier: hjhr9jxzpk.
Supplementary Material
* This work was supported by a grant from North West Cancer Research.
 This article contains supplemental Figures and Tables. The authors declare no conflicts
1 The abbreviations used are:
GO
gene ontology
SIDLS
stable isotope dynamic labeling of secretomes
CAMs
cancer-associated myofibroblasts.