PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Exploris 480
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-independent acquisition
keywords: Proteomics; protein stability; drug target identification; drug binding potency; downstream effector proteins; living cells analysis

ABSTRACT:
In this study, we introduce a novel approach, the Solvent-Induced Partial Cellular Fixation Approach (SICFA), to monitor drug targets and the temporal progression of downstream biochemical pathways in living cells. We observed that proteins in living cells undergo unfolding and aggregation when exposed to increasing concentrations of solvent-based fixatives, a process modifiable by molecular interactions and intracellular dynamics. Combined with quantitative proteomics, SICFA can precisely detect the effects of drugs on the stability of target and downstream effector proteins. As proof of concept, the intracellular targets and downstream effector proteins of several drugs were identified. Additionally, the IsoSolvent Dose-Response (ISDR)-SICFA workflow was developed to quantify drug-target binding potency within cells. To distinguish between direct drug targets and downstream biochemical pathways, time-dependent experiments were integrated with SICFA, systematically identifying the molecular initiation, intermediate, and outcome events triggered by 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Notably, SICFA revealed that the early stages of 5-FU treatment primarily impact RNA post-transcriptional modification and ribosome biogenesis pathways. Unlike protein expression data, the stability data provided by SICFA offers higher sensitivity, filling the gap in understanding early biochemical events during drug treatment.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Solvent-Induced partial Cellular Fixation Approach enables systematic identification of drug targets and temporal progression of downstream biochemical pathways in living cells

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Jurkat cells were cultured as described above and suspended in 40 mL of RPMI medium. The suspension was split equally into two groups: one treated with raltitrexed to a final concentration of 1 μM (in 1% DMSO) and the other treated with DMSO as a vehicle control. The cells were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes, pelleted by centrifugation at 320×g for 3 minutes, washed three times with ice-cold PBS, and resuspended in PBS containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail.  For SICFA analysis, the cell suspensions from both the drug-treated and control groups were each divided into seven aliquots (40 µL per aliquot, containing approximately 2 million cells). Varying concentrations of fixative (0%, 6%, 8%, 10%, 12%, 14%, and 16%) were added to each aliquot. The samples were equilibrated at 37°C with shaking at 1200 rpm for 10 minutes. After equilibration, 0.4% NP40 was added to each sample. The samples were then subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles using liquid nitrogen. After lysis, the samples were centrifuged at 21,000×g for 15 minutes at 4°C, and equal volumes of the supernatants were collected for Western blot analysis. For MS analysis, the cell suspensions from both the drug-treated and control groups were divided into five aliquots (each containing approximately 2 million cells). A 10% fixative was added to each aliquot. The samples were then equilibrated at 37°C with shaking at 1200 rpm for 10 minutes. After equilibration, the cells were lysed, and the supernatants were collected by centrifugation at 21,000×g for 15 minutes at 4°C, as described above, for subsequent MS analysis.

DATA PROCESSING:
Raw data were processed using the default parameters of the directDIA analysis module in Spectronaut (version 18.1). The Human UniProt FASTA database (updated on 2020-06-08) was used for protein identification, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) was controlled at 1% at the protein group level. For protein quantification, the top three peptide ion intensities were used. Protein intensities across different technical replicates were normalized using a local normalization strategy. All statistical analyzes in this work were performed using the limma package loaded in R (https://www.r project.org) for two-sample empirical Bayesian tests.