PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Placenta; Stem cell
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Top-down proteomics; Bottom-up proteomics; Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Filter-aided sample  preparation; Proteomics; Human amniotic mesenchymal stromal cells; Secretome

ABSTRACT:
LC-MS proteomic analysis using top-down and bottom-up combined strategies via Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) was applied to the secretome of mesenchymal stromal cells isolated from the amniotic membrane of human term placenta in the attempt to define the profile of its intact as well as digested proteome and of the biomolecules possibly involved in the immunomodulatory property exerted.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic Analysis of the Human Amniotic Mesenchymal Stromal Cell Secretome by integrated approaches via Filter-Aided Sample Preparation 

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
The proteome of the human amniotic mesenchymal stromal cells secretome was characterized by analyzing four different batches of secretome pool (Pools I-IV) by a modified Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP, 10 kDa molecular mass filter cut-off) protocol, named C-FASP, able to prepare the sample in one step for top-down and bottom-up (using trypsin digestion) combined analysis applied to the filtrate (< 10 kDa) and to the retained (> 10 kDa) fractions, respectively. The two fractions of each pool have been analysed in triplicate (run1-3) by Liquid Chromatography-nanoESI-Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) in gradient elution using C18 (2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) chromatographic columns. MS operated in positive ionization mode and CID tandem MS fragmentation in top 20 DDS mode. MS/MS spectra acquisition was performed in the linear ion trap at normal scan rate for bottom-up analysis and in high resolution for the top-down.

DATA PROCESSING:
LC-MS data were elaborated by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) based on SEQUEST HT cluster as search engine against the Homo Sapiens UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein knowledgebase (released in 2021_4). The signal to noise (S/N) threshold was set to 1.5. The set enzyme was trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites; minimum and maximum peptide length was 6 and 144 residues, respectively. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.5 Da and 0.02 Da; use average precursor mass False; use average fragment mass False. Methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da) and N-Terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) were set as dynamic modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02 Da) was additionally set as static modification for bottom-up analyses. Protein and peptide identification was validated by the Percolator node, with the strict target value of False Discovery Rate (FDR) set at 0.01 and the relaxed value at 0.05.