PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Cell culture
diseases: Cervix carcinoma
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion Lumos
modifications: No PTMs are included in the dataset
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: Label free
keywords: High-content screening; Click chemistry; Xpb

ABSTRACT:
High-content screening (HCS) has become a powerful tool in drug discovery; however, their reliance on indirect readouts and surrogate markers limits their ability to directly assess drug-protein interactions at endogenous levels, particularly in subcellular contexts. Here, we report the development of a confocal image-based HCS platform that addresses these limitations by combining with bio-orthogonal labelling. We synthesized a clickable probe TL-alkyne that rapidly and specifically labels xeroderma pigmentosum type B (XPB), a critical protein in the nucleotide excision repair (NER). The colorimetric HCS assay enabled direct and precise measurement of drug occupancy rates in XPB specifically within the nucleus of live cells. Out of 1,953 FDA-approved drugs, pelitinib was identified as a novel ligand to bind XPB. It formed a covalent bond with Cys342 of XPB, suppressed XPB's ATPase activity, impaired nucleotide excision repair, and synergistically enhanced chemotherapy. This study demonstrates the transformative potential of integrating click chemistry with advanced HCS technologies, offering a robust framework for high-throughput drug discovery targeting challenging protein systems

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Development of A Image-based High-content Screening Assay Based on Clickable Probes for Identification of XPB Inhibitors

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Following treatment by TL probe, cell pellets were lysed in a buffer containing 1% (v/v) Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES, 10% (v/v) glycerol, EDTA-free protease inhibitor, and 0.1% (v/v) Benzonase Nuclease. Protein concentrations were quantified using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The click chemistry reaction was performed in a solution comprising 50 μM biotin-azide, 1 mM TCEP, 100 μM TBTA in a 1:4 mixture of DMSO and t-butyl alcohol, and 1 mM CuSO4. The reaction was incubated at room temperature for 1 hour in the absence of light. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated with acetone, resuspended in a loading buffer, and separated by SDS-PAGEfor in-gel digestion.

DATA PROCESSING:
Data were analyzed by SEQUEST, PD. Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragmentation tolerance were set as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for the database search. Peptide length range was set from 6 to 144 as default. Trypsin was set as the enzyme with max. missed cleavage sites two.

RESULTS:
Results and Discussion
Design and Synthesis of Chemical Probes for Labeling XPB in Live Cells
Initially, we synthesized two chemical probes, TL‐alk and triptolide‐azide (TL‐az), based on the structure of TL (Figures 1a and S1‐3). We modified the parental compound TL on the side chain hydroxyl group based on prior knowledge of the structure‐activity relationship to retain the biological activities.[  ] Both probes retained the essential 12,13‐epoxide functional group, which serves as an electrophilic center for covalent bonding with Cys342 of XPB.[  ] Terminal alkyne and azide groups were incorporated for CuAAC click chemistry. The activity of probes was evaluated by measuring cell viability after treating HeLa cells for 48 h with various concentrations. The half‐maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values of TL‐alk and TL‐az were 9.6 nM and 2.0 nM, respectively, slightly lower than TL (19.8 nM) (Figure 1b). Next, the probe labeling was visualized by using an in‐gel fluorescent scan. TL was used to compete with probes and distinguish between specific and non‐specific labeling. TL‐alk displayed much less non‐specific labeling than TL‐az (Figure 1c). The increased background with TL‐az was likely attributed to the excess amount of TAMRA‐alkyne in the CuAAC reaction. It was reported that once activated, the TAMRA‐alkyne could not only react with azide but also engage in secondary reactions with protein nucleophiles, such as the sulfhydryl groups in cysteine residues.[  ] Interestingly, a prominent protein band at approximately 90 kDa was strongly and specifically labeled by TL‐alk, which was likely to be endogenous XPB. Comparative analysis revealed that TL‐alk outperformed its azide counterpart, TL‐az, in in‐gel fluorescence assays due to reduced background signals, underscoring its superior specificity and utility for HCS applications.
Labeling of XPB by Probe Triptolide‐alkyne in Live Cells
Next, we evaluated the characteristics of TL‐alk for labeling XPB in live cells in terms of efficiency, specificity, and labeling rate. A dose‐dependent experiment determined the saturation concentration of TL‐alk for XPB labeling with the half‐maximal effective concentration (EC50) value (0.0926 µM) (Figure 2a). The fluorescence intensity of the XPB band increased with probe concentration, reaching saturation at 0.25 µM without increasing non‐specific labeling (Figure S4A). In a time‐course experiment to investigate the labeling rate, the fluorescent intensity in the XPB band reached saturation within 3 minutes (Figures 2b and S4B). TL‐alk showed high specificity, efficiency, and rapid labeling kinetics attributes that are critical for imaging‐based assays designed to monitor dynamic processes in complex biological systems.
We also assessed TL's saturation concentration, finding that 1 µM TL fully occupied endogenous XPB in HeLa cells (Figures 2c and S4C). TL reacted quickly: within 8 min, 10 µM TL completely blocked TL‐alk from labeling XPB (Figures 2d and S4D). To ensure consistency across different cell lines, we tested the probe in HEK293T and HeLa S3 cells, achieving reproducible, specific, and rapid labeling (Figure S5).
Next, we employed TL‐alk as a tool to visualize the subcellular localization of XPB. However, as a transcription factor,[  ] endogenous XPB presents in extremely low abundance, making it difficult to observe under a regular confocal microscope. Therefore, we generated HEK293T and CHO‐K1 cell lines that stably express EGFP‐tagged XPB to visualize XPB more accurately, as the 121 kDa protein band in Figure S6A‐C. To saturate tagged XPB in engineered cells, 5 µM of TL‐alk was required (Figure S7B), and thus adopted in the following experiments. We designed a colorimetric assay with three channels to monitor EGFP, TAMRA, and DAPI stains. The EGFP signal was used to monitor the expression level and subcellular distribution of EGFP‐tagged XPB. Through click chemistry, we conjugated TAMRA‐azide to visualize probe‐labeled XPB. The DAPI signal enabled cell counting and cytotoxicity assessment. Notably, while the IAA probe (negative control) exhibited a non‐specific distribution, the TL‐alk signals (the TAMRA signal) showed precise co‐localization with EGFP‐tagged XPB, confirming the probe's high specificity. Dose‐response studies revealed an EC50 value of 0.604 µM, which aligned with independent in‐gel fluorescence scan analysis (Figure S7D). The CHO‐K1 XPB‐EGFP cells are indeed a promising model for studying and visualizing the binding kinetics between XPB and TL‐alk.
We also quantified the labeling efficiency of TL‐alk with endogenous XPB by mass spectrometry (MS). Given its intrinsic low abundance, the basal level of XPB was undetectable in the control group. A strong signal of unique XPB peptide, “NSEGEATELITETFTSK”, was observed after TL‐alk enrichment (Figure 2e). These results demonstrated that TL‐alk specifically and effectively labels XPB in live cells.
The Cell Imaging‐Based High‐Content Screening (HCS) Assay with the Clickable Probe for Discovering XPB Inhibitors
Confocal fluorescence imaging showed that TL completely occupied XPB in CHO‐K1‐XPB‐EGFP cells, as indicated by the lack of TAMRA signals (Figure S8A). This finding highlights the effectiveness of our approach and underscores the potential of direct intracellular imaging HCS assay as a reliable method for identifying XPB inhibitors (Figure 3a).
To ensure high reproducibility and robustness in cell‐based HCS, we optimized the assay parameters to enhance signal differentiation between low and high readouts. TL was utilized as a benchmark to evaluate the binding effect, with 100 nM for low occupancy and 10 µM for strong competition with the probe for XPB binding. We compared fluorophores, blocking buffer, and washing buffer recipes to identify the most effective conditions (Figures 3b,c and S8B). The key factors for improving the signal window were the concentration of fluorophores and the use of a 0.5% casein‐blocking buffer in the click reaction. Results (conditions a and b) showed that the saturation fluorophore concentration was required to achieve the highest TAMRA signal intensity. Also importantly, using the blocking buffer (conditions a and c) significantly reduced background noise from unbound fluorophores. There was almost minimum difference between 0.1% Triton X‐100 and 0.1% Tween‐20 in removing excess fluorophores (Figure S9). The most effective combination in our assay was condition a, which successfully differentiated positive from negative results and was subsequently implemented in the subsequent HCS assay. The quantification and normalization of XPB labeling signals across groups were based on the formula: XPB labeling extent (F) = Mean Nucleic TAMRA (647) intensity / Mean Nucleic EGFP‐tagged XPB intensity. The signal‐to‐noise ratio was determined via (F–F0) / F0, where F0 represents the DMSO group result. To evaluate nuclear XPB competition and identify potential hit candidates, we applied the formula: ((Fprobe–F) / (Fprobe–FTL)).
A library of 1874 FDA‐approved drugs was selected for XPB inhibitor screening due to their established safety profiles and repurposing potential.[  ] Initial screening was performed, with compounds incubated at 50 µM for 1 h, followed by a 0.5 h treatment with TL‐alk. The short incubation period was used to identify compounds with fast‐binding kinetics in XPB. The screening was conducted in triplicate, allowing for the exclusion of compounds exhibiting high toxicity, which could confound the results. Candidate compounds were shortlisted if they yielded a 50% decrease in fluorescent intensity and did not cause any cell death, according to the DMSO‐treated group. In Figure 3e, compounds were analyzed based on their XPB inhibition percentages, with grey dots indicating negative hits, which are compounds that showed less than 50% inhibition. Blue dots represented hits that were later excluded due to high toxicity or unfavorable outcomes in validation. Among these compounds, Pel (marked as a red dot) stood out for its combination of low toxicity and high efficiency in binding XPB, making it particularly noteworthy for further investigation. To evaluate the performance of HCS, we calculated the Z'‐factor and signal‐to‐background ratio (S/B). The average Z'‐factor was 0.76 and the average S/B was 2.6, which are both above the commonly accepted threshold for reliability.[  ] The performance of the seven positive hits from HCS was manually checked (Figure S11). While all six candidates showed reduced TAMRA signals, the DAPI signal reflected their cytotoxicity to be 6 (100%) > 4 (98%) > 5 (90%) > 3 (70%) > 2 (0%) ≈ 1 (0%) ≈ Pel (0%) given the same number of cells was initially seeded in each well. (1: Verteporfin, 2: Menadione, 3: Thimerosal, 4: Zinc Pyrithione, 5: Bardoxolone Methyl, and 6: Nonivamide)
Validation of the Novel XPB Inhibitor Pelitinib
Pel is an EGFR inhibitor currently in Phase II clinical trials for non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and colorectal cancer,[  ] emerged as a notable hit in our screening. To evaluate its inhibitory effect on XPB binding, alternative fluorescence imaging with a classical confocal microscope was performed to label XPB with Pel at varying concentrations. A dose‐dependent reduction in TAMRA signal intensity, was observed with increasing Pel concentrations, confirming that Pel competed with TL‐alk for binding to XPB. (Figure 4a,b). We also conducted the dose‐dependent competition experiments with the other two compounds (1) Verteporfin (Ver) and (2) Menadione (Men) in CHO‐K1‐XPB‐EGFP cells, and they displayed distinct inhibition effects and toxicity profiles. Both Ver and Men demonstrated dose‐dependent competition to probe labeling of XPB (Figure S12). However, Men caused significant nuclear morphological changes and exhibited high toxicity at tested concentrations (Figure S13), which was not observed for Pel or Ver.
Subsequently, the Cellular Thermal Shift Assay (CETSA) was employed to assess the direct interaction between Pel and XPB.[  ] The findings revealed that pre‐incubation with Pel increased XPB's thermal stability, indicating a direct interaction between Pel and XPB (Figure S14). To elucidate whether Pel forms a covalent complex with XPB and its binding sites, we performed LC‐MS/MS of the XPB‐Pel complex. As expected, the peptide 335SGVIVLPCGAGK346 displayed a mass increase of +467.15 240 Da at Cys342, which corresponds to the theoretical mass of a single Pel molecule (Figure 4c).
We investigated whether Pel could inhibit the ATPase activity of XPB using a fluorescence assay in a plate‐reader format to monitor ATP turnover. This assay couples ATP hydrolysis to NADH oxidation via pyruvate kinase (PK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH),[  ] as shown in Figure S15A. The reaction involves the conversion of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to pyruvate by PK, followed by the reduction of pyruvate to lactate by LDH, with each molecule of ATP hydrolysis correlating to a decrease in NADH fluorescence. XPB's ATPase activity was significantly inhibited by TL and Pel, as evidenced by reduced linear fit slopes representing ATP hydrolysis rates (Figures 5a and S15B).
Given that XPB plays an essential role in nucleotide excision repair (NER), the effect of Pel on NER was tested through quantifying UV‐induced DNA lesions, specifically the 6–4 pyrimidine‐pyrimidone photoproducts (6–4PPs), using an anti‐(6–4) PP antibody.[  ] Following treatment with Pel, cells were exposed to UVC irradiation and post‐incubated in a drug‐free medium for three hours (Figures 5b,c, and S16). In DMSO‐treated controls, HeLa cells showed 13% (6–4) PP lesions. In contrast, for HeLa cells treated with 30 µM Pel, 45% of (6–4) PP lesions remained after UV‐induced nucleotide excision. These findings demonstrated that Pel significantly impaired NER and suppressed the removal of UV‐induced DNA damage. We also tested the activity of Ver and Men in terms of NER inhibition. As we expected, Ver and Men both demonstrated inhibition effect, which was consistent with our observations in HCS, whereas Ver induced morphology change of cell nucleus of HeLa cells. (Figure S17). Eventually, we chose Pel as the focus in subsequent assays.
Previous research has shown that inhibiting XPB and NER enhanced the sensitivity of cancer cells to platinum‐based chemotherapeutic agents.[  ] Therefore, we anticipated seeing synergistic anti‐cancer effects of Pel and oxaliplatin. To eliminate the confounding effects of EGFR inhibition, we intentionally chose HepG2 cells, which lack EGFR expression, to test the Pel‐related synergistic effect.[  ] Considering that the IC50 dose of pelitinib in HepG2 cells was 3.32 µM (Figure 5d), a sub‐therapeutic concentration of 1 µM Pel was chosen for combination therapy with oxaliplatin. Two control groups with either 0.1% DMSO or 1 µM Pel were incorporated as reference. Pel significantly enhanced HepG2 cell sensitivity to oxaliplatin, with a 3‐fold reduction in the IC50 value, decreasing it to 2.3 µM (Figures 5e and S18A). The synergistic effect was represented by the Coefficient of Drug Interaction (CDI), with CDI values below 1 indicating synergy.[  ] Across all tested oxaliplatin concentrations, CDI values were consistently below 1, confirming a synergistic effect on cell death. The calculation method and results of CDI values were provided in Figure S18B and Table S1.
Broader Applications in Drug Discovery
This study establishes a broadly applicable framework for drug discovery against challenging protein targets under defined conditions. Notably, this approach enables the interrogation of protein targets previously inaccessible to conventional methodologies, including insoluble proteins in lysates, proteins mediating protein–protein interactions (PPIs), and those requiring native conformations or physiological environments for ligand engagement. Furthermore, the platform facilitates high‐throughput assessment of drug occupancy within specific organelles, cell types, or tissues. While we employed a cysteine‐reactive probe bearing epoxide electrophiles, the strategy is readily adaptable to other bio‐orthogonal probes targeting lysine or alternative residues, provided sufficient selectivity is achieved. For example, this methodology could be extended to targets such as human murine double minute 2 (MDM2)[  ] protein tyrosine phosphatase B (MptpB),[  ] or G‐Quadruplex(es) (G4).[  ] 
Limitations and Future Directions
Although chemical probes show varied specificities and kinetics in binding to their targets, not all chemical probes are suitable for establishing the HCS platform. Setting up an effective HCS platform will also require condition optimization and stable cell lines expressing tagged proteins, particularly for low‐abundance targets such as XPB. After demonstrating the feasibility of combining bio‐orthogonal labeling with the HCS platform, we will explore the possibility of using other chemical probes or additional biological systems. For example, extending our platform to primary cells, patient‐derived models, or patient tissue slices could bridge the gap to clinical translation.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
High‐content screening (HCS) technologies combine automated imaging and sophisticated data analysis in a high‐throughput format to quantitatively measure phenotypic changes in cells such as morphology,[  ] viability,[  ] proliferation,[  ] and specific biomarker expression.[  ] These measurements provide critical insights into the cellular effects of compounds, supporting lead optimization, toxicity assessment, and phenotypic screening.[  ] Despite these strengths, traditional HCS platforms rely on indirect phenotypic readouts such as cell viability, morphology, or surrogate markers, which often fail to provide direct insights into drug‐target interactions.[  ] Overcoming these challenges is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of drug activity, especially when dealing with complex or elusive protein targets.
Bio‐orthogonal labeling enables the direct visualization of cellular activity of special protein targets through copper (I)‐catalyzed azide‐alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) click reaction with fluorescent reporters.[  ] For example, to restore p53 activity by inhibiting the p53‐MDM2 interaction, a set of probes based on 3‐imidazolylindoles, a potent MDM2‐p53 inhibitor class, containing different tags for bio‐orthogonal chemistry were synthesized.[  ] These probes could visualize the differential expression and the subcellular distribution of MDM2 and also determine the target occupancy of compounds. By conducting competition experiments between probes and tested molecules, ligands of specific proteins can be identified.[  ] Although there are numerous good probes, they have been used to test only a handful of compounds because of the limited throughput of traditional gel‐based or cell‐based fluorescence imaging. When dealing with extensive compound libraries, new approaches are urgently needed to process multiple compounds in a single experiment.
We proposed a promising solution that combines bio‐orthogonal labeling with HCS, which could maximize their respective advantages. As a proof‐of‐concept, Xeroderma pigmentosum type B (XPB), the ATPase and a core subunit of the transcription factor TFIIH complex, was chosen as the drug target in our screening because of its critical role in nuclear excision repair (NER), and chemotherapy makes XPB an attractive therapeutic target.[  ] Besides, the extremely low endogenous abundance and difficulties in expressing recombinant XPB in vitro challenge traditional biochemical assays. These factors collectively highlight the need for a novel HCS platform to study important proteins like XPB.[  ] The lack of tools has impeded the development of XPB inhibitors, resulting in the identification of only one reported XPB covalent binder, Triptolide (TL), at the cysteine residue 342 (Cys342).[  ] Therefore, there is a need to develop new XPB inhibitors for NER suppression and to overcome drug resistance.
In the present study, we synthesized a probe triptolide‐alkyne (TL‐alk) that labels XPB in live cells swiftly and specifically. With optimized parameters, we established a confocal imaging‐based HCS platform employing TL‐alk to quantify drug occupancy in nuclear XPB. In total, 1874 FDA‐approved drugs were screened, and pelitinib (Pel) was identified as a novel inhibitor to bind XPB. Pel was validated to suppress XPB's ATPase activity, impair the NER process, and subsequently enhance chemotherapy efficacy. The successful combination of bio‐orthogonal labeling with HCS opens new avenues for broad applications of bio‐orthogonal probes in drug discovery. Integrating the scalability of HCS with the specificity of bio‐orthogonal chemistry creates a framework that not only overcomes the throughput limitations of gel‐based or traditional imaging techniques but also provides unprecedented mechanistic insights into subcellular drug dynamics in HCS.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting Information
The authors have cited additional references within the Supporting Information.[  ] 
Supporting information
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD059271. Username: reviewer_pxd059271@ebi.ac.uk; Password: OygcZwVCFvcr.