PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Blood serum
instruments: LTQ Orbitrap Elite; Xevo G3 QTof
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; deamidated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition; MSE
keywords: Anti-nuclear autoantibodies; Systemic sclerosis; Ip-ms; Tfiid; Ana

ABSTRACT:
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is characterized by systemic fibrosis, vascular dysfunction, and the presence of antinuclear autoantibodies. In up to 10% of persons with SSc, the target antigens of the antinuclear autoantibodies are unknown. Using IP-MS, we here describe another new target antigen in SSc. We examined a database of IP-MS identifications of 106 persons with SSc from two Belgian academic hospitals [Ghent University Hospital (n=59) and University Hospitals Leuven (n=47)] without autoantibody specificity as tested by commercial assays.TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated factors (TAFs) were precipitated by sera of four persons (two from Ghent, two from Leuven). Together with TBP, TAFs form the three-lobed transcription factor IID complex (TFIID) (figure 1B). The TFIID complex recognizes core promoter sequences on DNA. The binding of TFIID is the first step of the assembly of the preinitiation complex, which is needed to position RNA polymerase II onto the correct DNA sequence to start transcription. To identify additional cases, we tested samples from individuals with SSc with unidentified autoantibodies from 3 extra hospitals [Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc (Belgium) (n=45), Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital (South Africa) (n=28) and Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d’Angers (France) (n=13)] by IP-MS. Two additional cases precipitating TFIID subunits were identified. In order to confirm the specificity of anti-TIFIID antibodies for SSc, IP-MS was performed in healthy individuals (n=34) and in patients with idiopathic inflammatory myopathy (IIM, n=12), Sjögren’s disease (SjD, n=12), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE, n=36) and anti-topoisomerase-I-, anti-centromere- or anti-RNA polymerase III-positive SSc (n=28). TAF9, TAF9B and TAF10 were often precipitated in these control samples. In conclusion, we describe TFIID as a new target of autoantibodies in SSc, thereby expanding the spectrum of SSc-associated autoantigens related to transcription.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
The TFIID complex is a new autoantibody target in systemic sclerosis.

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed as previously described (ref. 2 of main document) with sera at 1/20 dilution and 200 μg HeLa nuclear extract. Orbitrap mass spectrometer For the initial IP-mass spectrometry (IP-MS) experiments, liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry was performed on an Ultimate 3000 Ultra High Pressure Chromatography (UPLC) System (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) interfaced with an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) (ref. 2 of the main document). QTOF mass spectrometer For the IP-MS experiment reported in figure 1 dried samples were resuspended in 10µl 0,1% formic acid (FA)/3% acetonitrile (ACN) and transferred to QuanRecovery vials (Waters). Five microliter of each sample was injected via the sample manager equipped with a 5µl sample loop, and separated on the M-class UPLC system (Waters) equipped with a nanoEase m/z Trap Column (300µm x 50mm, HSS T3, 100Å, 5µm, Waters) and a nanoEase m/z analytical column (300µm x 150mm, HSS T3, 100Å, 1.8µm, Waters). First, reverse elute trapping was performed using a gradient of 0,5% buffer B (0,1% FA in ACN) and 99,5% buffer A (0,1% FA in ULC/MS grade water (Biosolve)) for 3 minutes (15µl/min). Afterwards, column flow was set at 4µl/min with a gradient consisting of 5% buffer B for 5 minutes, 5-40% buffer B in 90 min, 40-99% buffer B in 5 min, 99% buffer B for 5 min and finally equilibration at 5% buffer B for 1 min. Total run time was 106 minutes. Column temperature was set to a constant 40°C. Mass spectrometry was performed using a Waters Xevo G3 QTOF equipped with a LockSpray dual electrospray ion source (Waters) in positive mode. The sample sprayer was set at a cone voltage of 30V and a capillary voltage of 2,8kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in MSe sensitivity mode with a typical resolving power of around 25 000. Mass shifts (due to changing temperatures) were corrected using 12pg/µl leucine enkephalin delivered through the reference sprayer of the source. The lock mass channel was sampled every minute. Accurate mass LCMS data was collected in alternating MS mode (6V collision energy) and MSe mode (15-40V ramping). Scan time was set at 0,5s. The detector was set to measure ions from 50 m/z to 2000 m/z.

DATA PROCESSING:
Orbitrap mass spectrometer Mass spectrometry data were matched against the Uniprot Homo sapiens database. MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications were validated with Scaffold 5 (Proteome Software, United States). QTOF mass spectrometer Mass spectrometry data was compared to the Uniprot Homo sapiens reviewed database using ProteinLynx Global Server software 3.0.3 (PLGS, Waters). Low and elevated energy ion detection thresholds were set at 250 and 50 counts, respectively. Proteins were digested with trypsin and one missed cleavage was accepted. Peptide and fragment mass tolerances were calculated automatically by the software. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. False discovery rate was set at 4%. Minimally 2 and 5 fragment ions were needed to accept a peptide and protein identification, respectively. In addition, minimally 1 peptide match was needed to accept a protein identification. PLGS generates csv output files with for each protein identification a confidence color score (≥95% confidence = green; 50-95% confidence = yellow; <50% confidence = red), the number of matched peptides, the percentage sequence coverage and the sum of the intensities of the top 3 most intense peptides (Hi-3). The Hi-3 value can be used to relatively quantify identified proteins within one sample.