PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Epithelial cell; Leukocyte; Keratinocyte; Oral mucosa; Blood plasma
diseases: Limb muscle
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: acetylated residue; monomethylated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
quantification: MS1 intensity based label-free quantification method
keywords: Pbmc; Histone ptms; Buccal swabs; Proteome; Backpain therapy

ABSTRACT:
This study investigates how molecular profiles evolve in response to standardized sport therapy and non-controlled lifestyle choices. We report that the therapy improves agility, attenuates backpain, and also triggers healthier habits. We find that a subset of participants´ histone methylation and acetylation profiles cluster samples according to their therapy status, before or after therapy. Integrating epigenetic reprogramming of both buccal cells and PBMCs reveals that these concomitant changes are concordant with higher levels of self-rated backpain improvement and agility gain. Additionally, epigenetic changes correlate with changes in immune-response plasma factors, reflecting their comparable ability to rate therapy effects at the molecular level.  Additionally, we performed an exploratory analysis to confirm the usability of molecular profiles in 1) mapping lifestyle choices, and 2) evaluating the distance of a given participant to an optimal health state.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Epi-proteomic assessment of backpain therapy

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
In this study, 12 men completed a curative backpain training program comprising of 24 sessions of 60 minutes each. For each participant, a questionnaire detailing backpain history and intensity, nutritional choices, exercise habits and agility metrics were collected as well as buccal swab and venous blood samples at the beginning and at the end of the therapy. Venous blood was collected using BD Vacutainer® CPT ™ according to manufacturer’s instructions. Buccal cells were collected by hDNA-free FLOQSwab® swabbing each cheek 30×. Swab heads were covered with a hypotonic buffer for cell extraction from swabs. Followed by centrifugation 1,500 rcf and 4°C for 5 min and 10,000 rcf for 10 min in subsequent 1.5ml tubes, respectively. Pellets were resuspended in acid extraction buffer and placed on the ThermoMixer at 4℃ overnight. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were resuspended in 500µl 1× PBS TC in order to obtain a final cell count of 5.0 × 10^5. Pellet was resuspended in 150µl of cooled 0.2 M H2SO4 and sonicated using Hielscher device with 60 sec ON and 60 sec OFF setting for 20 min. Samples were acid extracted over night at 4℃ and 1,000 rpm in a ThermoMixer. Peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and separated on a 15‐cm analytical column (75 μm ID with ReproSil‐Pur C18‐AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 4% B to 90% B (solvent A 0.1% FA in water, solvent B 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electro-sprayed into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The mass spectrometer was operated in data‐dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375 to 1,600) were acquired with resolution R = 60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3 × 106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1 × 105 and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C; and ion selection threshold, 33,000 counts.

DATA PROCESSING:
For each of the three datasets (buccal cells, PBMCs, and plasma), we evaluated candidate markers by intersecting the outcomes of both classic tests (paired Wilcoxon and t-tests) and machine learning (supervised partial-least square discriminant analysis framework (73,74)) on the changes of molecular profiles AT relative to BT, using a threshold α=0.05 after multiple testing correction, and a Variable importance score (VIP) value of 1 (from the lower bound of Jackknife 95% confidence interval). This led to 41 protein therapy markers and 6 (+2 precursors) and 12 (+1 precursor) swab and PBMC epigenetic markers, respectively. We computed the average log2-fold change (LFC, plasma proteins) or average percentage of change (PTMs) after-versus-before therapy over 11 and 12 paired datasets as a final estimate of each marker´s effect size.