PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human); Sus scrofa domesticus (domestic pig)
organism parts: Calvarial osteoblast; Gingival fibroblast; Tibia; Fibroblast; Mandible
instruments: Q Exactive
modifications: Phospho; Carbamidomethyl; Oxidation
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: Spectrum counting
keywords: Growth factors; Bone matrix; Acid bone lysates

ABSTRACT:
Demineralized bone matrix is a widely used allograft where not only the inorganic mineral but also embedded growth factors are removed by hydrochloric acid. The cellular response to the growth factors released during the preparation of demineralized bone matrix, however, has not been studied. Here we investigated the in vitro impact of acid bone lysates (ABL) prepared from porcine cortical bone chips on oral fibroblasts. Proteomic analysis of ABL revealed a large spectrum of bone-derived proteins including TGF-β1. Whole genome microarrays and RT-PCR together with the pharmacologic blocking of TGF-β receptor type I kinase with SB431542 showed that ABL activates the TGF-β target genes interleukin 11, proteoglycan 4, and NADPH oxidase 4. Interleukin 11 expression was confirmed at the protein level by ELISA. Immunofluorescence and Western blot showed the nuclear localization of Smad2/3 and increased phosphorylation of Smad3 with ABL, respectively. This effect was independent of whether ABL was prepared from mandible, calvaria or tibia. ABL prepared with 0.1 N HCL was most effective compared to lysates obtained with 0.01 N and also 1.0 N HCl. These results demonstrate that TGF-β is a major growth factor that is removed upon the preparation of demineralized bone matrix.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Acid bone lysates: what we eliminate by preparing demineralized bone matrix

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
Five grams of wet bone chips were incubated while being stirred with 10 ml of 0.01, 0.1 or 1.0 N HCl (50% weight/volume) at room temperature. ABL were harvested after 16 h, centrifuged, and pH neutralized. After another centrifugation, ABL were filtered sterile and kept frozen at −20°C. The stocks were thawed immediately before each experiment. Human gingiva was harvested from extracted wisdom teeth from patients who had given informed and written consent. An approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna (EK NR 631/2007). A total of three strains of fibroblasts were established by explant cultures and fewer than 10 passages were used for the experiments. Calvaria-derived osteoblasts were obtained according to a standard protocol previously described 25. Briefly, mouse pups less than 5 days old were euthanized and their calvaria collagenase digested through a series of sequential digestions. The first 2 digests were discarded, and the subsequent digests were pooled and plated. Cells were seeded at a concentration of 30,000 cells/cm² onto culture dishes one day prior to stimulation. If not otherwise indicated, cells were exposed to 5% ABL in serum-free medium for 16 h. The inhibitor for the TGF-βRI kinase, SB431542 (Calbiochem, Merck, Billerica, MA) was used at 10 µM. Extracted proteins were precipitated using methanol/dichloromethane and digested with trypsin.Precipitated proteins were dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and protein concentration was determined using the DeNovix DS-11 Microvolume Spectrophotometer (Wilmington, USA). Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C using a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were separated using a nano RSLC UltiMate3000 (ThermoScientific, Vienna, Austria) separation system and detected with a Q-Exactive Plus Biopharma mass spectrometer.  A user defined injection program was used for sample injection and additional injector and trap column wash. Every sample injection was followed by two blank runs with injections of 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol for removal of possible sample remains in the injector or on the trap column and prevention of carryover in the separation system.

DATA PROCESSING:
All database searches were performed using the in-house Mascot 2.6 and the most recent version of the Sus scrofa SwissProt database. All search results were refined and researched using Scaffold 4.6.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). For the classification of the proteins the Panther system Version 13.1 (http://pantherdb.org) was used. To predicted protein-protein interactions we have used String database (https://string-db.org) Statistical analysis All experiments were repeated three to five times. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of the cumulative data from all experiments. Statistical analysis was based on Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn`s multiple comparisons correction. Analyses were performed using Prism v7 (GraphPad Software, La Jolia, CA). Significance was set at p<0.05

METHODS:
Methods
Acid bone lysate
Bone was obtained from adult pigs within 6 h post-mortem (Fleischerei Leopold Hödl, Vienna, Austria). Bone chips were harvested from the mandible, calvaria, and tibia with a bone scraper (Hu-Friedy, Rotterdam, the Netherlands). Bone chips were washed with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with antibiotics (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Five grams of wet bone chips were incubated while being stirred with 50 ml of 0.01, 0.1 and 1.0 N HCl (10% weight/volume) or alternatively with 10 mM sodium tartrate buffer (pH 4.7) at room temperature. ABL was harvested after 16 h, centrifuged, and pH neutralized. After another centrifugation, ABL was filtered sterile and kept frozen at −20 °C. The stocks were thawed immediately before each experiment.
Cell culture
Human gingiva was harvested from extracted wisdom teeth from patients who had given informed and written consent. An approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the Medical University of Vienna (EK NR 631/2007), Vienna, Austria. All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. A total of three strains of fibroblasts were established by explant cultures and fewer than 10 passages were used for the experiments. Calvaria-derived osteoblasts were obtained according to a standard protocol previously described. Briefly, mouse pups less than 5 days old were euthanized and their calvaria collagenase digested through a series of sequential digestions. The first 2 digests were discarded, and the subsequent digests were pooled and plated. The 3T3-L1 cell line was obtained from Christian Wolfrum (ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland). Cells were seeded at a concentration of 30,000 cells/cm² onto culture dishes one day prior to stimulation. If not otherwise indicated, cells were exposed to 5% ABL in serum-free medium for 16 h. The inhibitor for the TGF-βRI kinase, SB431542 (Calbiochem, Merck, Billerica, MA, USA) was used at 10 µM.
Cell differentiation
For osteogenic differentiation, calvaria cells were incubated in growth medium containing 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid and 10 mM beta glycerophosphate. For adipogenic differentiation, 3T3-L1 cells were incubated in growth medium containing 0.5 mM 1-methyl-3-isobutylxanthine (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), 1 μM dexamethasone (Sigma) and 1 μg/mL insulin (Calbiochem, Merck Millipore), 10 μM indomethacin (Sigma), and 10 μM rosiglitazone (Sigma). Alkaline phosphatase staining was performed after 3 days. For histochemical staining of alkaline phosphatase, cells were fixed as indicated and incubated with a substrate solution containing naphthol AS-TR phosphate and fast blue BB salt (Sigma). After rinsing with distilled water, cultures were photographed.
Cell viability
For viability experiments, gingival fibroblasts were incubated overnight with ABL at the indicated concentrations. MTT (3-[4,5-dimethythiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; Sigma) solution at a final concentration of 0.5 mg/ml was added to each well of a microtiter plate (CytoOne) for 2 h at 37 °C. The medium was removed and formazan crystals were solubilized with dimethyl sulfoxide. Optical density was measured at 570 nm. Data were expressed as percentage of optical density in the treatment groups normalized to unstimulated control values. In addition, cell viability was assessed by Live-Dead staining kit from Enzo Life Sciences AG (Lausen, Switzerland).
Mass spectrometry
Extracted proteins were precipitated using methanol/dichloromethane and digested with trypsin as described earlier (For detail see Suppl. Methods). Briefly, precipitated proteins were dissolved in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and protein concentration was determined using the DeNovix DS-11 Microvolume Spectrophotometer (Wilmington, USA). Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C using a trypsin/protein ratio of 1:50. Peptides were separated on a C18 µPAC (µ-Pillar-Arrayed-Column, PharmaFluidics, Gent, Belgium) using a nano RSLC UltiMate3000 (ThermoScientific, Vienna, Austria) separation system and detected with a Q-Exactive Plus Biopharma mass spectrometer.
A user defined injection program was used for sample injection and additional injector and trap column wash. Every sample injection was followed by two blank runs with injections of 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol for removal of possible samples remaining in the injector or on the trap column and prevention of carryover in the separation system. All database searches were performed using the in-house Mascot 2.6 and the most recent version of the Sus scrofa SwissProt database. All search results were refined and researched using Scaffold 4.6.5 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR). For the classification of the proteins the Panther system Version 13.1 (http://pantherdb.org) was used. To predict protein-protein interactions String database was used (https://string-db.org). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD010145 and 10.6019/PXD010145”.
Microarray analysis
Total RNA was harvested with the RNA Isolation Kit (Extractme, BLIRT S.A., Gdańsk, Poland). RNA quality was determined using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Microarray analysis was performed using the SurePrint G3 Human Gene Expression v2 Microarray (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Array image acquisition was performed with the Agilent G2505B Microarray Scanner and Feature Extraction software version 9.5 (Agilent). Background-corrected fluorescence intensity values were imported into GeneSpring v.15, log2-transformed, and then normalized by quantile normalization. A filtering step was applied in order to reduce the number of multiple hypotheses. Only genes for which at least 100% of the values in one of the two evaluated conditions were above the 60th percentile were used for further analysis. Differentially expressed mRNAs were identified by paired t-tests in GeneSpring. The resulting p-values were corrected for multiplicity by applying Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment to all p-values calculated for a time point with a false discovery rate (FDR) < 5%. Genes with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.
RT-PCR and immunoassay
Reverse transcription (RT) was performed with the SensiFAST™ cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bioline Reagents Ltd., London, UK). RT-PCR was done with SensiFAST™ SYBR® Kit using manufacturer’s instructions (Bioline). Amplification was performed with the StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Primer sequences are given in Table 1. Relative gene expression was calculated with the delta delta CT method. Reactions were run in duplicates. The supernatant was analyzed for IL11 and TGF-β1 using an immunoassay assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA).
Western blot
Cell extracts containing SDS buffer and protease inhibitors (PhosSTOP with cOmplete; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (Whatman, GE Healthcare, General Electric Company, Fairfield, CT, USA). Membranes were blocked and the binding of the first antibody (rabbit anti-pSmad3 Ser423/425, 1:500, Abcam, ab52903, Cambridge, UK), and actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, SCBT, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) was detected with the appropriate secondary antibody directly labeled with near-infrared dyes (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA) and visualized with the appropriate imaging system (LI-COR Biosciences). Acquired images were not processed.
Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescent analysis was performed on human gingival fibroblasts plated onto Millicell® EZ slides (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) treated with ABL 5% for 30 min. Cells were fixed in paraformaldehyde and blocked in 1% BSA and 0.3% Triton in PBS at room temperature for 1 hour. Cells were subsequently incubated with Smad2/3 antibody (1:800, D7G7 XP® Rabbit mAb #8685, Cell Signaling, MA, USA) overnight at 4 °C. Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibody (1:500; Anti-Rabbit, Cell signaling Technology, USA) was applied for 1 hour. Cells were washed and mounted onto glass slides. Fluorescent images were captured at 40x in oil immersion using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 M fluorescent microscope.
Statistical analysis
All experiments were repeated three to five times. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of the cumulative data from all experiments. Statistical analysis was based on Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons correction. Analyses were performed using Prism v7 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA). Significance was set at p < 0.05.

RESULTS:
Results
ABL contains a large spectrum of proteins including TGF-β
To understand the complexity of ABL with respect to a possible cellular response, a proteomic analysis was performed. In support of previous proteomic analysis of bone-conditioned medium (BCM), we detected a wide range of proteins including growth factors with a possible impact on cellular function (Figs 1 and 2). Proteomic analysis of ABL revealed 394 proteins including TGF-β1 (Suppl. Table 1). Panther classified ABL proteins into 8, 12 and 7 groups according to their molecular function (Fig. 1a), biologic process (Fig. 1b) and cellular component (Fig. 1c), respectively. The majority of proteins were linked to transporter regulator activity (46%) and catalytic activity (28.5%) (Fig. 1a). Cellular process and metabolic process were represented by 26.5% and 18.6% of the proteins, respectively (Fig. 1b). The majority of the proteins originated from cells (37.1%) and organelles (24.5%) (Fig. 1c). The presence of active TGF-β1 in ABL was 1.3 ± 0.2 ng/ml independent of the bone source: mandible, calvaria or tibia (Fig. 1d). According to the STRING analysis tool, proteins in ABL revealed multiple clusters including ribosomal protein and collagens and also showed TGF-β1 (Fig. 2).
ABL maintains cell viability
To evaluate the impact of ABL on cell viability, the formation of formazan was determined. Dose-response curves indicate that a concentration of 5% ABL is appropriate to maintain viability of human gingival fibroblasts (Fig. 3a). Cell viability at 5% acidy bone lysate was further confirmed by live-dead staining (Fig. 3b). Thus, 5% of acid bone lysate was selected to study the whole genome response in gingival fibroblasts.
ABL provokes changes in gene expression based on a whole genome assay
To determine the overall cellular response of oral fibroblasts to ABL, a whole genome gene assay was performed. Overall, 1527 genes are changed ≥ 1.5-fold (Suppl. Table 2). Among those genes, 17 genes (IL11, NOX4, PRG4, IL33, MMP10, ADAMTS5, MMP13, BMP2, COMP, INHBA, AREG, COL10A1, CXCL5, PMEPA1, TSPAN13, GPR183, ESM1) and 1 gene (PTX3) are at least 10-fold up- and down-regulated, respectively (Table 2). To gain information on the significantly expressed genes, we functionally categorized them using the WEB-based Gene Stet Analysis Toolkit (WebGestalt) database. GO-term analysis revealed that up-regulated genes in response to ABL were associated with the TGF-β signaling pathway (adj. P = 0.000045; enrichment score 12.12; genes: TGF-β1; BMP2, BMP6, ID3, ID1, INHBA, COMP) besides other signaling pathways. Panther classified the most regulated genes into 5, 9 and 3 groups according to their molecular function (Fig. 4a), biologic process (Fig. 4b) and cellular component (Fig. 4c), respectively. The majority of genes were linked to binding (44.5%) and catalytic activity (22.2%) (Fig. 4a). Cellular process and response to stimulus were represented by 23.1% and 19.2% of the genes, respectively (Fig. 4b). The majority of the genes were related to the extracellular region (50.0%) and extracellular matrix (37.5%) (Fig. 4c).
ABL incites changes in gene expression via activation of TGF-β signalling
In a pilot experiment with the gene array (n = 1), SB431542 blocked the expression of all 17 highly up-regulated genes to less than 2-fold, except for ESM1 (3.3-fold) and CXCL5 (5.1-fold) suggesting that the TGF-β receptor I kinase mediates the respective effect of ABL (Suppl. Table 3). In support of the gene array, RT-PCR and immunoassay confirmed the increased expression of IL11, PRG4, and NOX4 by ABL and also their suppression by SB431542 (Fig. 5a). At protein level, ABL increased IL11 release into the cell-culture supernatant and these effects were blocked by SB431542 (Fig. 5b). Further proof for activation of TGF-β signalling comes from gingival fibroblasts exposed to ABL showing increased phosphorylation of Smad3 (Fig. 6a) and an accumulation of Smad2/3 in the nucleus (Fig. 6b).
ABL from various sources supports TGF-β signalling
To understand if the embryologic origin of bone affects the activity of the respective ABL, bone chips were prepared from the mandible, the calvaria and the tibia. All three independent preparations stimulated the expression of IL11, PRG4 and NOX4 in oral fibroblasts (Fig. 7a). Moreover, ABL prepared by 0.1 N HCl was most effective compared to lysates obtained with 0.01 N (data not shown), 1.0 N HCl (Fig. 7b) and also to lysates prepared with sodium tartrate buffer at pH 4.7 (Suppl. Fig. 2). In support of the RT-PCR, immunoassay confirmed the higher amount of IL11 in lysates obtained with 0.1 N (Fig. 7c).
ABL decreases osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation markers
In agreement with our previous work, exposure of osteogenic calvaria cells and adipogenic 3T3-L1 cells to ABL caused a considerable decrease of the marker genes alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin (OC) (Fig. 8a), as well as PPARγ and C/EBP (Fig. 8b), respectively. Chondrogenic ATDC5 cells showed a moderate increase of SOX9 and COL10A (Fig. 8c). Histochemical staining of alkaline phosphatase activity confirmed the findings from gene expression (Fig. 8d).

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Bone grafts are regularly used for augmentation in implant dentistry, oral and maxillofacial surgery, besides other medical fields including orthopedics and traumatology dealing with bone reconstructions. Freshly prepared bone autografts are considered gold standard in reconstructing large and complex bone defects due to the osteoconductive surface and the presence of osteogenic cells that can contribute to bone formation. Furthermore, growth factors released upon autograft resorption are supposed to support bone regeneration, even though evidence to support this claim is poor. Similar to the resorption of autografts by osteoclasts, demineralization of allografts by hydrochloric acid does not only remove the mineral phase. Hydrochloric acid also removes a fraction of growth factors intrinsic to bone. The biological activity of the respective acid bone lysate (ABL), which are discarded upon the preparation of demineralized bone matrix, has not been characterized so far.
Bone is a rich source of growth factors including TGF-β1. Pioneer work of purification and characterization of TGF-β1 released by hydrochloric acid and other methods dates back to the 1980s. With the introduction of proteomics, bone extraction protocols were refined still including demineralization of bone by hydrochloric acid. The concentration of TGF-β1 with around 0.5 ng/ml in bone lysates is conserved among skeletal areas and gender. In vivo, TGF-β1 is stored in a latent form and can be released and activated by osteoclasts. TGF-β1 released during bone remodeling induces migration of mesenchymal stem cells and targets osteoclasts. However, the activity of TGF-β1 and other growth factors in ABL has not been studied recently.
Bioassays with TGF-β-responsive cells are appropriate to determine TGF-β activity in ABL. We previously used oral fibroblasts to detect TGF-β1 activity in supernatants of freshly prepared bone chips and enamel matrix derivatives. Moreover, the adsorption of TGF-β1 from these preparations to collagen matrices commonly used for guided bone regeneration was determined by gene expression changes of oral fibroblasts. The selection of genes was based on proteomic analysis and a whole genome microarray resulting in a panel of TGF-β target genes including interleukin 11 (IL11), proteoglycan4 (PRG4), and NADPH oxidase 4 (NOX4). Further support for activation of TGF-β signaling comes from phosphorylation and translocation of Smad3 into the nucleus.
Here we report the protein composition of ABL and determine the respective biological activity for oral fibroblasts. Based on a whole genome microarray and RT-PCR approach including the pharmacologic blocking of TGF-β receptor type I kinase with SB431542, ABL caused a robust activation of TGF-β signaling. ABL also reduced the expression of osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation markers in calvaria cells and 3T3-L1 cells, respectively. Our findings suggest that TGF-β is among the major growth factors being discarded upon the demineralization of bone matrix.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Electronic supplementary material
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at 10.1038/s41598-018-34418-3.
Data Availability
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.