PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Cell culture
instruments: Orbitrap Fusion
modifications: phosphorylated residue; deamidated residue
experiment types: Data-dependent acquisition
keywords: Cdcp1; Extracellular vesicles; Proteomics; Lung cancer

ABSTRACT:
Lung cancer is the most prevalent malignancy worldwide, with metastasis causing over 90% of fatalities. Recent studies have demonstrated the pivotal role of extracellular vesicles (EVs) and glycoproteins in tumor progression. In this study, we compared the glycoproteome of EVs from 95C (low metastatic) and 95D (high metastatic) lung cancer cells to find key targets in metastasis. Through coupling lectin affinity chromatography with quantitative proteomics, 1562 glycoproteins were identified. Compared to 95C EVs, 23 glycoproteins exhibited a more than 20-fold increase in 95D EVs, including CDCP1, TNC, NCAM2, and ITGA4. CUB-domain containing protein 1 (CDCP1) was upregulated 143-fold in 95D EVs, which is significantly correlated with poor prognosis of lung cancer patients in the TCGA database. We then generated CDCP1 knockout (KO) 95D cell lines and revealed that the absence of CDCP1 reduced cell migration ability, which was also confirmed by EVs and cell co-culture experiments. We further performed Ti4+-IMAC based phosphoproteomic analysis to investigate the changes of signaling pathways in CDCP1 KO cell lines. 147 differentially expressed phosphoproteins were revealed, which involve in cell adhesion, cytoskeletal regulation, and ErbB signaling. Verification experiments confirmed that the levels of phosphorylated SRC and JUN proteins, markers of ErbB signaling pathway, were decreased 5.5-fold and 4.2-fold, respectively, indicating that CDCP1 can promote cell migration through the ErbB signaling pathway. Our data demonstrate that glycoprotein CDCP1 was selectively packed into EVs and potentially contributed to cancer metastasis, which is a critical target for anti-metastasis research and drug discovery.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles identifies CDCP1 as critical metastasis-related glycoprotein in lung cancer

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
N-glycoproteins Enrichment by Lectin Affinity Chromatography 95C and 95D EVs N-glycoproteins were extracted by lectin Concanavalin A (ConA) affinity chromatography according to the protocol of the manufacturer. Briefly, for 1 mg EVs protein, 1 mL of agarose bound lectin ConA (Vector Laboratories, AL-1003) was packed into a 2 mL disposable screw end-cap spin column with filter (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts). The column was washed with binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCL, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4). The sample was kept passing through the column for 5 times. Non-specific binding proteins were removed by washing the column with binding buffer. Captured glycoproteins were released by elution buffer (0.2 M α-methyl mannoside and 0.2 M α-methyl glucoside in binding buffer). Eluted glycoproteins were concentrated and stored at −80 °C. 2.9  Phosphorylated Peptides Enrichment Phosphorylated peptides were enriched by titanium (IV) ion immobilized metal affinity chromatography (Ti4+-IMAC) material according to the protocol of the manufacturer. Briefly, 300 μg of protein was digested by trypsin and aliquoted. The Ti4+-IMAC material was prepared according to the manufacturer: IMAC material (J&K Scientific, 2749380): Ti4+ (Sinopharm chemical, 10022728) =1:100 (w/w). The digested peptides were mixed with the prepared Ti4+-IMAC material at a ratio of 1:25 (w/w) and vortexed for 30 min. Then the supernatant was removed after centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 5 min. The pellet was washed twice with Washing Buffer 1 (50% ACN with 6% TFA and 200 mM NaCl) and Washing Buffer 2 (30% ACN with 0.1% TFA) respectively. The captured phosphorylated peptides on Ti4+-IMAC materials were eluted with 10% NH3H2O using ultrasound and vortexing. Eluted phosphorylated peptides were dried by rotary evaporator.  2.10 Protein Digestion and Proteomics Analysis EVs total proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111), while glycoproteins were digested with trypsin and PNGase F (NEW ENGLAND Biolabs, P0704) overnight at 37 °C using the Filteraided sample preparation (FASP) approach as previously described (14). The enzyme PNGase F cleaves the bond between the inner N-acetylglucosamine and asparagine residues of the glycoprotein, converting asparagine to aspartic acid and resulting in a mass increase of 0.984 Da. This allows for the identification of glycoproteins in mass spectrometry detection. Then the peptides were desalted on ZipTip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA), and their concentration was measured using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts) at 280 nm.  Desalted peptides were then separated and analyzed by nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (Nano LC-MS/MS) detection. The mobile phase was composed of solvent A (99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The EVs total protein peptides and peptides with removed glycans after enrichment were analyzed using the Easy-nanoLC1000 (250 mm × 50 μm column packed with 3 μm C18-AQ particles) coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The liquid chromatography was set for 120 min gradient (2−30% B). The 120 min gradient was as follows: 2-20% B, 98 min; 20%-30% B, 10 min; 35%-95% B, 2 min; 95% B, 8 min; 2% B, 2 min. The mass spectrometer’s scan ranged from 350 to 1500 m/z with an MS resolution of 70,000 while the MS/MS resolution was 17,500. The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed using the Vanquish nanoscale liquid chromatography system (200 mm × 75 μm column packed with 3 μm C18-AQ particles) coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The liquid chromatography was set for 60 min gradient (4−32% B). The 60 min gradient was as follows: 4-5% B, 1 min; 5-16% B, 29 min; 16-32% B, 22 min; 32-99% B, 1 min; 99% B, 7 min. Full scan MS1 resolution of 60,000; m/z range of 350-1750.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.7.0) and Proteome Discoverer (version 3.0) software and annotated against the UniProt database (taxonomy ID: 9606, version dated 2023/09/06, 20349 entries). A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. For glycoproteins, Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification. Oxidation on methionine (M) and deamidation (N and Q) with 0.984 Da mass increments were set as the variable modifications. For phosphoproteins, Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation (pS/pT/pY) were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances for precursors and fragment ions were 6 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The identification and quantification of proteins were based on at least two unique peptides, with a stringent false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% at both the protein and peptide levels. Proteins that lack of deamidation (N) with 0.984 Da mass increments were submitted to the NetNGlyc 1.0 Server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetNGlyc/) to confirm whether they have predicted N-glycosylation sites.  2.11 Bioinformatics and Statistical Analysis Data visualization and graphing were plotted by https://www.bioinformatics.com.cn, an online platform for data analysis and visualization (15). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, United States, http://www.ingenuity.com/) was used for the analysis of canonical pathways, diseases, and biological functions. Gene expression profile in different cancers and survival analysis were plotted by http://gepia2.cancer-pku.cn/ (16). The STRING database was used to simulate the protein-protein interaction network (https://cn.string-db.org/). The KSEA  (kinase-substrate enrichment analysis) primarily relies on this website (17): https://casecpb.shinyapps.io/ksea/. Each experimental trial was conducted with three biological replicates, and the results were presented as the average value with its standard error of the mean (SEM) using GraphPad Prism 9.0 (GraphPad, Avenida, CA, United States). Comparisons of quantitative data between two groups were evaluated by an unpaired t-test, and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Cell Line and Cell Culture
The human lung cancer cell lines, 95D (high metastatic) and 95C (low metastatic), were purchased from Wuhan Sunncell Biotechnology (https://www.sunncell.com.cn/). Cells were grown in RPMI‑1640 medium (Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) with 10% (vol/vol) Fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) at 37°C with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator. For EVs enrichment, the FBS used in cell culture was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 × g for 16 h to remove the EVs from FBS. The cells were cultured in EV‐free FBS medium for 48 h. Then the supernatant was collected for EVs isolation.
EVs Isolation From Cell Culture Supernatant
All sample preparation was performed at 4°C. The conditioned medium was centrifuged at 300 × g for 10 min, 2000 × g for 10 min, and 10,000 × g for 20 min to remove cell debris and large particles. Then the supernatant was ultracentrifuged at 100,000 × g for 70 min (Beckman Coulter, Rea, CA, USA). The pellet was washed with cold phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS), and the EVs were obtained after ultracentrifugation at 100,000 × g for 70 min. Obtained EVs were resuspended in 1 mL of cold PBS and utilized for nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis.
Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis
The size distribution and particle concentration of EVs were evaluated using ZetaView (Zeta potential distribution Analyzer, Particle Metrix). First, 100 nm particles were used as a standard to calibrate ZetaView. Then the EVs were diluted to a suitable concentration with cold PBS and injected into the sample chamber. Each sample was measured in triplicate according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Transmission Electron Microscopy
The morphology of EVs was checked by Tecnai G2 Spirit Biotwin transmission electron microscope (FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA). 10 µL of re‐suspended EVs solution was loaded onto an ultrathin carbon film 300 mesh copper grid, which was dried for fixation, then stained with 2% phosphotungstic acid. Each sample was measured according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Western Blot Analysis
EV lysate was prepared using RIPA buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) with freshly supplemented protease inhibitors cocktail and PhosSTOP tablet (Roche). The concentration of proteins was detected using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay, and 20 µg protein was separated on 10% SDS‐PAGE (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.). Subsequently, the proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene‐fluoride membrane (PVDF, Merck Millipore). Membranes were blocked with 5% milk in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Then the membranes were incubated with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight: TSG101 (Abcam, ab125011, 1:1000), CD63 (Abcam, ab134045, 1:1000), CD9 (Abcam, ab263019, 1:1000), Calnexin (Abcam, ab133615, 1:1000), CDCP1 (Cell Signaling Technology, 4115, 1:1000), TNC (Abcam, ab108930, 1:1000), GAPDH (Proteintech, 60004, 1:20,000), β‐actin (Abcam, ab6276, 1:10,000), phospho‐SRC (Cell Signaling Technology, 6943, 1:1000), SRC (Cell Signaling Technology, 2108, 1:1000), phospho‐JUN (Cell Signaling Technology, 3270, 1:1000), JUN (Cell Signaling Technology, 9165, 1:1000). HRP secondary antibody (Abcam, ab288151, 1:10,000) was used, and the images were scanned by Tanon 5200 multi‐209 imaging system (Tanon, China) with an ECL western blotting substrate (Tanon, China).
Cell Migration Assays
Cells were starved with serum‐free RPMI‑1640 medium for 10 h, and Transwell chambers with a pore size of 8.0 µm (Millipore) were inserted into a 24‐well culture plate. 30,000 95C or 95D cells were resuspended, respectively, in 200 µL serum‐free medium and added to the upper chamber, followed by the addition of 900 µL complete medium outside of the inserts and incubation at 37°C in the cell incubator for 24 h. Another transwell assay is designed as follows. For cells co‐cultured with different types of EVs, equal amounts of EVs were added to the upper chamber of the transwell, with the Blank group receiving an equal volume of culture medium, and co‐cultured with cells for 24 h. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 0.5% crystal violet for 5 min at room temperature. All cells above the membrane were removed by cotton swab, and only the cells under the membrane were photographed at a magnification of ×100. The number of cells in five random fields of view was counted to obtain an average sum of cells.
PNGase F Digestion of Glycoproteins
The enzymatic deglycosylation procedure was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol for PNGase F (New England Biolabs, P0704). Briefly, 20 µg of cell lysate was reconstituted in a 10 µL reaction mixture containing Glycoprotein Denaturing Buffer (10×) and H₂O. The mixture was denatured at 100°C for 10 min. Subsequently, 2 µL of GlycoBuffer 2 (10×), 2 µL of 10% NP‐40, and 6 µL of H₂O were added to bring the total reaction volume to 20 µL. Following this, 1 µL of PNGase F was added, the reaction was gently mixed and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. Deglycosylated protein samples were analyzed by Western blot.
Construction of CDCP1 Knockout Cell Line
Plasmid Construction
The guide‐RNA (gRNA, 5'‐ GACTGTAATGTTGCTTTCTCG ‐3') was designed by the online CRISPR design tool (https://zlab.bio/guide‐design‐resources). Two partially complementary oligonucleotides (5'‐ CACCGACTGTAATGTTGCTTTCTCG‐3' and 5'‐ AAACCGAGAAAGCAACATTACAGTC ‐3') were annealed and cloned into the PX459 plasmid (Addgene, #62988), which had been pre‐digested with the BbsI restriction enzyme. This construction was called the CDCP1 KO plasmid, which could guide hSpCas9 to the genomic target site in CDCP1 gene.
Transfection and Puromycin Selection
A total of 3 µg CDCP1 KO plasmids and PX459 plasmids (control) were transfected into 1 × 106 95D cells with Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Thermo Fisher), and the supernatant was exchanged for fresh complete medium 12 h later. After 48 h, the cells were incubated in fresh medium with 2 µg/mL puromycin. After 7 days, cells exhibiting resistance to puromycin were selected. Western blot analysis was used to identify the effect of knockout. Then, single cells were obtained by limited dilution method, and the knockout effect was verified by DNA sequencing (primer: 5'‐ GGGAAGGAACA AAGTTGTCA ‐3'). Based on the results of Western blot analysis and DNA sequencing, two CDCP1 knockout cell lines were selected for experiments.
Immunoprecipitation
Immunoprecipitation (IP) was performed using the Co‐IP Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 88804) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, cells were lysed directly in dishes with IP lysis buffer, and 1 mg of total protein was incubated with 2 µg of the target antibody overnight at 4°C, followed by rotation with 25 µL Protein A/G magnetic beads at room temperature for 1 h. Beads were washed, and bound proteins were eluted in Laemmli buffer by boiling at 100°C for 10 min for subsequent Western blot analysis. To avoid light chain interference, IP‐specific mouse anti‐rabbit IgG light chain secondary antibody (HRP‐conjugated, Abbkine, A25022) was used for immunoblot detection.
Construction of Glycosylation Site Mutant Plasmids
Site mutagenesis was performed to convert asparagine (N) to glutamine (Q) residues. Mutagenic primers (sequences provided in supporting information) were designed. The target sequence was amplified by PCR using Pfu DNA polymerase (Life Technologies) with wild‐type CDCP1 plasmid as the template. Subsequently, both the amplified insert and the pcDNA3.1(+) vector were digested with restriction enzymes EcoRI and BamHI (New England Biolabs). The digested insert and vector fragments were then ligated using T4 DNA Ligase (Fermentas). The ligation product was transformed into competent E. coli cells. Positive clones were selected, plasmid DNA was extracted, and the successful introduction of the mutation was confirmed by DNA sequencing.
N‐Glycoproteins Enrichment by Lectin Affinity Chromatography
N‐glycoproteins of 95C EVs and 95D EVs were extracted by lectin Concanavalin A (ConA) affinity chromatography according to the protocol of the manufacturer. Briefly, for 1 mg EVs protein, 1 mL of agarose bound lectin ConA (Vector Laboratories, AL‐1003) was packed into a 2 mL disposable screw end‐cap spin column with filter (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The column was washed with binding buffer (20 mM Tris‐HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4). The sample was kept passing through the column for five times. Non‐specific binding proteins were removed by washing the column with binding buffer. Captured glycoproteins were released by elution buffer (0.2 M α‐methyl mannoside and 0.2 M α‐methyl glucoside in binding buffer). Eluted glycoproteins were concentrated and stored at −80°C.
Intact Glycopeptides Enrichment by HILIC Chromatography
Intact glycopeptides were enriched via a ZIC‐HILIC (Merck) based solid‐phase extraction (SPE) method. Briefly, protein‐bound beads (initial input 5 mg of total protein) obtained from IP were reduced with DTT (Dithiothreitol, 10 mM), alkylated with IAA (Iodoacetamide, 25 mM), and digested with trypsin (1:50 w/w) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were dissolved in 200 µL loading buffer (80% acetonitrile [ACN], 1% trifluoroacetic acid [TFA]), vortexed for 20 min, and loaded onto a custom‐made SPE cartridge packed with 30 mg ZIC‐HILIC resin. After five adsorption cycles, the column was washed eight times with 200 µL loading buffer (500 × g, 5 min per wash), followed by five elutions with 100 µL elution buffer (0.1% TFA). Eluates were vacuum‐dried at 45°C and subjected to LC‐MS/MS (liquid chromatography—tandem mass spectrometry) analysis for intact glycopeptide characterization.
Phosphorylated Peptides Enrichment
Phosphorylated peptides were enriched by titanium (IV) ion immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (Ti4+‐IMAC) material according to the protocol of the manufacturer. Briefly, 300 µg of protein was digested by trypsin and aliquoted. The Ti4+‐IMAC material was prepared according to the manufacturer: IMAC material (J&K Scientific, 2749380): Ti4+ (Sinopharm chemical, 10022728) = 1:100 (w/w). The digested peptides were mixed with the prepared Ti4+‐IMAC material at a ratio of 1:25 (w/w) and vortexed for 30 min. Then the supernatant was removed after centrifugation at 15,000 × g for 5 min. The pellet was washed twice with Washing Buffer 1 (50% ACN with 6% TFA and 200 mM NaCl) and Washing Buffer 2 (30% ACN with 0.1% TFA), respectively. The captured phosphorylated peptides on Ti4+‐IMAC materials were eluted with 10% NH3H2O using ultrasound and vortexing. Eluted phosphorylated peptides were dried by rotary evaporator.
Protein Digestion and Proteomics Analysis
EVs total proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, V5111), while glycoproteins were digested with trypsin and PNGase F (New England Biolabs, P0704) overnight at 37°C using the Filter aided sample preparation (FASP) approach as previously described (Wang et al.). The enzyme PNGase F cleaves the bond between the inner N‐acetylglucosamine and asparagine residues of the glycoprotein, converting asparagine to aspartic acid and resulting in a mass increase of 0.984 Da. This allows for the identification of glycoproteins in mass spectrometry detection. Then the peptides were desalted on ZipTip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), and their concentration was measured using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) at 280 nm.
The EV total protein peptides and peptides with removed glycans after enrichment were analyzed using the Easy‐nanoLC1000 (250 mm × 50 µm column packed with 3 µm C18‐AQ particles) coupled with an Orbitrap Q‐Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase was composed of solvent A (99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The liquid chromatography was set for a 120 min gradient (2%−30% B). The 120 min gradient was as follows: 2%–20% B, 98 min; 20%–30% B, 10 min; 35%–95% B, 2 min; 95% B, 8 min; 2% B, 2 min. The mass spectrometer's scan ranged from 350 to 1500 m/z with an MS resolution of 70,000, while the MS/MS resolution was 17,500.
The intact glycopeptides were analyzed using the Vanquish nanoscale liquid chromatography system (200 mm × 75 µm column packed with 3 µm C18‐AQ particles) coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase was composed of solvent A (99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The liquid chromatography was set for a 60‐min gradient (2%−30% B). The 60 min gradient was as follows: 2%–5% B, 2 min; 5%–20% B, 47 min; 20%–30% B, 7 min; 30%–80% B, 4 min. Full scan MS1 resolution of 60,000; m/z range of 350–1500. HCD collision energies (%):25, 30, 35.
The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed using the Vanquish nanoscale liquid chromatography system coupled with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase was composed of solvent A (99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The liquid chromatography was set for a 60‐min gradient (4%−32% B). The 60 min gradient was as follows: 4%–5% B, 1 min; 5%–16% B, 29 min; 16%–32% B, 22 min; 32%–99% B, 1 min; 99% B, 7 min. Full scan MS1 resolution of 60,000; m/z range of 350–1750.
In this study, data‐dependent acquisition (DDA) was employed for all proteomic analysis. Mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.7.0) and Proteome Discoverer (version 3.0) software and annotated against the UniProt database (taxonomy ID: 9606, version dated 2023/09/06, 20349 entries). A maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. For glycoproteins, Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification. Oxidation on methionine (M) and deamidation (N and Q) with 0.984 Da mass increments were set as the variable modifications. For intact glycopeptides, Glyco‐Decipher (Fang et al.) (a deep learning‐driven software for glycan structure annotation and site‐specific glycosylation profiling) were used to analyze the data. For phosphoproteins, Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification. Methionine oxidation, N‐terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation (pS/pT/pY) were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerances for precursors and fragment ions were 6 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. The identification and quantification of proteins were based on at least two unique peptides, with a stringent false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1% at both the protein and peptide levels. Proteins that lack of deamidation (N) with 0.984 Da mass increments were submitted to the NetNGlyc 1.0 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetNGlyc/) to confirm whether they have predicted N‐glycosylation sites. The workflow for data processing is detailed in the supporting information file.
Bioinformatics and Statistical Analysis
Data visualization and graphing were plotted by https://www.bioinformatics.com.cn, an online platform for data analysis and visualization (Tang et al.). Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, USA, http://www.ingenuity.com/) was used for the analysis of canonical pathways, diseases, and biological functions. Gene expression profile in different cancers and survival analysis were plotted by http://gepia2.cancer‐pku.cn/ (Li et al.). The STRING database was used to simulate the protein‐protein interaction network (https://cn.string‐db.org/). The KSEA (kinase‐substrate enrichment analysis) primarily relies on this website (Wiredja et al.): https://casecpb.shinyapps.io/ksea/. Each experimental trial was conducted with three biological replicates, and the results were presented as the average value with its standard error of the mean (SEM) using GraphPad Prism 9.0 (GraphPad, Avenida, CA, USA). Comparisons of quantitative data between two groups were evaluated by an unpaired t‐test, and p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS:
Results
Characterization of 95C and 95D Lung Cancer Cells and Their EVs
The 95C and 95D lung cancer cell lines were subcloned from a poorly differentiated human large cell lung carcinoma cell line, PLA‐801. However, multiple studies have indicated that they possess different metastatic capabilities. We have previously demonstrated that 95D cells exhibit stronger tumorigenic ability and higher metastatic potential compared to 95C cells in the mouse model (Qiao et al.). A previous global proteomic study demonstrated several EV proteins related to cellular functions. The question arises whether EVs released by cancer cells and their glycoproteome play a significant role in the migration process. To address this question and discover key targets in cancer metastasis, we designed the workflow of this study as shown in Figure 1.
We first verified the metastatic ability of the 95C and 95D lung cancer cells involved in the experiment. As shown in Figure 2A, after 24 h of culture in Transwell chambers, the number of cells that migrated out was counted. The results indicated that the migration ability of the 95D cells was higher than that of the 95C cells. Ultracentrifugation was used to isolate EVs from the supernatant of 95C and 95D cells, as depicted in Figure 2B. The obtained EVs were then subjected to a comprehensive characterization, including NTA, TEM, LC‐MS/MS, and western blot. The NTA and TEM results demonstrated the size distribution and morphological characteristics of the EVs (Figure 2C,D). It can be observed that the concentration of 95D EVs was higher than that of 95C EVs. The primary size distribution of the EVs was within the range of 50–250 nm, with an average particle size around 150 nm. In the TEM images, typical membrane structure vesicles can be observed, which align with the fundamental characteristics of EVs. Western blot analysis of characteristic EVs proteins, TSG101, CD63, and CD9 further confirmed the features of the extracted EVs (Figure 2E). The negative marker Calnexin also demonstrated the quality of EVs.
These results indicated that we have successfully isolated EVs from the cell culture supernatant by ultracentrifugation, which meet the standard criteria for EV characterization. The EVs obtained are suitable for further research in subsequent experiments, ensuring the reliability of the subsequent analyses.
Proteome and N‐Glycoproteome Analysis of EVs
To further explore the role of EVs in the process of cell migration, we analyzed the proteome and N‐glycoproteome of EVs, as shown in Figure 3A. In this study, lectin ConA was used to specifically enrich N‐glycoproteins in EVs. The enriched glycoproteins were then enzymatically digested by trypsin and PNGase F, followed by nano‐LC‐MS/MS‐based proteomic analysis. Subsequently, bioinformatic software was utilized to identify differentially expressed proteins and their associated functions. As shown in Figure 3B, the principal component analysis (PCA) plots of the total proteins (T‐p) and glycoproteins (G‐p) of 95C EVs and 95D EVs demonstrated good reproducibility across three replicates. The PC1 and PC2 accounted for 50.7% and 28.3%, respectively, which indicated that the proteome data can effectively distinguish between the EVs secreted by 95C cells and 95D cells. Venn diagrams in Figure S1A showed the number of identified proteins. 2797 EVs total proteins were identified through label‐free quantitative proteomics, with 2419 from 95C EVs and 2561 from 95D EVs, exhibiting a 78% protein overlap between the two cell lines.
After enrichment with ConA, the glycoproteomic data were processed with the addition of deamidation as a variable modification. Meanwhile, the unique sequences characteristic of N‐glycoproteins, along with the NetNGlyc‐1.0 website, facilitated the identification of N‐glycoproteins in EVs. A total of 1562 glycoproteins were identified based on stringent criteria, including 1345 from 95C EVs and 1316 from 95D EVs (Figure S1B). The glycoprotein enrichment specificity of the lectin ConA was 75.5%, and the proportion of glycoproteins is shown in Figure S2, with no significant differences between 95C EVs and 95D EVs. Comparative analysis of the total proteins and glycoproteins it was discovered that 211 glycoproteins were detected exclusively after ConA enrichment (Figure 3C). This suggested that ConA enrichment allows for the detection of low‐abundance glycoproteins, facilitating the discovery of novel glycoproteins within EVs. We then analyzed the Pearson correlation coefficients of the proteomic and glycoproteomic datasets for 95C EVs and 95D EVs. As shown in Figure 3D, the matrix graph illustrates the degree of correlation among the four groups. The correlation coefficient between 95C EVs T‐p and 95D EVs T‐p was 0.87. After lectin ConA enrichment, the correlation coefficient between 95C EVs G‐p and 95D EVs G‐p was approximately 0.58, indicating that the differences between 95C EVs and 95D EVs become more pronounced at the protein glycosylation level. This data also suggested that glycoproteins enrichment might be more beneficial for the functional analysis of differentially expressed proteins.
We then proceeded to conduct a differential expression analysis on these proteins. After setting threshold for the datasets, proteins that were upregulated or downregulated by more than 2‐fold in 95D EVs versus 95C EVs (p < 0.05) were considered as differentially expressed proteins. As shown in Figure 3E and Figure S3A, a total of 517 and 777 differentially expressed glycoproteins and total proteins were identified, respectively. As shown in Figure S4, the heatmap shows the expression pattern of differentially expressed glycoproteins. Compared to 95C EVs, 23 glycoproteins in 95D EVs exhibited a more than 20‐fold increase (FC (G) > 20 and p value (G) < 0.05), including CDCP1, TNC (tenascin‐C), NCAM2 (neural cell adhesion molecule 2), ITGA4 (integrin alpha‐4), and so forth (Table 1). The fold changes of these proteins in the total proteomics before ConA enrichment (FC (T)) are also listed in the table. Approximately half of the proteins were not detected in 95C EVs before enrichment, including TNC, NCAM2, EMB (embryonic development associated protein), and others. Moreover, the fold changes of the majority of proteins significantly increased after enrichment. The fold change of CDCP1 dropped from 1123‐fold to 143‐fold after enrichment because only trace amounts were detected in the 95C EVs before enrichment. Briefly, ConA enrichment highlighted proteomic differences between 95D EVs and 95C EVs, facilitating the identification of differentially expressed proteins.
The table presents the number of glycosylation sites enriched for different proteins in 95C EVs and 95D EVs, indicating that these proteins exhibit a higher degree of glycosylation in 95D EVs. Next, we counted the number of glycosylation sites on glycoproteins from both 95C EVs and 95D EVs. The distribution of N‐glycosylation sites is illustrated in Figure 3F, where the number of glycoproteins with identified sites in 95D EVs was higher than that in 95C EVs. These results collectively indicated that the level of protein glycosylation in 95D EVs is higher overall than that in 95C EVs.
As shown in Figure 3G–I, three typical glycoproteins containing multiple N‐glycosylation sites demonstrate the changes in ranking, relative quality, and unique peptides before and after ConA enrichment. For example, in 95C EVs, the ranking of CDCP1 rose from 0.17% to 43.35%, and the relative abundance increased from 0.01 to 0.21; in 95D EVs, its relative abundance rose from 9.46 to 29.70 after enrichment, with a 262‐fold increase. Moreover, the number of unique peptides increased significantly after ConA enrichment. Similar trends were also observed for the glycoproteins TNC and NCAM2. These results collectively indicated that ConA enrichment can significantly enhance the detection capability for low‐abundance N‐glycoproteins.
We conducted bioinformatic analysis on these dysregulated proteins. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis of these differentially expressed proteins further revealed their biological processes, intracellular localization, and signaling pathways (Figure 3J,K, Figure S3B,C, and Table S1). These biological processes and signaling pathways mainly include cell adhesion, cell junctions, tumorigenesis, the PI3K‐Akt signaling pathway, proteoglycans in cancer, cytoskeleton regulation, adhesion, and migration‐related pathways.
CDCP1: A Key Candidate Glycoprotein in Lung Cancer Progression
Among the 23 differentially expressed glycoproteins list in Table 1, most of them have more glycosylation sites in 95D EVs than that in 95C EVs, indicating that protein glycosylation is closely associated with cancer metastasis. In particular, CDCP1 and TNC are top ranked ones with increased glycosylation sites in 95D EVs. Glycoproteins CDCP1 and TNC were significantly upregulated in 95D EVs, with 143‐fold and 418‐fold higher compared to 95C EVs, respectively. And the minimal p value pointed to a strong confidence in these results. Literature review and database searching indicate that both proteins are glycoproteins with multiple glycosylation sites and are closely related to cell migration (Kawase et al.; Campos et al.). They may be important candidate proteins affecting the high metastatic potential of 95D cells. The N‐glycoproteome data revealed that a total of 8 glycosylation sites on CDCP1 were identified in EVs (Figure 4A), and we assessed the probability of glycosylation modification at each site. The results indicated that only 3 glycosylation sites of CDCP1 were detected in 95C EVs, whereas 8 glycosylation sites were identified in 95D EVs. Similarly, we conducted a statistical analysis of the glycosylation sites for TNC (Figure S5). The results showed that a total of 7 glycosylation sites were detected, all of which were from 95D EVs, whereas no glycosylation sites for TNC were detected in 95C EVs. The glycopeptide sequences are listed in Table S2. These results suggest that CDCP1 and TNC in 95D EVs have a higher level of glycosylation modification, with a greater number of glycan chains. Heavily glycosylated CDCP1 and TNC may contribute to the high metastatic potential of 95D cells.
We then verified the expression levels of CDCP1 and TNC in 95C and 95D cell lysates (CL) and their EVs by western blot analysis. CDCP1 is a 135 kDa type I transmembrane glycoprotein containing 14 predicted N‐glycosylation sites. It is cleaved by serine proteases into a soluble 65 kDa N‐terminal fragment (ATF) and a membrane‐bound 70 kDa C‐terminal fragment (CTF) (Khan et al.). As shown in Figure 4B, CDCP1 was highly expressed in both the CL and EVs of 95D cells, whereas the bands were almost invisible in that of 95C cells. The expression of TNC glycoprotein in the CL of 95D cells was significantly higher than that of 95C cells, whereas no obvious bands were observed for their EV proteins, which may be due to the low concentration of TNC in EVs or the limited affinity of the antibody used. To determine the molecular weight contribution of glycans on CDCP1, we treated proteins from 95D CL and EVs with PNGase F to remove N‐glycans, followed by Western blot analysis. As shown in Figure 4C, deglycosylation reduced the molecular weight of full‐length CDCP1 from ∼135 kDa to ∼100 kDa in both CL and EVs, indicating that glycans contribute ∼35 kDa to the full‐length protein. Similarly, the CTF of CDCP1 decreased from ∼70 kDa to ∼55 kDa after PNGase F treatment, indicating the presence of a ∼15 kDa glycan on the CTF. Especially, the magnitude of molecular weight reduction was comparable between CL and EVs, demonstrating that CDCP1 retains its glycosylation profile upon EV packing. The above results demonstrated that CDCP1 was highly enriched in 95D EVs, indicating that CDCP1 may be selectively packaged into EVs and could be considered as an important candidate glycoprotein affecting lung cancer cell migration. Importantly, PNGase F enzymatic cleavage assays provided direct visual evidence of CDCP1 glycosylation, establishing the foundation for subsequent characterization of glycan structure and functional analysis of the protein.
We analyzed and summarized the expression levels of CDCP1 in various tumor tissues and normal tissues in the TCGA database and further explored the potential of CDCP1 as a clinical marker for lung cancer. As shown in Figure S6A, in patients with cancers such as bladder urothelial carcinoma (BLCA), breast invasive carcinoma (BRCA), lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), lung squamous cell carcinoma (LUSC), pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAAD), and stomach adenocarcinoma (STAD), the expression of CDCP1 in tumor tissues was significantly higher than that in normal tissues. After statistical analysis of data from 483 patients with LUAD and 486 patients with LUSC (Figure 4D), the results indicated that the expression level of CDCP1 in both lung cancers was significantly higher than that in normal tissues, with a p value less than 0.05, and the abundance of CDCP1 in LUSC was slightly higher than that in LUAD. We then conducted a survival analysis on LUAD and LUSC patients with high and low CDCP1 expression, as shown in Figure 4E. Patients with low CDCP1 expression had a significantly higher survival rate than those with high CDCP1 expression, and the data were statistically significant. Similarly, we performed the TCGA database statistical analysis for TNC (Figures S6B and S7). TNC was found to be more abundant in some tumor tissues compared to normal tissues, including glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSC), skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM), and LUSC. However, it had no effect on the prognosis of lung cancer patients (p = 0.55). These data indicate that high CDCP1 expression is associated with a poorer prognosis in lung cancer patients. It also suggests that CDCP1 may serve as a clinical therapeutic target, which is important for the development of diagnosis and treatment of lung cancer.
Site‐Specific Glycan Profiling of CDCP1 via ZIC‐HILIC
To further investigate the glycan structures of CDCP1, we utilized ZIC‐HILIC for intact glycopeptide enrichment and site‐specific glycan profiling. Due to the low abundance of glycopeptides, we first conducted IP experiments to enhance detection sensitivity, followed by ZIC‐HILIC based glycopeptide isolation and intact glycopeptide LC‐MS/MS analysis (Figure 4F). As shown in Figure 4G, we identified 7 CDCP1 glycopeptides, 9 glycosylation sites (N39, N180, N205, N213, N339, N386, N512, N639, N642), 86 glycoforms, and 335 glycopeptide‐spectrum matches (GPSMs) in 95D CL. These glycopeptides and corresponding sites are detailed in Table S3. Notably, the 9 glycosylation sites identified in this experiment differ from the 8 sites previously detected in EVs through ConA‐based glycoproteomics, suggesting potential method‐dependent discrepancies in glycan profiling.
Quantitative analysis of glycopeptides (Figure 4H) revealed distinct glycosylation patterns across the nine identified sites. Sites N180, N339, and N386 exhibited the highest glycopeptide counts (top three) and substantial area contributions, suggesting diverse glycoform modifications and high abundance at these positions. This phenomenon implies that glycosylation at N180, N339, and N386 may critically regulate CDCP1's functional interactions, highlighting their potential as therapeutic targets. To explore the glycan types at each glycosylation site, we conducted statistical analyses categorizing N‐linked glycans (Figure 4I). Oligo‐mannose glycans (33.2% overall) are typically associated with protein folding and intracellular trafficking. In contrast, complex/hybrid glycans (66.8% overall) mediate cell‐cell recognition, immune evasion, and signal transduction. Notably, sites N180, N205, N339, and N386 exhibited >90% complex/hybrid glycans, suggesting these positions are hotspots for functionally critical glycan modifications. The prevalence of sialylated and fucosylated glycans at these sites may enhance CDCP1's interaction with integrins or other proteins, driving metastatic signaling.
Figure 4J illustrates the relative abundance and site‐specific distribution of the top 15 glycans identified in our study. The most abundant glycoform, Hex(8)HexNAc(2) (oligo‐mannose type), accounts for 15.65% of total glycans and is predominantly localized at site 512. Among the top 15 glycans, 12 are classified as complex/hybrid types. Notably, site 180 shows the highest abundance of Hex(6)HexNAc(3)NeuAc(1)Fuc(1) (18.57%), where sialylation (NeuAc) and fucosylation (Fuc) likely contribute to immune evasion or anti‐inflammatory signaling. Meanwhile, sites 339 and 386 exhibit diverse glycoform distributions, with Hex(5)HexNAc(3)NeuAc(1)Fuc(1) and Hex(6)HexNAc(3)Fuc(1) being the most prominent, respectively. These findings highlight the functional specialization of glycoforms across distinct sites, linking glycosylation patterns to biological processes. The glycopeptide LQFQVLVQHPQNESNK‐Hex(6)HexNAc(3)NeuAc(1)Fuc(1) at site N339 exhibits a characteristic mass‐to‐charge (m/z) abundance profile with high‐intensity signals corresponding to its glycan core structure (Figure 4K). During HCD fragmentation, the N‐glycan core generates a series of Y‐type fragment ions with predictable mass gaps, validating the glycan composition and site‐specific localization. This glycopeptide represents the highest‐confidence identification in our dataset. To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first comprehensive characterization of CDCP1's site‐specific glycosylation landscape, identifying N180, N339, and N386 as functionally critical sites. Targeting these glycosylation hotspots may offer novel therapeutic strategies.
Target Deletion of CDCP1 in 95D Cells and EVs Suppressed Cell Migration
To further investigate the function of the glycoprotein CDCP1, we utilized the CRISPR‐Cas9 system to generate a CDCP1 knockout (KO) 95D cell line (Figure 5A). Guide‐RNA targeting exon2 of the CDCP1 gene was designed, enabling the Cas9 protein to cleave the third nucleotide following the PAM (Protospacer Adjacent Motif) sequence. This gene editing induced a mutation through non‐homologous end joining, which resulted in the loss of CDCP1 gene function (Zhang et al.). The knockout efficiency was then verified by DNA sequencing (Figure 5B) and Western blot analysis (Figure 5C). The DNA sequencing results showed overlapping peaks in exon2 of the CDCP1 gene, indicating a frameshift mutation occurred that prevents normal translation and expression of CDCP1. The Western blot results confirmed the absence of CDCP1 protein in the EVs of the 95D CDCP1 KO 1 and 95D CDCP1 KO 2 cell lines, with both the full‐length 135 kDa and the 70 kDa CDCP1 protein undetectable. This demonstrates that we have successfully established CDCP1 protein knockout 95D lung cancer cell lines, which can be used for subsequent studies on the impact of CDCP1 on the metastatic function of lung cancer cells.
After CDCP1 protein was successfully knockout by CRISPR‐Cas9 system, EVs derived from knockout (KO) and control (CTRL) cell lines were characterized. As shown in Figure 5D, the EVs from both groups exhibited a nearly spherical shape with clear membrane structures, and the diameter was approximately 150 nm, showing no significant change between two cell lines. The size distribution of the EVs was depicted in Figure 5E, where the particle concentration of EVs from the KO‐2 cell line was lower than that of the CTRL group and the KO‐1 cell line, but the size distribution remained around 150 nm without significant differences. Subsequently, we assessed the migratory ability of the KO‐1 and KO‐2 cell lines. The results indicated that the absence of the CDCP1 protein severely impaired the migration ability of the 95D cells (Figure 5F,H). Both the KO‐1 and KO‐2 cell lines exhibited a decrease in cell migration ability to different degrees, with a p value of less than 0.0001, suggesting that CDCP1 is an important protein influencing cell migration ability.
To investigate whether the effect of the CDCP1 protein on cell migration could be exerted via EVs, we conducted cell co‐culture experiments by incubating cells with different types of EVs. Transwell assay was used to verify whether EVs carrying the CDCP1 protein would affect the migration ability of other cells. As shown in Figure 5G,H, the migration ability of 95D CTRL and KO cells increased after 24 h of incubation with EVs containing CDCP1. Although the migration ability of KO cells increased after co‐culture, it was still much lower than that of the CTRL cells. Meanwhile, cells co‐cultured with CDCP1 in the absence of EVs had no effect on migration. These results indicate that the proteins carried by EVs still possess biological functions after enrichment by ultracentrifugation, and that CDCP1 can be transferred by EVs to affect both themselves and other cells. EVs containing CDCP1 can promote the migration of lung cancer cells.
Phosphoproteomics Profiling Reveals CDCP1‐Regulated Metastatic Signaling Pathway
Following the knockout of CDCP1, we performed proteomic analysis of 95D CDCP1 KO cell lysates (CTRL CL, KO‐1 CL, KO‐2 CL) and EV proteins (CTRL EVs, KO‐1 EVs, KO‐2 EVs). As shown in Figure S8, the results indicated high consistency across the three replicates, with 2030 proteins being common to all six groups. Next, we conducted an analysis of differentially expressed proteins in KO groups. The results are shown in Figure 6A,B. Several proteins were found to be commonly upregulated or downregulated in both 95D CDCP1 KO cells and EVs. As shown in the heatmap, the expression levels of proteins such as MME (membrane metallo endopeptidase), MAP2K3 (mitogen‐activated protein kinase kinase 3), and ITGA5 (integrin subunit alpha 5) decreased, and previous studies have indicated that these proteins are associated with cell migration (Sun et al.; Zhang et al.; Pavlakis et al.; Wang el al.). We performed enrichment analysis on the differentially expressed proteins in the cell lysates, and the results suggested that these proteins may be involved in adherens junctions, microtubule regulation, and cancer‐related pathways.
To further explore the signaling pathways that are regulated by CDCP1, we conducted intracellular phosphoproteomic analysis. The enrichment workflow is shown in Figure 6C. We applied Ti4+‐IMAC material to specifically enrich phosphorylated peptides and conducted nanoLC‐MS/MS‐based proteomic analysis to investigate the changes of signaling pathways in the 95D CDCP1 KO cells. By adding phosphorylation as a variable modification in the database search, as shown in Figure 6D and Figure S9, a total of 2402 phosphoproteins were identified, with a phosphorylation enrichment efficiency of 98.1%. 90.72% of the phosphosites are derived from phosphoserine (pS), with the remaining consisting of 8.9% phosphorylated Threonine (pT) and 0.38% phosphorylated Tyrosine (pY). A total of 4280 proteins in the cell lysate were identified before Ti4+‐IMAC enrichment. In particular, 993 proteins were only detected after phosphorylation enrichment, indicating that more low‐abundance phosphorylated proteins can be detected following the Ti4+‐IMAC enrichment. After comparing the results with the 95D CTRL cells, a total of 147 phosphoproteins were found to be commonly upregulated or downregulated in both CDCP1 KO‐1 and KO‐2 (FC ≥1.5 or ≤0.67, and p < 0.05) (Figure 6E,F). These differentially expressed phosphoproteins were subjected to clustering and functional analysis, as shown in Figure 6G,H, and Table S4. GO analysis results indicated that these differential phosphoproteins are involved in functions such as vesicle‐mediated transport, adhesion, and kinase activity regulation. Furthermore, SRC and JUN are involved in the modulation of various functions. As can be seen from the heatmap, the level of phosphorylated SRC and JUN protein decreased 5.5‐fold and 4.2‐fold in the CDCP1 KO cell line, respectively. As shown in Figure S9C, statistical analysis of phosphosites revealed that JUN‐S63/S73 and SRC‐Y419 were the most significantly altered sites. These two proteins were involved in multiple intracellular signaling pathways, particularly in the ErbB signaling pathway.
CDCP1 Glycosylation Sites as Potential Therapeutic Targets in Lung Cancer
According to literature review, it is evident that phosphorylation of SRC and JUN can activate downstream pathways to promote cell migration (Chang et al.; Zhu et al.). Therefore, these two proteins are the focus of our subsequent research. We further validated the changes in phosphorylated proteins after CDCP1 knockout using Western blot analysis. As shown in Figure 7A, the levels of phosphorylated SRC and JUN were significantly reduced in 95D KO cells, while the total levels of SRC remained largely unchanged. Meanwhile, the total level of JUN protein was also decreased. When 95D CDCP1 KO cells were co‐cultured with EVs containing CDCP1, a faint band of CDCP1 could be observed, indicating that CDCP1 can be taken up by recipient cells through EVs‐mediated transfer. The phosphorylation levels of SRC and JUN were significantly increased, with no noticeable change in the total protein levels. Western blot results further confirmed that CDCP1 can regulate the phosphorylation levels of downstream SRC and JUN, and this regulation can be conveyed through EVs, affecting signaling pathways within recipient cells. We utilized the STRING database to identify proteins that interact with CDCP1, SRC, and JUN, resulting in a protein‐protein interaction network diagram (Figure 7B). Among these, CDCP1 and SRC interacted with multiple proteins, some of which are kinases, such as PRKCD, MAPK8, and MAPK9. Therefore, the absence of CDCP1 induced alterations in downstream kinases in the cell, which further regulated the transcriptional modulation of JUN and affected cell migration. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the changes in kinases within the cell following the absence of CDCP1. We performed kinase substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) on the differentially phosphorylated proteins. As shown in Figure 7C, the activity of several kinases was downregulated. The substrates corresponding to these kinases are shown in Figure S10. These results indicate that in the absence of CDCP1, the activity of kinases such as PRKCA, MAPK, and VRK1 was reduced, leading to a decrease in the phosphorylation levels of their corresponding substrates.
To validate the interaction between CDCP1 and SRC, we performed co‐immunoprecipitation (Co‐IP) assays using CDCP1 or SRC‐specific antibodies in 95D CL. As shown in Figure 7D, IP with CDCP1 antibody enriched CDCP1 and co‐precipitated SRC in CTRL cell lysates, while no SRC band was observed in KO lysates, confirming CDCP1‐dependent SRC interaction. Conversely, IP with SRC antibody robustly pulled down CDCP1. Negative controls (IgG) showed no detectable bands. These results conclusively demonstrate the formation of CDCP1‐SRC complex in wild‐type cells, indicating a promising direction for mechanism discovery. To further validate whether site‐specific glycosylation modulates downstream SRC phosphorylation, we performed glycosylation site mutagenesis experiments (Asn‐to‐Gln, N to Q) targeting key residues. As shown in Figure 7E, CDCP1 expression was undetectable in the empty vector control, while the N180Q, N339Q, N386Q mutants, and WT CDCP1 plasmids exhibited varying levels of CDCP1 expression. Notably, N339Q showed extremely weak CDCP1 expression. This suggests that the glycosylation site mutation at position 339 potentially impairs protein folding and stability, leading to proteolytic degradation and reduced abundance. Additionally, the N386Q mutant displayed a pronounced reduction of molecular weight in its CTF, indicating that glycosylation at position 386 contributes significantly to glycan mass, possibly influencing CDCP1's functional interactions. SRC phosphorylation was upregulated by N180Q, N386Q, and WT CDCP1, indicating minimal glycan impact at these sites. In contrast, N339Q abolished SRC activation, linking N339 glycosylation to both CDCP1 stability and SRC signaling. WT CDCP1 slightly enhanced JUN phosphorylation, while mutants showed no effect, underscoring CDCP1's role in sustaining downstream signaling.
These findings demonstrate that CDCP1 interacts with SRC, and its expression level regulates the phosphorylation of SRC and JUN. The N339 glycosylation site is critical for maintaining CDCP1 stability and downstream signaling. The N386 site, due to its substantial contribution to glycan mass, may also play a key role in modulating CDCP1's functional interactions.

INTRODUCTION:
Introduction
Lung cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world, with the highest incidence and mortality, accounting for 12.4% of the total cancer incidence and 18.7% of cancer‐related deaths (Bray et al.). Clinically, the majority of cancer patients die from metastasis and its complications (Ganesh and Massagué). Lung cancer metastasis is also the main reason for the low 5‐year survival rate (Kalluri and McAndrews). Therefore, it is essential to elucidate the underlying pathogenic mechanisms and identify novel inter‐ or intracellular factors that contribute to lung cancer metastasis.
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bilayer membrane‐delimited, non‐self‐replicating, nano‐ to micro‐sized particles that can be secreted by all cell types. EVs serve diverse and important roles in most biological systems, relying on their compositional complexity (Welsh et al.). EVs are vital mediators of intercellular communication, influencing the growth, metastasis, and drug resistance of tumors by facilitating interactions between cancer cells and other cells. Clinically, EVs can be utilized as diagnostic biomarkers or novel therapeutic targets for tumor progression, particularly for predicting and preventing future metastatic development (Becker et al.). Proteomic analysis of EVs greatly contributed to the understanding of carcinogenesis and tumor progression, playing a pivotal role in the identification of biomarkers for the early detection of cancer (Lischnig et al.). Previously, our proteomics study found several EV proteins associated with cellular functions, and some of them were glycoproteins (Qiao et al.). Proteomic profiling of EVs and their post‐translational modifications (PTMs) represents a novel approach and is part of the growing interest in cancer research.
Protein glycosylation is a typical PTM that significantly influences the function of proteins. Both N‐linked and O‐linked glycosylation have been identified and characterized within the proteome of EVs (Macedo‐da‐Silva et al.). Recent studies have indicated that glycoproteins in EVs are essential for the growth and metastasis of cancers. For instance, the glycoprotein CD147 has been discovered as a candidate surface marker for cancer cell‐derived EVs, defining a subpopulation of EVs (Ko et al.). Due to the potential for glycoproteins to be overshadowed by the high abundance of non‐glycosylated proteins, it is essential to perform glycoprotein enrichment before glycoproteomic analysis. Lectin ConA (Concanavalin A) binds specifically to α‐mannose and α‐glucose, providing a powerful affinity chromatography tool for the study of N‐glycoproteins (Waniwan et al.). To elucidate glycoprotein functions, site‐specific glycoform profiling is essential. The ZIC‐HILIC (zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography) technique employs a zwitterionic stationary phase that selectively captures polar glycopeptides via dual hydrophilic/charge interactions (Di Palma et al.). N‐glycans are categorized as oligo‐mannose, complex, or hybrid structures (Bagdonaite et al.). However, due to the low abundance of EVs, the complex glycoproteins within them are even more difficult to fully explore. It is challenging to conduct a comprehensive investigation of the EV glycoproteome and uncover its functions. Glycoproteins and glycopeptides enrichment coupled with mass spectrometry offers a potent strategy for uncovering novel targets in low abundance.
Protein phosphorylation is another prevalent PTM, which is a crucial regulator of protein and cellular function. Abnormal protein phosphorylation activation can lead to many diseases, particularly in the process of tumorigenesis and tumor progression (Pan and Chen; Bilbrough et al.). As a reversible modification, protein phosphorylation is sensitive to physiological and pathological conditions, which can facilitate the discovery of altered signaling pathways. Ti4+‐IMAC (Ti4+‐immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography) material has a high specificity for the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides and is frequently used in related research (Zhou et al.; Guo et al.). Based on the obtained phosphoproteomic data, dysregulated signaling pathways can be revealed. KSEA (kinase‐substrate enrichment analysis) can further estimate changes in kinase activity between different physiological conditions, contributing to the deciphering of underlying mechanisms.
In this study, we enriched and analyzed the glycoproteome of EVs from lung cancer cells with differential metastatic potential to identify key glycoproteins in metastasis. First, we enriched EV glycoproteins using the lectin ConA and performed quantitative proteomic analysis for the EV glycoproteome. Candidate glycoproteins that are critical for cell migration were revealed. Subsequently, we performed glycoform profiling of the candidate glycoprotein by enriching intact glycopeptides using ZIC‐HILIC. We then conducted phenotypic validation of selected candidate glycoproteins using target gene knockout, as well as EVs and cell co‐culture. Finally, we identified the role of target EV glycoprotein in lung cancer cell migration and elucidated the potential mechanism using phosphoproteomics and glycosylation site mutagenesis experiments. Through the verification of downstream signaling pathways, the crucial role of EV glycoproteins in cell migration will be explored and discussed.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supporting information
Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD057348 and PXD064331.