PRIDE PROJECT PROPERTIES:
organisms: Homo sapiens (human)
organism parts: Haploid cell; Cell culture
diseases: Chronic myeloid leukemia
instruments: Q Exactive HF
modifications: monohydroxylated residue; acetylated residue; iodoacetamide derivatized residue
experiment types: Shotgun proteomics
quantification: MS1 based isotope labeling
keywords: N-terminal acetylation; Nat; Actin; Human

ABSTRACT:
Eukaryotic actins undergo several post-translational modifications during their maturation to enable a fully functional cytoskeletal network. A unique N-terminal processing is conserved in the animal kingdom and includes the removal of the first one or two amino acids as well as N-terminal acetylation of the newly exposed acidic N-termini. These events have been known for decades, but the mechanism and function of actin N-terminal acetylation are not well understood due to the lack of information on the catalysing N-terminal acetyltransferase (NAT). Here, we show that NAA80, previously known as NAT6 or FUS-2,is a unique, animal kingdom-specific NAT that exclusively N-terminally acetylates actins. In vitro, the lack of actin N-terminal acetylation impedes the actin polymerization rate due to decreased formin-mediated filament elongation, while the depolymerisation rate is unaffected. Human NAA80 knockout cells display a complete loss of actin N-terminal acetylation and a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. We reveal Naa80 as the enzyme that specifically N-terminally acetylates actin the most abundant protein in animal cells, and that this modification controls cellular dynamics and cytoskeletal functions. In this project acetylation of actins was investigated with the use of LC-MS/MS and MS1 quantitation of the Total Ion Current signal.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
Naa80 acetylates the actin N-terminus impacting the actin cytoskeleton and cell motility

SAMPLE PROCESSING:
SCX enrichment of N-terminal peptides from Naa80 WT and KO cells was performed as described previously (PMID: 28315243). To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events (Ac), all primary protein amines were blocked at the protein level making use of a N-hydroxysuccinimide ester of acetic acid encoded with stable heavy isotopes (i.e. NHS ester of 13C2D3-acetic acid (AcDC)). In this way, it is possible to distinguish between in vivo (Ac) and in vitro (AcDC) acetylated N-termini and to calculate the degree of in vivo Nt-acetylation as described below. After trypsin digestion, N-terminally blocked peptides were enriched by Strong Cation Echange (SCX) as such peptides will not bind to the SCX resin at low pH. From both samples, approximately 2 µg of the resulting peptide mixture was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection. Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent (0.1% TFA in water/acetonitrile (98:2, v/v)) on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany) and the sample was loaded on a 400 mm analytical column (made in-house, 75 µm I.D., 1.9 µm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear increase from 2 to 56% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 140 minutes at a constant flow rate of 250 nl/min, followed by a 10-minutes wash reaching 99% solvent B and re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the orbitrap analyser after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated (window of 1.5 Th) for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the orbitrap analyser. The S-lens RF level was set at 55 and we excluded precursor ions with single and unassigned charge states from fragmentation selection.

DATA PROCESSING:
Mascot generic files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.5.1.0, Matrix Science Ltd.). Peak lists were searched with the Mascot search engine using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) against the SwissProt database restricted to human proteins (database release version of January 2017 containing 20,246 human protein sequences). Spectra were first searched with semi-ArgC/P enzyme settings, allowing 1 missed cleavage. Heavy acetylation (13C2D3) of lysine residues and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues was set as a variable modification. Mass tolerance of the precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and of fragment ions to 20 mmu. The instrument setting was set to ESI-QUAD. To allow identification and quantification of acetylated N-terminal peptides, a quantitation method with two different components was made defining light (12C2H3) and heavy (13C2D3) acetylation of peptide N-termini as respectively light and heavy exclusive modification groups. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score set at 99% confidence were withheld. In a second search, peptides without N-terminal acetylation were identified using a similar search parameter set, including the cyclization of N-terminal glutamine residues to pyroglutamine residues as a variable modification. The FDR was calculated as described previously (PMID: 18067246) and found to be 0.96%. Identified peptides were quantified using the Mascot Distiller Toolbox version 2.3.2.0 (MatrixScience) in the precursor mode. To validate the calculated ratio, the standard error on the least square fit has to be below 0.16 and correlation coefficient of the isotopic envelope should be above 0.97.  For processing of all MS data the ms_lims software platform was used (PMID 20058248). Peptides shorter than 8 amino acid residues, peptides not starting at position 1 or 2 in the protein sequence and non-tryptic peptides were removed for downstream analysis. The degree of in vivo acetylation was calculated separately in both samples using the light/heavy (Ac/AcDC) ratio reported by the Mascot Distiller Toolbox by the equation Ac % = ratio (Ac/AcDC) / (ratio (Ac/AcDC) + 1). In those cases were N-terminal peptides were identified and quantified multiple times, the median and standard deviation of the acetylation degrees of the individual peptides was calculated.

METHODS:
Materials and Methods
Detailed procedures for cell culturing, microscopy analysis, recombinant protein purification, actin purification, pyrene-based polymerization and depolymerization assays, Nt-acetylation assays, and Western blot analysis are described in SI Materials and Methods and Table S3.

RESULTS:
Results
NAA80 Nt-Acetylates Actin.
Nat6/Fus-2/NAA80 was previously described as a putative NAT, based on sequence analysis that suggested the presence of a NAT-specific (GCN5)-related N-acetyltransferase (GNAT)-fold (Fig. S1A), although no specific substrate had been described. Here we studied the Nt-acetylation activity of NAA80 toward a representative selection of peptides, revealing a marked preference for peptides with acidic N termini (DDDI and EEEI) (Fig. 1A and Fig. S1B). This preference for the DDDI substrate peptide and EEEI as the second best was observed both in NAA80 immunoprecipitated from HeLa cells (Fig. 1A) and in recombinantly expressed and purified NAA80 (Fig. S1B). Among all the proteins expressed in animals, these N termini uniquely correspond to those of cytoplasmic β- and γ-actin, respectively, after the intermediate step of posttranslational cleavage of the N-terminal acetylmethionine (Fig. S1C).
NAA80-eGFP expressed in human HAP1 cells displayed a diffuse cytosolic distribution (Fig. 1B) and, contrary to most NATs, did not associate with ribosomes (Fig. S1D), suggesting that it targets its substrate(s) posttranslationally. To identify NAA80-specific substrates in cells, we generated two HAP1 NAA80-KO cell lines (KO1 and KO2) using the CRISPR/Cas9 system (Fig. S2A). Phosphoimaging of NAA80 KO1 cell lysates treated with purified NAA80 and isotope-labeled [14C]-acetyl CoA revealed a single band at ∼43 kDa, corresponding to the expected molecular mass of actin (Fig. 1C). Actin’s identity was confirmed using N-terminal proteomics by quantitatively assessing the Nt-acetylation status of 402 unique N termini from control and NAA80 KO1 cell lysates. Only peptides corresponding to the fully processed N termini of β- and γ-actin showed altered Nt-acetylation levels in KO cells (Fig. S2B and Table S1). No other proteins, including Arps (ARPC2, CAZA2, TPM1, and TPM4), displayed any difference between control and KO1 cells (Table S1). This can be explained by the fact that the N termini of these proteins do not match NAA80’s substrate specificity. The lack of matching substrate sequence also applies to other Arps, including all isoforms of the Arp2/3 complex, capping protein, VASP, myosin, tropomyosin, and formin. Furthermore, both actin isoforms were 100% and 0% Nt-acetylated in control and NAA80 KO1 cells, respectively. Isoform- and Nt-acetylation–specific actin antibodies recognized an ∼43-kDa band in control but not NAA80 KO1 cells (Fig. 1 D and E). The Ac-β-actin and Ac-γ-actin antibody signals reappeared in KO cell lysates transfected with NAA80 (Fig. 1E) but not in cells transfected with a catalytically inactive mutant, NAA80mut (W105F, R170Q, G173D, Y205F) (Fig. 1E and Fig. S3), confirming that catalytically active NAA80 is absolutely required for actin Nt-acetylation in cells. Of note, the Ac-β-actin is a weaker antibody in our hands than Ac-γ-actin. Both signals are almost equally strong in rescue experiments (Fig. 1 D and E), suggesting a more effective rescue for β-actin and thus confirming the substrate specificity of NAA80 we observed in our in vitro experiments (Fig. 1A and Fig. S1B). These results were corroborated for both KO cell lines at the single-cell level by immunofluorescence (IF) analysis (Fig. 1F and Fig. S3), showing that only control cells and NAA80-eGFP–transfected NAA80-KO cells were positive for Ac-β-actin and Ac-γ-actin antibody staining.
Actin Nt-Acetylation Controls Cell Motility.
Next, we explored the impact of actin Nt-acetylation in cells. Since the actin cytoskeleton is a major factor in cell motility, we tested HAP1 control and NAA80-KO cells in several independent migration assays. We found that the lack of actin Nt-acetylation resulted in increased motility of HAP1 NAA80-KO cells. In wound-healing assays, NAA80 KO1 cells closed the gap ∼12 h faster than control cells (Fig. 2 A and B), with cell-front velocity increasing from 6.4 ± 0.7 to 10 ± 0.6 μm/h (Fig. 2C). We observed similar results for both KO cell lines in an IncuCyte ZOOM system for live-cell imaging, showing an increase of cell-front velocity from 7 to 9 μm/h and 11 μm/h for NAA80 KO1 and KO2 cells, respectively (Fig. S4 and Movie S1). To investigate the migratory properties of single cells, we performed a chemotaxis assay by seeding cells on a transparent porous membrane in medium containing 1% FBS. Cells were attracted to the bottom side by a medium containing 10% FBS, and the number of migrating cells was normalized to the growth rates of each cell line (Fig. S4). NAA80 KO1 cells showed an ∼50% increase in chemotactic motility compared with control cells (Fig. 2D). In addition to the chemotactic assay for directed migration, we also measured random cell migration in parallel wells in which both chambers contained 10% FBS. In this assay, we also observed increased random motility of NAA80 KO1 cells (Fig. 2E), consistent with an increased capacity of these cells to migrate. Similar results were obtained with NAA80 KO2 cells (Fig. S4 D and E). Taken together these data demonstrate that cells deficient in actin Nt-acetylation have increased motility.
Actin Nt-Acetylation Affects Cytoskeletal Morphology.
The actin cytoskeleton regulates not only cell motility but also cell shape and morphology. Thus, we compared the morphology of the actin cytoskeleton in HAP1 control and NAA80-KO cells by phalloidin staining. Based on the hypermotility phenotype of NAA80-KO cells, we were specifically interested in the formation of cell protrusions, such as filopodia and lamellipodia, that are usually linked to cell motility. As anticipated, NAA80-KO cells displayed an increase in both the number and length of filopodia-like structures (Fig. 3 A–D). These cells showed an approximately fourfold increase in the number of filopodia-like structures, defined as phalloidin-stained protrusions with a length ≥0.5 µm (Fig. 3C). The average filopodia length increased from 1 µm in control cells to 5 µm in NAA80-KO cells (Fig. 3D). Confirming the specificity of this phenotype, the reexpression of NAA80 in NAA80-KO cells reduced the number of filopodia-like structures nearly to control levels, whereas the expression of the catalytically inactive mutant NAA80mut did not (Fig. S5A). As in the other experiments described above, the NAA80 KO2 clone showed similar behavior (Fig. S5B). Consistent with the apparent elevated number of filamentous actin structures in NAA80-KO cells, we observed a significant reduction in the ratio of globular-actin to filamentous-actin (G/F), from 0.73 in HAP1 control cells to 0.55 in NAA80 KO1 cells (Fig. 3E). This effect was reversed by the expression of wild-type NAA80 but not NAA80mut in both NAA80-KO cell lines (Fig. S5C), demonstrating that NAA80-dependent actin Nt-acetylation directly impacts the transition between G- and F-actin.
Since we observed a hypermotility phenotype for NAA80-KO cells (Fig. 3), we quantified the number of cells showing at least one distinguishable lamellipodium supported by microspikes or filopodia-like structures. To efficiently study these cell protrusions in HAP1 cells, which typically grow in clusters, we included only cells at the borders of the clusters in quantifications. These were scored as either positive or negative for the presence of lamellipodia. In agreement with the increased cell-front velocity in the motility assays, we observed that twice as many NAA80-KO cells as control cells formed lamellipodia (32 vs. 16%) (Fig. 3 F–H). These results further emphasize the importance of actin Nt-acetylation in the control of cytoskeletal dynamics.
Nt-Acetylation–Dependent Actin Polymerization and Stability.
To address the mechanism behind the altered cytoskeleton organization phenotypes of NAA80-KO cells, we analyzed the recovery rates of cytoskeletal structures in cells treated with the actin-depolymerizing drug latrunculin A (LatA). Within 60 min of LatA treatment the actin appeared to be fully depolymerized in control and NAA80-KO cells, and washout of the drug resulted in the recovery of actin filament structures, but the time of recovery was significantly delayed for NAA80-KO cells compared with control cells (Fig. S6), consistent with a direct role of actin Nt-acetylation in actin polymerization.
We next explored the in vitro effect of actin Nt-acetylation on the polymerization/depolymerization properties of actin alone or in the presence of some of the most common actin-assembly factors in cells. Cytoplasmic actin (a mixture of β and γ isoforms) was purified from control and NAA80-KO cells, and the presence or absence of Nt-acetylation was verified by Western blotting (Fig. 4A). The time course of actin polymerization measured using the pyrene-actin polymerization assay revealed no significant difference in the polymerization rate of acetylated β/γ-actin (Ac-actin) vs. nonacetylated β/γ-actin (non–Ac-actin) (Fig. 4B). However, the elongation of 1.5-μM β/γ-actin filament seeds (±Nt-acetylation) in the presence of 0.5-μM β/γ-actin monomers (i.e., above the critical concentration for monomer addition at the barbed end but below that of the pointed end) was more than twofold faster for Ac-actin than for non–Ac-actin (Fig. 4C). In contrast, the depolymerization rate of 0.1-μM filament seeds (i.e., below the critical concentration of both the pointed and barbed ends) was approximately twofold faster for Ac-actin than for non–Ac-actin, suggesting that, at least in the absence of other factors, actin filament structures formed by non–Ac-actin might be more stable (Fig. 4D). Because both elongation and depolymerization are approximately twofold faster for Ac-actin than for non–Ac-actin, whereas total polymerization is unchanged, nucleation seems to be mostly unaffected by Nt-acetylation. In cells, nucleation is greatly enhanced by the Arp2/3 complex. However, we also found no difference in the relative polymerization rate of Ac-actin and non–Ac-actin induced by Arp2/3 complex (Fig. 4E and Fig. S7 A and B). We next analyzed two formins, mDia1 and mDia2, that, while closely related in sequence, have very different actin-assembly properties. We observed no significant difference in the relative polymerization rates of Ac-actin and non–Ac-actin induced by mDia2 (Fig. 4D and Fig. S7 A and C), a formin that has strong nucleation but poor elongation activity. In contrast, for mDia1, which has both strong nucleation and strong elongation activities, the polymerization rate was approximately twofold higher for Ac-actin than for non–Ac-actin (Fig. 4G and Fig. S7 A and D). Because Nt-acetylation–dependent differences appear to be emphasized during formin-mediated elongation, we analyzed the role of profilin (isoforms 1 and 2), known to virtually stop pointed-end elongation of actin alone while dramatically accelerating barbed-end elongation by formins. As expected, mDia1 accelerated the elongation rate of β/γ-actin filament seeds from profilin1-actin compared with the elongation of seeds from actin alone, but this effect was greater for Ac-actin than for non–Ac-actin (Fig. 4H). Curiously, no significant difference was observed with profilin2-actin (Fig. 4I), suggesting that mDia1 processes profilin1-actin more efficiently than profilin2-actin. We note, however, that these assays detect the incorporation into filaments of the small fraction of pyrene-labeled actin, which binds profilin with weaker affinity than unlabeled actin, so the effects of profilin may be far more pronounced than indicated by the bulk assays. Together, these results suggest that the differences in filament assembly between Ac-actin and non–Ac-actin emanate mainly from an Nt-acetylation–dependent increase in the rates of filament depolymerization and elongation, whereas nucleation appears to be mostly unaffected (spontaneous or Arp2/3 complex-driven).

INTRODUCTION:
Humans express six highly conserved actin isoforms, which account for ∼5% of the total protein in most cells and ∼20% in muscle cells. Actin’s abundance is paralleled by its crucial role in countless cellular functions, which are regulated in cells by a large number of actin-binding proteins (ABPs). An essential group of actin regulators is those that control the initiation of actin polymerization, known as “actin nucleators”. By overcoming the rate-limiting step in actin polymerization, i.e., nucleation, these proteins control the spatiotemporal polymerization of actin as well as the specific morphology of actin networks. Two types of nucleators, actin-related proteins (the Arp2/3 complex) and formins, mediate most nucleation activities in cells. The Arp2/3 complex is responsible for the formation of branched actin networks, whereas formins mediate the assembly of unbranched filament structures such as filopodia and stress fibers. Other than ABPs, several forms of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) regulate actin’s function, among which N-terminal (Nt)-acetylation is the most widespread. Protein Nt-acetylation, affecting 80–90% of all proteins in humans, is emerging as a key regulator of cell function with major roles in the control of protein lifetime, protein–protein interaction, and protein folding. While most eukaryotic proteins are Nt-acetylated cotranslationally by one of several ribosome-associated N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs), i.e., NatA–NatE, animal actins are processed posttranslationally. The omnipresence of Nt-acetylation in actin suggests that it can be conceptually viewed as part of its functional sequence and is thus thought to play a major role in cytoskeleton assembly by making actin’s exposed N terminus exceptionally acidic. However, the functional consequences of actin Nt-acetylation remain largely unexplored, and the identity of actin’s NAT has remained a mystery.

SUPPLEMENTARY:
Supplementary Material
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Data deposition: The mass spectrometry proteomics data in Table S1 have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository (dataset ID PXD006856; user name: reviewer89589@ebi.ac.uk; password: LMHVncnM).
See Commentary on page .
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1718336115/-/DCSupplemental.