In the preceding decades, molecular characterization has revolutionized breast cancer (BC) research and therapeutic approaches. Presented herein, an unbiased analysis of breast tumor proteomes, inclusive of 9995 proteins quantified across all tumors, for the first time recapitulates BC subtypes. Additionally, poor-prognosis basal-like and luminal B tumors are further subdivided by immune component infiltration, suggesting the current classification is incomplete. Proteome-based networks distinguish functional protein modules for breast tumor groups, with co-expression of EGFR and MET marking ductal carcinoma in situ regions of normal-like tumors and lending to a more accurate classification of this poorly defined subtype. Genes included within prognostic mRNA panels have significantly higher than average mRNA-protein correlations, and gene copy number alterations are dampened at the protein-level; underscoring the value of proteome quantification for prognostication and phenotypic classification. Furthermore, protein products mapping to non-coding genomic regions are identified; highlighting a potential new class of tumor-specific immunotherapeutic targets.

Gene expression profiles can classify breast cancer into five clinically relevant subtypes. Here, the authors perform an in-depth quantitative profiling of the proteome of 45 breast tumors, and show they can recapitulate the transcriptome-based classifications and identify many potentially antigenic tumour-specific peptides.

Tumor samples from Oslo2 cohort were prepared for MS analysis using a modified version of the spin filter-aided sample preparation protocol,, and peptides were separated using immobilized pH gradient-isoelectric focusing (IPG-IEF) on narrow range pH 3.7–4.9 and 3–10 strips. Peptide fractions were separated using a 3000 RSLCnano system and analyzed using a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive. MSGF + Percolator in the Galaxy platform was used to match MS spectra to the Ensembl 75 human protein database,. Protein identifications were limited to 1% protein FDR. Proteogenomics was performed as described by Branca et al. and Zhu et al.,. See for additional methods and details.

Further information on experimental design is available in the linked to this article.
