Cancer evolves as a result of an accumulation of mutations and chromosomal aberrations. Developments in sequencing technologies have enabled the discovery and cataloguing of millions of such mutations. The identification of protein-level alterations, typically by using reversed-phase protein arrays or mass spectrometry, has lagged, however, behind gene and transcript-level observations. In this study, we report the use of mass spectrometry for detecting the presence of mutations-missense, indels and frame shifts-in MCF7 and SKBR3 breast cancer, and non-tumorigenic MCF10A cells. The mutations were identified by expanding the database search process of raw mass spectrometry files by including an in-house built database of mutated peptides (XMAn-v1) that complemented a minimally redundant, canonical database of Homo sapiens proteins. The work resulted in the identification of nearly 300 mutated peptide sequences, of which ~50 were characterized by quality tandem mass spectra. We describe the criteria that were used to select the mutated peptide sequences, evaluate the parameters that characterized these peptides, and assess the artifacts that could have led to false peptide identifications. Further, we discuss the functional domains and biological processes that may be impacted by the observed peptide alterations, and how protein-level detection can support the efforts of identifying cancer driving mutations and genes. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014458.

The breast cancer (MCF7, SKBR3) and nontumorigenic (MCF10) cell lines were purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA). Cell culture reagents and media (EMEM, PBS, trypsin 0.25%/EDTA) were from ATCC, DMEM/F12 1:1 phenol-red free and horse serum from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA), and McCoy from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA). FBS was purchased either from Gemini Bio-Products (West Sacramento, CA) or from ATCC. Charcoal/dextran treated FBS was from Hyclone (Logan, UT). Cell culture media additives (cholera toxin, hydrocortisone, 17-β estradiol, L-glutamine, bovine insulin), various other reagents (NH4HCO3, NaF, Na3VO4, protease inhibitor cocktail, DTT, urea, and acetic and trifluoroacetic acids), as well as the nuclear/cytoplasmic separation Cell Lytic™ NuCLEAR™ kit were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Sequencing grade trypsin for enzymatic digestion of cell extracts was from Promega (Madison, WI). C18 and SCX sample cleanup cartridges (SPEC-PTC18 and SPEC-PTSCX) were acquired from Agilent Technologies (Palo Alto, CA). DI water was from an in-house MilliQ Ultrapure water system (Millipore, Bedford, MA), and all solvents were HPLC grade from Fisher Scientific (Fair Lawn, NJ).

Detailed conditions for cell culture and processing were described in previous work. Three biological replicates were produced for each cell state. Briefly, the cells were cultured per manufacturer’s protocol in their optimal growth medium supplemented with various factors: SKBR3 in McCoy 5 A + FBS 10%; MCF7 in EMEM + bovine insulin 10 μg/mL + FBS 10%; and MCF10 in DMEM/F12 + horse serum 5% + EGF 20 ng/mL + hydrocortisone 0.5 μg/mL + cholera toxin 0.1 μg/mL + insulin 10 μg/mL. The culture incubator was maintained at 37 °C with 5% CO2. The cells were arrested for 48 h in serum free medium, and then released for 24–36 h with medium supplemented with serum and growth factors. After harvesting, the cells were frozen at −80 °C.

The nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of the cells were separated with the Cell Lytic™ NuCLEAR™ kit, in the presence of phosphatase/protease inhibitors and DTT, by following the manufacturer’s recommendations. The cell extracts were aliquotted in 500 µg batches based on concentration measurements performed with the Bradford assay and a SmartSpec Plus spectrophotometer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). The protein extracts were reduced with DTT 4.5 mM in the presence of urea 8 M, at 55–60 °C for 1 h. After dilution 10-fold with NH4HCO3 50 mM, the extracts were subjected to enzymatic digestion overnight, at 37 °C, with trypsin (~30–50:1 substrate:enzyme ratio). Sample cleanup was performed with SPEC-PTC18 and SPEC-SCX cartridges, and the samples were dissolved in acidified (0.01% TFA) aqueous solution (2–5% CH3CN) at 2 μg/μL.

A micro-LC 1100 system (Agilent Technologies) was used for performing nano-LC separations with columns prepared in-house (100 μm i.d. × 360 o.d. × 12 cm long, packed with Zorbax SB-C18 particles/5 μm), and operated at ~180 nL/min. The experimental set-up was described in detail in previous work,. The composition of the mobile phases A and B was 95:5:0.01 and 20:80:0.01 v/v, H2O:CH3CN:TFA, respectively. The eluent gradient was 200 min long, from 10% to 100% B. A linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) MS system (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA), with electrospray ionization (ESI) operated at 2 kV, was used for performing mass analysis. ESI was produced with the aid of a fused silica capillary (20 μm i.d. × 90 μm o.d. × 10 mm long) that was inserted in the outlet of the nano-LC column. Data acquisition occurred by using a triple play data-dependent analysis method. Zoom/MS2 scans were retrieved for the five most intense peaks of a prior MS scan (500–2,000 m/z), with the following settings: ±5 m/z zoom scan width, 60 s exclusion duration, ±1.5 m/z exclusion width, exclusion list 200, dynamic exclusion at repeat count 1, repeat duration 30 s; collision induced dissociation at 35% normalized collision energy, Q 0.25, 30 ms activation time, 3 m/z isolation width, and MS2 trigger threshold 100 counts. Five LC-MS/MS replicates were performed for each sample.

The raw MS data were processed by Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher) using Sequest HT as a search engine, and a Homo sapiens non-redundant, canonical, reviewed database with 20,198 entries (January 2015 download). The search allowed for matches only to fully tryptic peptides with maximum two missed cleavages, in a mass range of 500–5,000 Da, with a minimum and maximum peptide length of 6 and 144 amino acids, and with tolerances of 2 Da and 1 Da for precursor and fragment ions (b/y/a), respectively. The peptide FDRs (calculated with the Target Decoy PSM Validator node) were set to <3% and <1% relaxed and stringent matches, respectively. No posttranslational modifications were included. To enable the identification of mutated peptide sequences, the database search process was devised such that the experimental tandem mass spectra that could not be matched to the canonical Homo sapiens database, were searched against a database containing only altered peptide sequences (XMAn-v1). The database comprised over 700,000 mutated peptide entries, and was developed in previous work based on information extracted from public resources (COSMIC, IARC P53, OMIM and UniProtKB), mostly from COSMIC (v. 66). For the purpose of this work, data from all LC-MS/MS experiments performed for a cell line were combined into one aggregate list. Protein annotations and functional classification of proteins were performed with DAVID 6.8,.

Supplemental Figure S1

Supplemental Dataset S1

Supplemental Table S1

Supplemental Table S2

Supplemental Table S3
