Skeletal muscle constitutes 40% of individual body mass and plays vital roles in locomotion and whole-body metabolism. Proteomics of skeletal muscle is challenging because of highly abundant contractile proteins that interfere with detection of regulatory proteins. Using a state-of-the art MS workflow and a strategy to map identifications from the C2C12 cell line model to tissues, we identified a total of 10,218 proteins, including skeletal muscle specific transcription factors like myod1 and myogenin and circadian clock proteins. We obtain absolute abundances for proteins expressed in a muscle cell line and skeletal muscle, which should serve as a valuable resource. Quantitation of protein isoforms of glucose uptake signaling pathways and in glucose and lipid metabolic pathways provides a detailed metabolic map of the cell line compared with tissue. This revealed unexpectedly complex regulation of AMP-activated protein kinase and insulin signaling in muscle tissue at the level of enzyme isoforms.

All animal experiments were approved by Danish Animal Experimental Inspectorate in compliance with the European Convention for Protection of Vertebrate Animal Used for Scientific Purposes. Fifteen-week-old female C57BL/6 mice were maintained on a 12:12-h light-dark cycle and had free access to standard chow diet. Triceps muscles were surgically removed from the anesthetized mice and quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen followed by storage at −80 °C.

C2C12 cells (myoblasts) were grown in Eagle's minimum essential medium supplemented with 2 mm l-glutamine and 10% fetal bovine serum plus antibiotics in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 in air. Undifferentiated myoblasts were grown to confluence in normal growth media (day 0). To induce differentiation, the amount of serum in the media was decreased to 2%. Cells were differentiated for 8 days. Growth medium was replaced with fresh medium every 2 days over a period of 8 days. At day 8 post differentiation, we observed less than 5% cell death (Tryphan blue staining). After 8 days, differentiated C2C12 (myotubes) were harvested for proteomics analysis.

Triceps muscle and differentiated C2C12 cells were lysed in buffer consisting of 0.1 m Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.1 m DTT, and 4% SDS, and incubated at 95 °C for 5 min. Triceps muscle homogenization was achieved with Ultra Turbax blender (IKA, Staufen, Germany). Lysates were sonicated using a Branson type sonicator and were then clarified by centrifugation at 16,100 × g for 10 min.

Cell lysates were diluted in 8 m urea in 0.1 m Tris-HCl followed by protein digestion with trypsin according to the FASP protocol (). After an over-night digestion peptides were eluted from the filters with 25 mm ammonium bicarbonate buffer. From each sample, 100 μg of peptides were fractionated by isoelectric focusing on an OffGel fractionator (Agilent, Santa Clara, USA) in 12 well formats as described (). Peptides from each of the 12 fractions were purified on C18 StageTips.

Analysis was performed in triplicates. Samples were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Easy nano-flow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (). Purified peptides were separated on 50 cm C18 columns (inner diameter 75 μm, 1.8 μm beads, Dr, Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and eluted with a 150 min linear gradient from 2–30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). After the gradient the column was washed with 90% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS using a top-10 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with mass range of 300–1750 m/z and 70,000 resolutions at m/z 200. HCD1 peptide fragments acquired at 25 normalized collision energy were analyzed at high resolution in the Orbitrap.

Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant version 1.3.7.4 () (http://www.maxquant.org). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine () against the decoy UniProt-mouse database (Version June 2012, 59,345 entries) supplemented with 262 frequently observed contaminants and forward and forward and reverse sequences. In the main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass were identified with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two mis-cleavages was allowed. When we checked for the occurrence of demidation, we found it to be negligible (supplemental Fig. S6, supplemental Table S9). We therefore did not include it as a variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR1) was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. MS runs from skeletal muscle were analyzed with or without the “match between runs” option. For matching, a retention time window of 30 s was selected. In the case of identified peptides that are all shared between two proteins, these were combined and reported as one protein group. Proteins matching to the reverse database were filtered out. For the proteins that were identified with single peptide, detailed information about the MSMS spectrum, peptide sequence, precursor m/z is provided (supplemental Table S8 and supplemental Fig. S5).

All bioinformatics analysis was performed with the Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org). Categorical annotation was supplied in form of Gene Ontology (GO) biological process (BP), molecular function (MF), and cellular component (CC), as well as participation in a KEGG pathway. All annotations were extracted from UniProt database. Hierarchical clustering and 2D annotation enrichment were based on label-free quantitation of the samples (). Because of randomness of peptide sampling in shotgun proteomics, quantification will be missing in some samples for each protein. In order to retain sufficiently informative protein expression profiles for bioinformatics analysis, the protein expression data was filtered to have at least two valid abundance values in at least one group (muscle or C2C12). The data was inputed to fill missing abundance values by drawing random numbers from a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of 30% in comparison to the standard deviation of measured protein abundances, and one standard deviation downshift of the mean. These parameters have been tuned in order to best simulate the distribution of low abundant proteins. These values are universally applied to nearly all data sets that were generated with the label-free quantitation algorithm. Two sample t test were performed on muscle and C2C12 groups with FDR = 0.05. Hierarchical clustering of significantly different proteins was performed after z-score normalization. We then performed Fisher exact test on particular clusters, testing for enrichment or depletion of any annotation term in the cluster compared with the whole matrix. The specific test used is a two-dimensional version of the nonparametric Mann-Whitney test. Multiple hypothesis testing was controlled by using a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate threshold of 5%. Fisher exact test was performed with an FDR value of 0.04.

Categorical annotations are supplied in the form of GOCC, GOMF, GOBP, and KEGG. A two-dimensional two-sample test was performed to find the significant differences between the two-dimensional means of the two protein populations (skeletal muscle and C2C12 myotubes). The nonparametric Mann-Whitney test was used. Multiple hypothesis testing was controlled by using a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR threshold of 5%. For categories that are significant, a two-dimensional difference score was calculated by determining the average rank of the protein abundance belonging to the corresponding annotation category. This average rank was then rescaled to the interval between −1 and 1. A value of 1 in one of the dimensions would mean that all members of this category are the largest values in this dimensions, whereas a value of 0 means that the ranks of the members of the category are distributed in same way as the background proteins having no significant bias toward larger or smaller values. For detailed explanation of the rank and scaling of 2D score between 1 to −1, please refer to ().

Absolute protein abundance (mass) was calculated as described before (). Briefly, the mass spectrometric signal of an individual protein was divided by the sum of all proteins. Because the resulting values were small, we multiplied them by 1 million and expressed absolute abundance as part-per-million (ppm) (, , and supplemental Table I). In other words, the absolute protein abundance described here is the fractional signal of each protein in relation to the total protein signal and hence is expressed in ppm. Quantifiable proteins in the analysis of skeletal muscle and C2C12 myotubes were defined as those identified at least two times in each group. Error bars in , , and supplemental Fig. S4 denote standard deviation of median. In Table SI, quantifiable proteins were defined as those identified at least two times in skeletal muscle. The absolute abundances that are provided were calculated for the list of the proteins identified after using “match between runs” (Table SI).

The lysates from the muscle and C2C12 cells were electrophoresed, transferred to nitrocellulose, and probed for selected proteins. This analysis was performed on the very same lysate that were used for MS analysis (n = 2). The following antibodies were used: goat anti-AMPK alpha 2 (Santacruz, Dallas, USA), rabbit anti-HK II (Cell Signaling, Beverly, USA), rabbit anti-GLUT4 (Thermo scientific, Naerum, Denmark), and rabbit anti-GAPDH (Cell signaling, Beverly, USA). The anti-AMPK-a1 antibody (raised in sheep) was kindly provided by Prof. D. G. Hardie (University of Dundee, UK).
