Diverse groups of proteins play integral roles in both the physiology and pathophysiology of the retina. However, thorough proteomic analyses of retinas of experimental species are currently unavailable. The purpose of the present paper is providing the field with a comprehensive proteomic characterization of the retina of a commonly used laboratory mouse using a discovery-based mass spectrometry (MS) approach.

Retinas from eight male and eight female 30-week-old outbred ND4 Swiss Webster mice were harvested and immediately processed for MS analysis on a Thermo Fisher (TF) Fusion Orbitrap MS. The retinal proteome and phosphoproteome were identified and subsequently analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and Panther-GeneGo. SEQUEST-HT scoring was used for analysis, and the reference protein FASTA database was from Mus musculus. Specifically, three technical repeats were performed for each biological sample. For characterization, only high-scoring peptides were considered, with a false discovery rate (FDR) of <1%. Downstream bioinformatic analysis used Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA; Qiagen).

Using Proteome Discoverer 2.2, 4,767 different proteins were identified and segregated into 26 major protein classes, 9 functional molecular classes, and 12 categories of biological processes. The five largest protein classes included the following: nucleic acid binding (17%), hydrolases (13%), enzyme modulators (10%), transferases (9%), and oxidoreductases (6%). “Binding” and “catalytic” proteins contributed to 81% of the molecular function class at 37% and 42%, respectively. “Cellular processing” and “metabolic processes” contributed the most to biologic activity, at 31% and 26%, respectively. Phosphopeptide enrichment yielded the identification of 610 additional unique proteins that were not originally identified. The two datasets combined produced an adult mouse retinal proteome consisting of 5,377 unique proteins. Overall, 41% of the retinal proteome was phosphorylated. The overwhelming diversity of retinal protein functionality was reflected through further analyses revealing 2,086 unique pathway hits across 241 different pathways (TF). A core analysis summary report was performed in IPA (Qiagen) to analyze the top signaling networks, protein–protein interaction (PPI) enrichments, and canonical pathways.

Using this high-throughput technique, we have further deciphered and updated the diverse proteome of the mouse retina, including the phosphoproteome, thereby providing the most comprehensive proteomic profile for this tissue known to date. These findings, and the bioinformatic analyses we also provided, establish a platform for future studies, facilitating the elucidation of the relevance of these proteins to the molecular and cellular pathologies that underlie retinal function and disease.

Outbred ND4 Swiss Webster mice (Envigo, Indianapolis, IN) were shipped to our institution at 10 weeks of age and maintained in our institutional vivarium for 5 months in compliance with all Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center (LSUHSC) and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) regulations. Both retinas from eight male and eight female 30-week-old mice were harvested and immediately processed for MS-based proteomic analysis. Retinal tissues was harvested in a manner such that Bruch’s membrane, choriocapillaris, and the eyecup (RPE) were not dissected and included with the retina sample we analyzed. This was achieved by a single cut across the sclera with a #10-blade scalpel. The retina and lens were removed and separated from one another using sterile forceps.

A comprehensive proteomic profile of the adult mouse retina was achieved by analyzing the combination of multiple animals’ freshly harvested retinas, followed by peptide enrichment procedures, and finally, bioinformatic analysis. The overall workflow of the study is depicted in . Freshly harvested retinas were placed in a 1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) solution and immediately homogenized. The samples were heated to 80 °C for 10 min, and the protein concentration was determined using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Based on the protein concentration, 100 µg of protein sample was adjusted to a final volume of 100 µl using 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB), then reduced using 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) at 55 °C for 1 h. The reduced samples were subsequently alkylated using 5 µl of 375 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. Following this, the protein samples were precipitated by chloroform-methanol extraction, air dried, and digested with 2 µg of trypsin (Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37 °C overnight.

Acidic reverse-phase conditions were employed for desalting the samples before drying them in a Speedvac. After drying, an offline basic pH reverse-phase fractionation step was employed to reduce the complexity. The samples were brought up in 260 ul of 10 mM Optima Grade ammonium hydroxide, pH 10, and separated using an Acquity Ultra Performance LC (UPLC) Peptide Ethylene Bridged Hybrid (BEH) column, 300A, 1.7 um, 2.1 × 50 mm (Waters, Ireland) on a Dionex U3000 High Perfomance LC (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA). Following fractionation, samples were ultraviolet (UV) monitored at 215 nm for an injection of 130 µl at 0.1 ml/min with a gradient developed from 10 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH = 10, to 100% acetonitrile (ACN) over 96 min. A total of 48 fractions (200 µl each) were collected in a 96-well microplate and recombined in a checkerboard fashion to create 12 “super fractions” (original fractions 1, 13, 25, and 37 became new super fraction #1; original fractions 2, 14, 26, and 38 became new super fraction # 2; etc.) [].

The 12 “super fractions” were then run on a Dionex U3000 nanoflow system coupled to a Thermo Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Each fraction was subjected to the following: 1) 120-min chromatographic method employing a gradient of 2–25% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (ACN/FA) over the course of 100 min, 2) a gradient to 50% ACN/FA for an additional 10 min, 3) a step to 90% ACN/FA for 5 min, and 4) a re-equilibration into 2% ACN/FA in a “trap-and-load” configuration. The trap column used an Acclaim C18 PepMap100, 5 um, 100A trap and the separation column used an Acclaim PepMap Rapid Separation Liquid Chromatography (RSLC) 75 um × 15 cm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The entire run employed a 0.3 µl/min flow rate and sample ionization through a Thermo Nanospray Flex Ion Source. Data dependent scans were run on a Thermo Fisher Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer. MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using a resolution of 240,000. Data-dependent MS2 scans were performed in the Orbitrap using high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 30% using a resolution of 30,000. Automatic Gain Control was employed during MS2 acquisition with a setting of 5 × 104, and dynamic exclusion was set at 10 s. This was repeated for a total of three technical replicates per “super fraction.”

Protein phosphorylation patterns can be difficult to measure without enrichment techniques due to biochemical factors, including the following: low stoichiometry, poor ionization of peptides, incomplete fragmentation of peptides, and high hydrophilicity. Thus, we performed a sequential enrichment of metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) using both TiO2 and Fe-NTA resins (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following retina dissections and initial sample preparation, 10-µl sample aliquots from each animal were pooled together (1.6 mg of total protein). After reduction, alkylation, and trypsin digestion, the peptides were processed using a High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. A32993) followed by a High-Select Fe-NTA phosphopeptide enrichment kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. A32992) per the manufacturer’s specifications. The enriched phosphopeptides were then analyzed via MS, as described previously. The overall phosphopeptide workflow () essentially consisted of lysis, reduction, alkylation, digestion, phosphopeptide enrichment, and reverse-phased peptide fractionation before loading into the MS.

Initial data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using SEQUEST HT scoring and comparing PEP posterior error probability (PEP) scores and peptide spectral matches (PSMs). Only one unique high-scoring peptide was required for inclusion of protein identification in the results. High-scoring peptides have less than a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Peptides on the lower scoring end were evaluated manually to confirm b and y ion presence in the MS2 spectra. Subsequent bioinformatic analyses was performed using GeneGo (Panther) before loading into Qiagen’s Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The Protein FASTA database is for M. musculus (TaxID = 10090) version 2017–07–05. Static modifications included carbamidomethyl on cysteines (= 57.021), and dynamic modification of oxidation of methionine (= 15.9949). Parent ion tolerance was set at 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 0.6 Da, as recommended for the initial orbitrap tolerances. The maximum number of missed cleavages for trypsin was set to 2. Following completion of data acquisition and analysis in Thermo and GeneGo, our dataset was uploaded for bioinformatics using IPA. Multiple bioinformatic platforms were used to cross-reference proteins and resolve inconsistencies that may arise due to variable protein identifications (IDs) across different libraries, incorrect classifications, or scheduled update differences between software packages.

All confidently identified peptides (those with SEQUEST-HT scores > 0 or PEP scores < 10 that were individually validated by spectral viewing), including proteins identified by one unique peptide, were exported to Microsoft Excel. When annotating and applying filters for the dataset uploaded to IPA, the following criteria were applied: Only < 1% FDR SEQUEST-HT scoring peptides were analyzed, only high experimentally observed molecules were factored, the IPA organism settings were mouse (in vivo), and high confidence only. These filters were applied in a “core-analysis” of the entire dataset. The content version release date of the IPA used was June 14th, 2018. The bioinformatics reported herein are descriptive of the entire pooled dataset and are not individual comparisons. Herein, we report a core analysis summary consisting of the following: top canonical pathways; signaling networks; and the disease, molecular, and biological functions of the MS-derived retinal proteome.
